CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF FITCHBURG, WISCONSIN 
____________ 
VOLUME I 
____________ 
Published by Order of the Common Council 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
FITCHBURG, WISCONSIN 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Jay Allen 
Mayor 
____________ 
Steve Arnold 
Shawn Pfaff 
William Horns 
Richard Bloomquist 
Carol Poole 
Andrew Potts 
Darren Stucker 
Swami Swaminathan 
 
Common Council 
____________ 
Tony Roach 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Mark Sewell 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Thomas Hovel 
Zoning Administrator/City Planner 
____________ 
Linda Cory, WCMC 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Fitchburg, Wisconsin. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2009 Compiled Ordinances, current through December 9, 2009, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the common council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2009 Compiled Ordinances and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been arranged in a convenient order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
RELATED LAWS 	RL:1 
SPECIAL ACTS 	SA:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	RLCT:1 
SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	SACT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves that stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Sandra S. Fox, Code Attorney, and Shelly Hayes and Ellen Torof, Editors, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Linda Cory, City Clerk; Mark Sewell, City Attorney, and Susan Sloper, Community Planner, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and City of Fitchburg, Wisconsin. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Fitchburg, Wisconsin. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Fitchburg, Wisconsin. 2011. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2011-0-02 
AN ENABLING ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF FITCHBURG, WISCONSIN; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE 
THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF FITCHBURG, DANE COUNTY WISCONSIN ORDAINS AS FOLLOWS: 
Section 1. Pursuant to Wisconsin State Statute §66.0103 the Code entitled the "Code of the City of Fitchburg, Wisconsin," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 74 each inclusive which has been on file in pamphlet form with the City Clerk and open to public inspection for a period of not less than two weeks, is hereby adopted by reference as is fully set forth herein. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before December 14, 2010, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, unless a greater penalty is authorized by state law. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City Attorney may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the common council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after December 14, 2010, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. The City Clerk is directed to publish a copy of this enabling ordinance and to keep a copy on file in his/her office permanently and open for public inspection during regular office hours. 
Section 8. This ordinance shall take effect upon passage by a majority vote of the Common Council and publication as required by law. 
Passed and adopted by the Common Council this 8 th day of March, 2011. 
	_____
Jay Allen, Mayor 
ATTEST: 	
_____
Linda Cory, City Clerk 	
Published: April 13, 2011 	
 
Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the common council, held on the 8 th day of March, 2011. 
	_____
City Clerk 
  
PART I - INCORPORATION AND CHARTER ORDINANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the certification of the incorporation of Fitchburg, Wisconsin, issued on April 26, 1983, by the then secretary of state. The certificate as printed below remains in its original version, except that it has been conformed to the format of the city's Code of Ordinances, a uniform system of punctuation and capitalization has been used, obvious misspellings and grammatical errors have been corrected without notation, and material in brackets [ ] has been added for clarity. Subsequent to the incorporation represented in the following certificate, boundaries of the city have been expanded by various annexations. In addition, by Res. No. R-55-01 dated July 10, 2001, the city adopted a municipal ward plan that has also varied with changes in the boundaries of the city. Ordinances affecting the city boundaries set forth below and the city's voting wards and polls are listed in Appendix A, and copies of the ordinances are available in the office of the city clerk. 
 
ARTICLE I. - CITY INCORPORATION AND BOUNDARIES 
CERTIFICATE OF INCORPORATION 
I, DOUGLAS LAFOLLETTE, Secretary of State of the State of Wisconsin, do hereby certify that: 
WHEREAS, the Clerk of the Town of Fitchburg, Dane County, did, on the 26th day of APRIL, 1983, file in the office of the Secretary of State of the State of Wisconsin a certificate for the incorporation of the town as a city of the fourth class under the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 60.81; and 
WHEREAS, the Clerk of the Town of Fitchburg has certified that pursuant to the return of votes cast at the special referendum election held on the 7th day of April, 1981, on the question of whether the Town of Fitchburg should be incorporated as a city of the fourth class, a majority of the votes were cast in favor of a city as follows: 
FOR A CITY—One Thousand Six Hundred and Thirty-seven (1,637) 
AGAINST A CITY—Three Hundred and Four (304) 
That the resident population of the town is 12,824 as shown by the last federal census; and 
That the description of land to be included within the city limits of Fitchburg is as follows: 
Lands located in Town 6 North, Range 9 East, Dane County, Wisconsin, described as follows: 
Beginning at the Northeast corner of Section 1, T6N, R9E, Dane County, Wisconsin; thence Southerly along the East line of Section 1 to the Southeast corner of the NE ¼ of the NE ¼ of Section 1 to the point of beginning; thence continuing Southerly along the East line of T6N, R9E, to the Southeast corner of Section 36; thence Westerly along the South line of T6N, R9E to the Southwest corner of Section 31; thence Northerly along the West line of T6N, R9E to the South line of the North ½ of the Northwest ¼ of Section 6; thence East along the South line of the North ½ of the Northwest ¼ of said Section 6, T6N, R9E to the West line of the Northeast ¼ of said Section 6; thence North along said West line 330.5 feet; thence Easterly on a straight line to a point in the centerline of the concrete pavement of U.S. Highway 18, said point being 1,759.54 feet South of the North line of Section 6, measured at right angles to said North line; thence Northeasterly along the centerline of said Highway, 154.6 feet; thence Westerly on a line parallel to the North line of Section 6 to a point; said point being 516 feet West of the East line of Section 6; thence Northerly on a line that is 516 feet West of and parallel to the East line of Section 6 to a point 150 feet South of the South line of the Moschkau Subdivision; thence East 214.1 feet on a line that is parallel to and 150 feet South of the South line of the said Plat to its point of intersection with the West line of Westchester Road; thence Northeasterly along the West line of Westchester Road 163.8 feet to its point of intersection with the Easterly prolongation of the South line of Moschkau Subdivision; thence West 286.4 feet on the Easterly prolongation of the South line and the South line of Moschkau Subdivision to a point that is 516 feet West of the East line of Section 6; thence Northerly on a line that is parallel to the East line of Section 6 to the point of intersection with the Westerly prolongation of the South line of Lot 3, Moschkau Subdivision; thence Easterly 200 feet along the Westerly prolongation of the South line of Lot 3 and the South line of Lot 3 to the East line of Lot 3; thence Northerly along the East line of Lot 3 to the North line of Lot 3; thence Westerly 200 feet along the North line of Lot 3 and said North line extended to a point that is 516 feet West of the East line of Section 6; thence Northerly on a line that is parallel to the East line of Section 6 to a point 457.8 feet South of the North line of Section 6; thence Westerly on a line parallel to the North line of Section 6 to the East line of Michael's Plat; thence Northerly 220 feet along the East line of Michael's Plat to the Northeast corner of said Plat; thence Westerly 225 feet, more or less, along the North line of Michael's Plat to the East line of the Third Addition to Meadowood; Section 6; thence North 01;deg;-59' East to the North line of Section 6; T6N, R9E; thence East along the North line of Section 6 to the centerline of Harley Drive; thence South 260 feet along the centerline of Harley Drive; thence East 153 feet along a line that is parallel to and 260 feet South of the North line of Section 6; thence North 260 feet on a line that is parallel to and 153 feet East of the centerline of Harley Drive to a point in the North line of Section 6; thence East along the North line of Section 6 to its point of intersection with the Northerly prolongation of the West line of Lot 1, Westchester Woods; thence South 00;deg;-14'-31" East, 141.0 feet, more or less, to the South line of Lot 1 of Westchester Woods; thence North 89;deg;-45'-29" East, 153.97 feet along the South line of Lot 1 to the East line of Section 6; thence North 01;deg;-32'-44" East, 140 feet, more or less, along the East line of Section 6 to the Northwest corner of Section 5; thence Easterly 455.2 feet along the North line of Section 5; thence South 00;deg;-53' West, 297.3 feet; thence South 84;deg;-31' East, 18.4 feet; thence South 58;deg;-03' East to the Northwesterly right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 18 & 151), said Northwest right-of-way line; thence Northeasterly on a line that is parallel to and 110 feet Northwest measured at right angles to the centerline of Verona Road to its point of intersection with a line that bears South 1;deg;-31'-14" West from a point in the North line of said Section 5 that is 877.1 feet East of the Northwest corner of Section 5; thence South 1;deg;-31'-14" West to a point that is 3,364.85 feet South of the North line of Section 5; thence North 88;deg;-52'-51" East, 865.87 feet; thence North 01;deg;-39'-59" East, 3,365.14 feet, more or less, along the East line of the said First Addition to Allied Terrace and the East line of the Allied Terrace Plat to the North line of Section 5; thence East along the North line of Section 5 to the Northeast corner of the North Hill Addition to Belmar; thence South 12;deg;-15'-00" East, 415.0 feet; thence South 77;deg;-45'-00" West, 124.97 feet to the East line of Apache Drive; thence South 12;deg;-15'-00" East, 466.72 feet along to the East line of Apache Drive; thence continuing along the East line of Apache Drive South 06;deg;-45'-00" East, 13.02 feet to the Southwest corner of Lot 118, South Hill Addition to Belmar; thence North 79;deg;-23'-00" East, 80.18 feet; thence North 83;deg;-15'-00" East, 279.83 feet; thence South 89;deg;-15'-00" East, 85.00 feet; thence South 02;deg;-58'-56" West, 121.85 feet to a point of curve; thence on a curve to the right convex to the Northeast having a radius of 183.00 feet and a chord that bears South 60;deg;-45'-21" East, 161.95 feet; thence North 55;deg;-30'-22" East, 127.61 feet; thence South 35;deg;-38'-33" East, 60.68 feet; thence South 87;deg;-53'-23" East, 159.88 feet to the centerline of Whenona Drive; thence South 02;deg;-02'-38" West, 182.24 feet along the said centerline of Whenona Drive to the North line of the East Hill Addition to Belmar; thence South 71;deg;-57'-52" East, 532.05 feet along the said North plat line to the centerline of Seminole Highway; thence Northeasterly along the centerline of said road and the centerline of Seminole Highway to the North line of Section 5; thence Easterly along the North line of T6N, R9E to the North one-quarter corner of Section 4; thence South along the East line of the NE ¼ of Section 4 to the Southerly right-of-way line of the Chicago and North Western Transportation Company; thence Southeasterly, Northeasterly and Easterly along the Southerly right-of-way line of said railway to the West line of Section 3; thence Northerly along the West line to the South line of the North ½ of the Northwest ¼ of Section 3; thence Easterly along the South line of said North ½ of the Northwest ¼ of Section 3 and the centerline of Post Road to the East line of the Northwest ¼ of Section 3; thence South 86;deg;-59'-55" East, 387.31 feet along the centerline of Post Road to a point of curve; thence continuing along the said centerline of Post Road on a curve to the right, convex to the Northeast having a radius of 290.0 feet to its point of intersection with the Southerly prolongation of the West line of Lot 1, Certified Survey Map No. 555, recorded in Volume 3 of Certified Surveys, Page 59, in the Dane County Register of Deeds' Office; thence North 03;deg;-00'-05" East, 162.15 feet along the said Southerly prolongation of the West line of Lot 1 and the West line of said Lot 1 to the Northwest corner of said Lot 1; thence North 00;deg;-27'-20" West, 268.9 feet along the West line of said Certified Survey to the Southwest corner of Lot 34, Maple Lawn Heights, a recorded plat in Section 3; thence North along the West line of Lot 34 to the South line of Lot 33 of Maple Lawn Heights; thence Westerly along the South line of Lots 33, 35, 36 and 37 to the East line of Lot 38, Maple Lawn Heights; thence North along the East line of said Lot 38 and said East line extended Northerly to the North line of Section 3, to a point 33 feet North of the Northwest corner of Lot 15, Maple Lawn Commercial Plat, City of Fitchburg, Dane County, Wisconsin; thence South 00;deg;-20'-50" West, 168.17 feet; thence South 74;deg;-10'20" East, 240.25 feet to a point that is 233.0 feet South and measured at right angles to the North line of the Northeast ¼ of Section 3; thence South 89;deg;-39'-10" East, 682.57 feet to the East line of Section 3; thence South 01;deg;-58'-50" East, along the East line of Section 3 to a point that is 316.96 feet North of the East ¼ corner of Section 3; thence North 71;deg;-33'-54" East, 553.00 feet; thence North 61;deg;-09'-40" East, 589.18 feet; thence South 89;deg;-00'-00" East, 932.00 feet; thence South 02;deg;-14'-23" West, 770 feet to the South line of the Northwest ¼ of Section 2; thence North 89;deg;-30'-33" East, 726.00 feet along the South line of the Northwest ¼ of Section 2 to the centerline of Syene Road; thence North 02;deg;-17'-22" East along the centerline of Syene Road to a point that is South 02;deg;-17'-22" West, 1,735.12 feet South of the North ¼ corner of Section 2, measured along the West line of the Northeast ¼ of Section 2; thence South 89;deg;-42'-38" East 394.60 feet; thence North 80;deg;-47'-16" East 344.43 feet; thence North 32;deg;-01'-17" East 923.45 feet; thence North 05;deg;-10'-49" East 138.50 feet; thence North 89;deg;-07'-09" West, 1,014.2 feet, more or less, to a point that is 183.0 feet East of the West line of the Northeast ¼ of said Section 2; thence North 02;deg;-17'-22" West 200.00 feet, along a line that is parallel to and 183 feet East of the West line of the Northeast ¼ of said Section 2; thence North 89;deg;-07'-09" West 113.0 feet to a point that is 70.0 feet East of the centerline of Syene Road; thence Northerly and Northeasterly along a line that is parallel to and 70.0 feet East of the centerline of Syene Road to the North line of Section 2; thence Easterly along the North line of Section 2 to the Easterly right-of-way line of the Chicago and North Western Transportation Company; thence Southerly and following along the Easterly line of said Chicago and North Western Railway right-of-way to a point 880 feet, more or less, North of the South line of Section 2; thence South 88;deg;-50' East 278.3 feet; thence South 39;deg;-12' East 604.9 feet to the Northwesterly line of West Clayton Road; thence Northeasterly 600.0 feet, more or less, along the Northwesterly line of West Clayton Road to the most Southerly corner of property owned by R. L. Finch and described in Volume 304 of Miscellaneous, Page 360, Instrument No. 940938; thence North 39;deg;-12' West 187.0 feet; thence North 50;deg;-48' East 459.8 feet to the Westerly line of the abandoned right-of-way of the Rock River and Union Valley Railroad; thence South 10;deg;-27' West 288.8 feet to the Northwesterly line of said public highway; thence Northeasterly along said Northwesterly line of said highway 92.7 feet to the Easterly line of said abandoned railroad right-of-way; thence North 10;deg;-27' East along said East line 300.3 feet; thence South 48;deg;-30" East, 164.6 feet to the Westerly line of West Clayton Road; thence Northeasterly along said Westerly line 335.4 feet; thence North 56;deg;-50' West 328.5 feet; thence North 33;deg;-10' East 161.2 feet; thence North 47;deg;-06' West 75.9 feet, more or less, to the Easterly right-of-way line of said abandoned railroad; thence North 10;deg;-27' East along said Easterly line 161.6 feet; thence South 56;deg;-50' East 247.8 feet; thence North 33;deg;-10' East 500 feet; thence South 56;deg;-50' East 218 feet to the Northwesterly line of West Clayton Road; thence Northeasterly along said Northwesterly line 530 feet, more or less, to the most Southerly corner of property owned by E. Spears and described in Volume 612 of Deeds, Page 321, Instrument No. 875065; thence North 60;deg;-04' West 214.8 feet; thence North 37;deg;-17' East 231 feet to the centerline of Old State Highway; thence North-westerly and Northerly along said centerline to its point of intersection, the Southwest right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 13 and 14 (Oregon Road) as presently located; thence Southeasterly along the said Southwest right-of-way line to its point of intersection with the North line of East Clayton Road. Last mentioned point being 33 feet North of, measured at right angles to, the South line of the Northwest ¼ of Section 1, T6N, R9E; thence Easterly along a line that is parallel to and 33 feet North of, measured at right angles to, the South line of the Northwest ¼ of Section 1 to a point that is 183 feet Northeast of, measured at right angles to, the centerline of said U.S. Highway 13 and 14; thence Northwesterly along a line that is parallel to and 183 feet Northeast of, measured at right angles to, the last mentioned centerline to the centerline of the Nine Springs Drainage Ditch; thence Northwesterly to the point of intersection of the West right-of-way line of Anderberg Street with the Northeast right-of-way line of said U.S. Highway 13 and 14; thence Northwesterly along the Northeast right-of-way line of said U.S. Highway 13 and 14 and its Northwesterly prolongation to the Northwest right-of-way line of Rimrock Road as presently located; thence South 75;deg;-17' West along the Southwesterly prolongation of the Northwest right-of-way line of Rimrock Road to the Southwest right-of-way of said U.S. Highway 13 and 14; thence Northwesterly along the last mentioned right-of-way line to a point that is 33 feet Southwest of, measured at right angles to, a point in the reference line of U.S. Highway 13 and 14 as designated in Wisconsin State Highway Project TO 4-2(1). Last mentioned point being 846 feet South of, measured at right angles to, the North line of Section 1; thence Southwesterly 67 feet along a line that is normal to the said reference line to the Southwest right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 13 and 14 as established in said project; thence Northwesterly and following along said Southwesterly right-of-way line to the North line of T6N, R9E; thence Easterly along said North line of T6N, R9E to the Northeast corner of Section 2; thence Easterly along the North line of the Northwest ¼ of Section 1, 1,328.8 feet, more or less; thence South 00;deg;-54'-14" East, 1,255 feet, more or less; thence North 86;deg;-40'-00" West 594.06 feet (recorded as 596.00 feet); thence North 32;deg;-35'-44" West 118.90 feet; thence South 47;deg;-24'-16" West, 33.00 feet to the centerline of Anderberg Road as presently located; thence South 42;deg;-35'-44" East 9.31 feet along the said centerline of Anderberg Road; thence continuing along the said centerline of Anderberg Road South 15;deg;-44'-35" East 329.53 feet; thence continuing along the said centerline of Anderberg Road South 11;deg;-44'-35" East 40.46 feet; thence South 88;deg;-07'-05" East 874.30 feet to the meander line of Nine Springs Creek; thence North 73;deg;-00'-18" East 398.14 feet along said meander line of Nine Springs Creek; thence continuing along the meander line of Nine Springs Creek North 76;deg;-17'-00" East 661.86 feet to the East line of the Northwest ¼ of Section 1, T6N, R9E; (excluded is the land lying between the above described meander line of Nine Springs Creek and the centerline of Nine Springs Creek as presently located, adjacent to and South of the said meander line); thence North 01;deg;-57'-30" East along the East line of the Northwest ¼ of Section 1 to the South line of the North ½ of the North ½ of the Northeast ¼ of Section 1; thence East on said South line to the East line of Section 1, T6N, R9E, and the point of beginning. 
The above-described boundary also includes the following-described parcel: 
Commencing 1,142.84 feet East of the North ¼ corner of Section 1, T6N, R9E, said point being the point of beginning; thence Westerly 813.5 feet; thence Southerly 629 feet; thence Easterly 805.2 feet; thence Northerly 637.5 feet to the point of beginning. 
NOW, THEREFORE, I, DOUGLAS LAFOLLETTE, Secretary of State of the State of Wisconsin, by virtue of the authority vested in me, do hereby determine and declare that the area, as described above and situated in the County of Dane and State of Wisconsin, is duly incorporated as a city of the fourth class, according to the classification of cities as set forth in the Wisconsin Statutes, and that from henceforth shall be known as THE CITY OF FITCHBURG with the powers and privileges of a municipal corporation at common law and conferred by chapter 62 of the Wisconsin Statutes. 
IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and affixed the Great Seal of the State of Wisconsin on this 26th day of APRIL, in the year of One Thousand Nine Hundred and Eighty-three. 
S/DOUGLAS LA FOLLETTE 
Secretary of State 
State of Wisconsin  
ARTICLE II. - CHARTER ORDINANCES 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 1 
ADOPTED 5-22-1990 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR 
NUMBERED ALDERMANIC SEATS IN THE 
CITY OF FITCHBURG, DANE COUNTY, WISCONSIN 
The Common Council of the City of Fitchburg ordains as follows: 
Section 1. The City of Fitchburg pursuant to Wis. Stats. 62.09(l)(a) and (l)(b) and Wis. Stats. 66.01 hereby elects to amend its charter to provide for election of aldermen to numbered seats. 
Section 2. Commencing with the candidates elected at the regular spring election in April, 1991, the aldermen of the City of Fitchburg shall be elected from numbered seats within each aldermanic district as follows: District 1, seats 1 and 2; District 2, seats 3 and 4; District 3, seats 5 and 6; District 4, seats 7 and 8. 
Section 3. For purposes of nominations, primariesm ballots, election procedures and filling of vacancies, each numbered seat shall be considered a separate office. 
Section 4. Any charter provisions or any previously enacted ordinance or charter ordinance or part thereof inconsistent or in conflict with this ordinance is hereby expressly repealed. 
Section 5. This charter ordinance shall first take effect 60 days after passage and publication subject to provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.01 allowing the electors to petition for a referendum. 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 2 
Adopted 12-14-2004 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR PRIMARY UPON 3 CANDIDATES FOR SAME ELECTED CITY OFFICE IN THE CITY OF FITCHBURG, DANE COUNTY, WISCONSIN 
The Common Council of the City of Fitchburg, Dane County, Wisconsin, do ordain as follows: 
SECTION 1. The City of Fitchburg, Dane County, Wisconsin, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 8.11(l)(b) and Wis. Stats. § 66.0101 elects to amend its charter to provide for a primary to nominate candidates for a city office whenever 3 or more candidates file nomination for a city office. 
SECTION 2. Any charter provisions or any previously enacted ordinance or charter ordinance or part thereof inconsistent or in conflict with this ordinance is hereby expressly repealed. 
SECTION 3. This is a Charter Ordinance and shall take effect sixty (60) days after passage and publication unless within sixty (60) days after such publication a referendum petition as provided for in Wis. Stats. § 66.0101(5) shall be filed. In the event of the filing of such a petition in such a manner this Charter Ordinance shall then not take effect until it is submitted to a referendum of the electors approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon such petition and the proceedings for its submission to be governed by Wis. Stats. § 9.20(2) to (6). 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 3 
ADOPTED 9-13-2005 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE ELECTING NOT TO BE GOVERNED BY STATE LAW FOR POLICE DEPARTMENT MUTUAL AID SO LONG AS CONTRACT IS IN EFFECT 
WHEREAS, The City of Fitchburg has entered into an Intergovernmental Agreement with the City of Sun Prairie and the City of Middleton concerning cooperative activities among the police departments of the three contracting cities; and 
WHEREAS, Wis. Stats. § 66.0513 requires that when law enforcement personnel of a police department serves outside the territorial limits of a city, the officer is entitled to all regular compensation, with the municipality where the service is rendered reimbursing all of the officer's wage and disability payments, pension and worker's compensation claims, damage to equipment and clothing and medical expenses; and 
WHEREAS, under the terms of the Intermunicipal Agreement between the Cities of Fitchburg, Sun Prairie and Middleton, the Cities have agreed that the requesting City shall pay all disability payments and worker's compensation claims, damage to equipment and clothing and medical expenses arising out of such activities, but that all wages and any other benefits not previously identified shall not be reimbursed since the three municipalities expect that the degree of cooperative service will balance out over time; and 
WHEREAS, Wis. Stats. § 66.0101(4) permits cities under their home rule powers to elect not to be governed by State law other than enactments of the Legislature of Statewide concern; and 
WHEREAS, Wis. Stats. § 66.0513 is not an enactment of the Legislature of Statewide concern; 
NOW, THEREFORE, the Common Council of the City of Fitchburg do ordain as follows: 
Section 1.21(5) of the Fitchburg General Ordinances is hereby created to read as follows: 
1.21(5) 
Law Enforcement Personnel Expenses Pursuant to Intermunicipal Agreement. 
(a)  The City of Fitchburg, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0101(4), hereby elects not to be governed by those portions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0513 relating to reimbursement of police expenses when acting outside municipal limits, which are in conflict with this Ordinance. 
(b)  Whenever Fitchburg law enforcement personnel are serving in the City of Middleton or the City of Sun Prairie, the requesting city shall be responsible for all disability payments, worker's compensation claims, damage to equipment and clothing, and medical expenses arising out of these activities. Wage, pension and all other benefits other than disability payments, worker's compensation claims, damage to equipment and closing and medical expenses shall be paid by Fitchburg without reimbursement from Sun Prairie or Middleton. 
(c)  Whenever Middleton or Sun Prairie law enforcement personnel are serving in Fitchburg, Fitchburg shall be responsible for all disability payments, worker's compensation claims, damage to equipment and clothing, and medical expenses arising out of these activities. Wage, pension and all other benefits other than disability payments, worker's compensation claims, damage to equipment and clothing and medical expenses shall be paid by Sun Prairie or Middleton without reimbursement from Fitchburg. 
(d)  Effective Date. 
(1)  This Ordinance shall take effect upon notice that the Common Councils of Fitchburg, Sun Prairie and Middleton have approved a Police Cooperation Intergovernmental Agreement containing the language specified in subsections (b) and (c) herein. This Ordinance shall become null and void upon the City no longer being party to the Agreement. 
(2)  This is a Charter Ordinance, and shall take effect 60 days after its passage and publication unless within such 60 day period a referendum petition, as provided by Wis. Stats. § 66.01(5) shall be filed, in which event this Ordinance shall not take effect until it shall have been submitted to a referendum vote of the electors and approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon." 
CHARTER ORDINANCE 4 
Adopted 1-9-2018 
Establishing Staggered Terms for Alderpersons and Amending Mayoral Term to Three Years 
The Common Council of the City of Fitchburg, Dane County, Wisconsin ordains as follows: 
Section 1 - Section 4-1 is hereby amended to read: 
Sec. 4-1. - Form of government. 
The city is a state political corporation, has the powers and privileges afforded cities under the constitution and laws of the state and of the United States of America. Its corporate authority is vested in a mayor and common council comprised of the mayor and eight alderpersons, two from each of four aldermanic districts. Commencing with the spring election in April of 2020, the mayor is to be elected for a three year term, and the alderpersons are to be elected for two year terms on a staggered basis with alderpersons for District 1 seat 2, District 2 seat 4, District 3 seat 6, and District 4 seat 8 elected in even years and alderpersons for District 1 seat 1 District 2 seat 3, District 3 seat 5, and District 4 seat 7 elected in odd years. 
Section 2 - Section 4-23 is hereby amended to read: 
Sec. 4-23. - Composition. 
(a) Two classes of Alders. The common council shall consist of the mayor and eight alderpersons elected for seats numbered as follows: District 1, seats 1 and 2; District 2, seats 3 and 4; District 3, seats 5 and 6; and District 4, seats 7 and 8. Alderpersons shall be divided into two (2) classes, one (1) class of Alderpersons to be elected in odd years and one (1) class to be elected in even years as follows: 
Alderpersons for District 1 seat 2, District 2 seat 4, District 3 seat 6, and District 4 seat 8 to be elected in even years. 
Alderpersons for District 1 seat 1 District 2 seat 3, District 3 seat 5, and District 4 seat 7 to be elected in odd years. 
For purposes of nominations, primaries, ballots, election procedures and filling of vacancies, each numbered seat shall be considered a separate office. The mayor and all alderpersons shall be elected in the spring election held on the first Tuesday in April. 
(b) Transition to Staggered Terms. During the spring election in April of 2019, the alderpersons of the City of Fitchburg shall be elected as follows: 
1.  Alderpersons for District 1 seat 2, District 2 seat 4, District 3 seat 6, and District 4 seat 8 shall be elected for a one (1) year term. 
2.  Alderpersons for District 1 seat 1 District 2 seat 3, District 3 seat 5, and District 4 seat 7 shall be elected for a two (2) year term. 
Commencing with the spring election in April of 2020, the alderpersons are to be elected for two year terms on a staggered basis as described in subsection (a) above. 
Section 3 - Section 4-62 is hereby amended to read: 
Sec. 4-62. - Orientation meeting. 
Every year, immediately after the adjournment of the first monthly meeting in April (held on the second Tuesday of the month and which shall be held by the outgoing common council members), there shall be held a common council orientation meeting for the new common council members who will assume their positions the third Tuesday in April. The orientation meeting shall include, but not be limited to a discussion of Robert's Rules of Order, open meetings law, open records law, ethics code, and other topics of interest. 
Section 4 - Section 4-63 is hereby amended to read: 
Sec. 4-63. - Organizational meeting. 
(a)  The organizational meeting is to be held on the third Tuesday in April every year. At this meeting the council president will be elected. The council president may present nominations for standing committees for immediate action by the common council. A majority of those present and voting shall be required to confirm nominations. 
(b)  The mayor may also present nominations for other committees and commissions for immediate action by the common council as provided in this article. Referrals to committees and commissions may be made at the organizational meeting, as well as approval of bills, and any item deemed necessary for immediate action. 
Section 5 - Section 8-37 is hereby amended to read: 
Sec. 8-37. - Election. 
During the spring election in 2019 only, the Mayor shall be elected for a one year term commencing on the third Tuesday of April 2019 and continuing for a one year term or until a successor is elected and qualified. 
Commencing with the 2020, the mayor shall be elected every three years for a term of office commencing on the third Tuesday of April in the year of election and continuing for three years or until a successor is elected and qualified. 
Section 6 - This ordinance shall take effect 60 days after publication unless, within the 60-day period a petition conforming to the requirements of Wis. Stat. § 8.40 and signed by a number of electors of the City equal to not less than 7 percent of the votes cast in the City for governor at the last general election is filed with the City Clerk demanding that the ordinance be submitted to a vote of the electors. In that event, this ordinance will not take effect until it is submitted to a referendum and approved by a majority of the electors voting in the referendum.  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ordinance 
Number 	Date 	Section 	Section 
this Charter 
1 	 5-22-1990 		Art. II 
2 	12-14-2004 		Art. II 
3 	 9-13-2005 		Art. II 
4 	 1- 9-2018 		Art. II 
  
TITLE I - ADMINISTRATION  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Cities generally, Wis. Stats. § 62.01 et seq.; general municipality law, Wis. Stats. § 66.0101 et seq.; municipal home rule, Wis. Stats. § 66.0101; penalties under county and municipal ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.0109; bond or cash deposit under municipal ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.0111; citations for certain ordinance violations, Wis. Stats. § 66.0113; actions for violation of ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.0114; outstanding unpaid forfeitures, Wis. Stats. § 66.0115; special inspection warrants, Wis. Stats. § 66.0119. 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Title; effective date; citation. 
This Code shall be known as the "Code of the City of Fitchburg, Wisconsin," and shall take effect from and after passage and publication. The Code may also be referred to by the shortened form "Fitchburg Code." 
State Law reference— Authority for codification of ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.0103; publication and posting of ordinances and resolutions, Wis. Stats. § 60.80.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
(a)  General rule. All words and phrases shall be construed according to their plain meaning in common usage. However, words or phrases with a technical or special meaning shall be understood and construed according to that technical or special meaning if such is the intent of this Code. 
(b)  Specific definitions and terms. In the construction of this Code of general ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless such definitions and rules of construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Code provisions: 
Acts by agents. When a provision requires an act to be done that may by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requisition shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent. 
City. The term "city" means the City of Fitchburg, Wisconsin. 
City council, common council, council. The terms "city council," "common council" and "council" mean the common council of the City of Fitchburg, Wisconsin. 
Code. Whenever the term "Code" or "Code of Ordinances" is used without further qualification, it means this Code as designated in section 1-1. 
Conjunctions. Where a provisions involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by any of the conjunctions "and," "or," "either … or," or "neither … nor," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The terms "either … or" and "neither … nor" indicate that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
County. The term "county" means Dane County, Wisconsin. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or other officer of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such department head or officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. 
Department, board, committee, commission, agency. The name or title of any department, common council, or agency, unless otherwise specifically stated otherwise, shall be read as though the words "of the City of Fitchburg, Wisconsin," were added thereto. 
Fee schedule or annual budget appendix fee schedule. The terms "fee schedule" or "annual budget appendix fee schedule" means the official consolidated list maintained in the city clerk's office that lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the common council. 
Fine. The term "fine" shall be the equivalent of the term "forfeiture," and vice versa. 
Following. The term "following" means next after. 
Gender, singular and plural. Every word in this Code and in any city ordinance importing the masculine gender may extend and be applied to females as well as males, and every word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing; provided, however, that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any provision that contains any express language excluding that construction or when the subject matter or context of the provision may be repugnant thereto. 
State Law reference— Gender, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(2). 
Includes. The term "includes" does not limit a term to a specified example. 
Joint authority. All words purporting to give a joint authority to three or more city officers or employees shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(8). 
Law. The term "law" means and denotes applicable federal law, the state constitution and statutes, this Code, ordinances and resolutions of the city, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations that may be promulgated thereunder. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
May not. The term "may not" states a prohibition. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
State Law reference— Month, Wis. Stats. § 990.01(21). 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be constructed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes affirmation in all cases where by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. If an oath or affirmation is required to be taken, such oath or affirmation shall be taken before and administered by some officer authorized by law to administer oaths, at the place where the same is required to be taken or administered, unless otherwise expressly directed, and, when necessary, duly certified by such officer. If an oath is administered, it shall end with the term "so help me God." In actions and proceedings in the court, a person may take an oath or affirmation in communication with the administering officer by telephone or audiovisual means. 
State Law reference— Oath, Wis. Stats. § 990.01(24). 
Officers and employees. Whenever any officer or employee is referred to by title, such as "city clerk" or "clerk," it shall be construed as if followed by the term "of the City of Fitchburg, Wisconsin." 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Ordinance. The term "ordinance" means a legislative act of the common council of a general and permanent nature. 
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety of the whole part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" extends and applies to natural persons, firms, corporations, associations, partnerships or other bodies politic and all entities of any kind capable of being sued unless plainly inapplicable. 
State Law reference— Person, Wis. Stats. § 990.01(26). 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
State Law reference— Personal property, Wis. Stats. § 990.01(27). 
Preceding. The term "preceding" means next before. 
Premises. The term "premises," as applied to real property, includes lands and structures. 
Property. The term "property" includes real property, personal property and mixed property. 
State Law reference— Property, Wis. Stats. § 990.01(31). 
Public place. The term "public place" means any place subject to the primary control of any public agency, including, but not limited to, any park, street, public way, cemetery, schoolyard or adjacent open space and any lake or stream. 
Real property, real estate, land, lands. The terms "real property," "real estate," "land" and "lands" include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
State Law reference— Real property, Wis. Stats. § 990.01(35). 
Resolution. The term "resolution" means a legislative act of the city governing authority of a special or temporary character. 
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature. If the signature of any person is required by law, it shall always be the handwriting of such person, or if the person is unable to write, the person's mark or the person's name written by some other person at the person's request and in the person's presence, including the identification of the witness and any federal mandated facsimile signature. 
State Law reference— Signature, Wis. Stats. § 990.01(38). 
State. The term "state" means the State of Wisconsin. 
Statute. The term "statute," unless otherwise specifically stated, refers to the indicated portion of the Wisconsin Statutes. 
Street. The term "street" means any alley, avenue, boulevard, highway, road, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approach thereto, and any other public thoroughfare in the city. The term "street" also means the entire width thereof between abutting property lines. The term "street" includes a sidewalk or footpath. 
State Law reference— Highway, Wis. Stats. § 990.01(12). 
Tenant, occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," as applied to a building or land, include: 
(1)  Any person holding, either alone or with others, a written or oral lease of such building or land. 
(2)  Any person who, either alone or with others, occupies such building or land. 
Tense. Terms used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" means a period of seven consecutive days. 
Wis. Admin. Code. The term "Wis. Admin. Code" means the current administrative regulations promulgated pursuant to law by state agencies. 
Wisconsin Statutes, Wis. Stats. The terms "Wisconsin Statutes" and "Wis. Stats.," wherever used in this Code, means the Wisconsin Statutes for the current year; the term "Wisconsin Statutes" and "Wis. Stats.," includes session laws of the legislature not yet printed in statute form. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. 
State Law reference— Written, in writing, Wis. Stats. § 990.01(48); definitions and rules of construction, Wis. Stats. §§ 990.001, 990.01. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year.  
Sec. 1-3. - Conflict. 
(a)  If the provisions of different chapters conflict with each other, and no specific language within the affected chapters resolves the conflict, the provisions of each individual chapter shall control all issues arising out of the events and persons intended to be governed by that chapter. 
(b)  If the provisions of different sections of the same chapter conflict with each other, the provision which is more specific in its application to the events or persons raising the conflict shall control over the more general provision. 
(c)  If any of the provisions hereof conflict, and the conflict cannot be resolved by application of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the more stringent regulation shall apply and the specific provision shall prevail over the general.  
Sec. 1-4. - Computation of time. 
In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code, the following rules of construction apply: 
(1)  The time within which an act is to be done, or proceeding had or taken, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last; and when any such time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday and of any legal holiday, from 12:00 midnight to 12:00 midnight, shall be excluded. 
(2)  If the last day within which an act is to be done or proceeding had or taken falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, the act may be done or the proceeding had or taken on the next secular day. 
(3)  When the last day within which a proceeding is to be had or taken or an act done, which consists of any payment to or the service upon or the filing with any officer, agent, agency, department or division of the state, county, city, town or village school district or other subdivision of the state, of any money, return, statement, report, notice or other document, falls on a Saturday and the duly established official office hours of such officer, agent, agency, department or division to which such payment is to be made or upon which such service is to be made or with which such return, statement, report, notice or other document is required to be filed, do not include any office hours thereof on such Saturday, such proceeding may be had or taken or such act may be done on the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal holiday. 
(4)  Regardless of whether the time limited in any ordinance for the taking of any proceeding or the doing of an act is measured from an event or from the date or day on which such event occurs, the day on which such event took place shall be excluded in the computation of such time. 
(5)  The expression "legal holiday," as used in this section, means any statewide legal holiday provided in Wis. Stats. § 995.20. When an act is permitted to be done by the use of the postal service, and the last day within the time prescribed by law for performing such act falls on a legal public holiday under federal law, or other holiday designated by the president such that the postal service does not receive registered mail or make regular deliveries on that day, the day shall be considered a legal holiday for purposes of this section. 
State Law reference— Computation of time for state procedures, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(4).  
Sec. 1-5. - Catchlines, notes, and references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, not as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are intended merely to indicate the source of material contained in the section. Editor's notes, charter references and state law references that appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or section of this Code, unless otherwise specified.  
Sec. 1-6. - Provisions deemed continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously adopted by the city relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments.  
Sec. 1-7. - Form of Code; repository; maintenance. 
A copy of this Code shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the clerk or his/her designee to insert in their designated places all resolutions, general resolutions and ordinances that indicate the intention of the common council to make the same a part of this Code, when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from this Code all provisions that may be from time to time repealed by the common council. A copy of this Code shall be available in the office of the city clerk for examination by all persons.  
Sec. 1-8. - Availability of documents incorporated by reference. 
Whenever any standard code, rule, regulation, statute or other written or printed matter is adopted by reference, it shall be deemed incorporated in this Code, as if fully set forth herein, and the city clerk shall maintain in his/her office a copy of any such material, as adopted and as amended from time to time. Materials on file at the city clerk office shall be considered public records open to reasonable examination by any person during the office hours of the city clerk subject to such restrictions on examination as the city clerk imposes for the preservation of the material.  
Sec. 1-9. - Responsibility of city personnel with respect to assigned copies of Code. 
Each city official or employee assigned a copy of this Code shall be responsible for maintaining the same and for the proper insertion of amendatory pages as received. Each such copy shall remain the property of the city and shall be turned over by the official or employee having custody thereof, upon expiration of his/her term of office or employment, to his/her successor or to the city clerk, in case he/she shall have no successor.  
Sec. 1-10. - Effective date of ordinances. 
(a)  Code. This Code shall take effect from and after passage and publication as provided by state law. 
(b)  Subsequent ordinances. All ordinances passed by the common council subsequent to the adoption of this Code, except when otherwise specifically provided, shall take effect from and after their publication.  
Sec. 1-11. - Exclusion of special or temporary ordinances. 
Ordinances hereafter adopted which are not of a general or permanent nature shall be numbered consecutively, authenticated, published and recorded in the book of ordinances, but shall not be prepared for insertion in this Code, nor be deemed a part hereof.  
Sec. 1-12. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
The adoption of this Code shall not act to repeal any ordinances, parts of ordinances, resolutions, of prior Code provisions relating to the following subjects and not conflicting with the provisions of this Code, except that some of the following provisions may be amended by this Code: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city; 
(3)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of the Code; 
(4)  Any appropriation ordinance or resolution; 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the common council to any person, firm or corporation; 
(6)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(7)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing or prescribing the street grades of any streets in the city; 
(8)  Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements or assessing taxes or special assessments therefor; 
(9)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(10)  Any ordinance annexing property to the city; 
(11)  Any ordinance or resolution regulating the erection, alteration, repair, maintenance, demolition, moving or removal of buildings or other structures; 
(12)  Charter ordinances; 
(13)  The issuance of corporate bonds and notes of the city of whatever name or description; 
(14)  Water and sewer rates, rules and regulations and sewer and water main construction.  
Sec. 1-13. - Effect of repeals. 
The repeal or amendment of any provision of this Code or of any other ordinance or resolution of the common council shall not: 
(1)  Affect any rights, privileges, obligations or liabilities which were acquired or incurred or which had accrued under the repealed or amended provision, unless the city has expressly reserved the right to revoke such right, privilege, obligation or liability. 
(2)  Affect any offense, penalty or forfeiture, or prosecution for any offense, or levy of any penalty or forfeiture that has arisen prior to the repeal or amendment of the relevant provision of any ordinance or resolution. The preceding sentence shall not preclude the application of a lesser penalty or forfeiture if the new amending or repealing provision contains such a lesser penalty or forfeiture. The procedure for prosecution of any violations of ordinances repealed or amended shall be conducted according to the procedure set forth in the new amending or repealing provision or other procedure currently in effect. 
State Law reference— Effect of repeal, Wis. Stats. § 990.03.  
Sec. 1-14. - Amendments; language of amendments; new material; repeals. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, article, division, section or subsection or any portion of a chapter, article, division, section or subsection, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from affected reprinted pages; and the subsequent ordinances, as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the common council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Fitchburg, Wisconsin, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Fitchburg, Wisconsin, is amended by adding a section to be numbered _____, which section reads as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
State Law reference— Adoption of municipal ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 62.11.  
Sec. 1-15. - Effect of amendments to Code. 
Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the common council to make the addition or amendment a part of this Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to the city's Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.  
Sec. 1-16. - Keeping Code current; reviser's amendments. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)  Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in the Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in the Code. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to the Code. 
(4)  Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections. 
(5)  Change the words "this ordinance" or similar words to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section" or "sections ___ to ___" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code). 
(6)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in the Code.  
Sec. 1-17. - Clerk to file documents incorporated by reference. 
Whenever in this Code any standard, code, rule, regulation or other written or printed matter, other than the state statutes or other sections of this Code, are adopted by reference, they shall be deemed incorporated in this Code, as if fully set forth in this Code, and the clerk is directed and required to file, deposit and keep in his/her office a copy of the code, standard, rule, regulation or other written or printed matter as adopted. Materials so filed, deposited and kept shall be public records open for examination with proper care by any person during the clerk's office hours, subject to such orders or regulations that the clerk may prescribe for their preservation.  
Sec. 1-18. - Severability of Code provisions. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by reason of any decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any other section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase or portion thereof. The mayor and common council declare that they would have passed this Code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions thereof may be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
State Law reference— Severability, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(11).  
Sec. 1-19. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to altar or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the common council. 
State Law reference— Tampering with public records and notices, Wis. Stats. § 946.72.  
Sec. 1-20. - Fees established by resolution; fee schedule. 
Fees for permits, licenses, and other city services shall be as established from time to time by resolution or ordinance, as required by law, of the common council and set forth in the separate fee schedule adopted and maintained by the city. A copy of the fee schedule is available for inspection and copying in the office of the city clerk.  
Sec. 1-21. - Penalty provisions. 
(a)  Penalty schedule. The common council has adopted a schedule of specific penalties, as amended from time to time, as set forth in section 70-309. Penalties for violation of any provision of this Code that are not specifically addressed in the penalty schedule or in this Code shall be subject to the general penalty set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  General penalty. Unless otherwise specifically provided in the penalty schedule referred to in subsection (a) of this section or in this Code, any person who violates any of the provisions of this Code shall, upon conviction, be subject to a penalty as follows: 
(1)  First offense. For the first offense, the violator shall make a forfeiture of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 together with the costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution, imprisonment in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not for a period exceeding 90 days and not exceeding the penalty authorized by state statute. 
(2)  Second offense. For the second and all subsequent offenses of the same provision or ordinance within one year, the violator shall make a forfeiture of not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each such offense, together with costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution, imprisonment in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs of prosecution are paid, not to exceed 90 days and not to exceed the amount authorized by statute. 
(c)  Continued violations. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Code shall preclude the city from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any provision of this Code. 
(d)  Execution against defendant's property. Whenever any person fails to pay any forfeiture and costs of prosecution upon the order of any court for violation of any provision of this Code or ordinance of the city, the court may, in lieu of ordering imprisonment of the defendant, or after the defendant has been released from custody, issue an execution against the property of the defendant for such forfeiture and costs. 
State Law reference— Authority of municipalities to prohibit criminal conduct, Wis. Stats. § 66.0107; penalty for violation of ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.0109; bail generally, Wis. Stats. § 66.0417; outstanding unpaid forfeitures, Wis. Stats. § 66.0115; actions for violations of municipal ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.0114; fines and costs in municipal court, Wis. Stats. § 814.65.  
Chapter 2 - CITY BOUNDARIES, WARDS AND ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Elections generally, Wis. Stats. § 5.01 et seq.; divisions of municipalities into wards, Wis. Stats. § 5.15; enforcement of division requirement, Wis. Stats. § 5.15; polling places, Wis. Stats. § 5.25; polling place requirements, Wis. Stats. § 5.35; electors generally, Wis. Stats. § 6.01 et seq.; voter registration, Wis. Stats. § 6.26 et seq.; voting generally, Wis. Stats. § 6.76 et seq.; municipal board of election commissioners, Wis. Stats. § 7.22; prohibited election practices, Wis. Stats. § 12.01 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - City boundaries. 
The city's boundaries were established by certificate of incorporation issued by the Secretary of State of the State of Wisconsin on April 26, 1983, a copy of which is included in part I, article I of this Code. Since that date, the city boundaries have been changed and will continue to be changed from time to time. Ordinances and other documents affecting the city boundaries, and the resulting locations of wards and voting polls, are listed in appendix A to this Code. Copies of documents listed in appendix A to this Code are available in the office of the city clerk. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 31.01; Ord. No. 2011-O-17, § 1, 8-9-2011)  
Secs. 2-2—2-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WARDS 
 
Sec. 2-21. - Number of wards. 
The city shall be divided into 20 wards. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 31.02; Ord. No. 2011-O-17, § 1, 8-9-2011; Res. No. R-24-15, 3-10-2015)  
Sec. 2-22. - Ward boundaries. 
Ward boundaries are to be established by resolution, according to Wisconsin State Statutes. Current ward boundaries were established by Resolution R-65-11. Detailed descriptions of each ward are as follows: 
(1)  Ward 1. Ward 1 shall be bounded as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of the west line of T6N, R9E and the centerline of McKee Road; thence north along the west line of T6N, R9E to the north line of Jamestown subdivision; thence easterly along the north line of Jamestown Subdivision to the centerline of Whitney Way; thence south along the centerline of Whitney Way to the centerline of Williamsburg Way; thence west along the centerline of Williamsburg Way to the centerline of Smithfield Drive; thence south along the centerline of Smithfield Drive to the centerline of Norfolk Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of Norfolk Drive to the centerline of King James Way; thence southeasterly along the centerline of King James Way to the centerline of Anton Drive; thence southwesterly along the centerline of Anton Drive to the centerline of Kapec Road; thence south along the centerline of Kapec Drive to the centerline of McKee Road; thence west along the centerline of McKee Road to the point of beginning. 
(2)  Ward 2. Ward 2 shall be bounded as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of the centerline of McKee Road and Verona Road; thence north along the centerline of Verona Road extended to the north line of CSM 2048; thence west along the north line of CSM 2048 and extended to the north line of Western Hills Subdivision to the west line of Western Hills Subdivision; thence south along the west line of Western Hills Subdivision to the north line of Jamestown Subdivision; thence west along the north line of Jamestown Subdivision to the centerline of Whitney Way; thence south along the centerline of Whitney Way to the centerline of Williamsburg Way; thence west along the centerline of Williamsburg Way to the centerline of Smithfield Drive; thence south along the centerline of Smithfield Drive to the centerline of Norfolk Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of Norfolk Drive to the centerline of King James Way; thence southeasterly along the centerline of King James Way to the centerline of Anton Drive; thence southwesterly along the centerline of Anton Drive to the centerline of Kapec Road; thence south along the centerline of Kapec Drive to the centerline of McKee Road; thence east along the centerline of McKee Road to the point of beginning. 
(3)  Ward 3. Ward 3 shall be bounded as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of the centerline of McKee Road and Seminole Highway; thence northerly along Seminole Highway to the centerline of the Cannonball Path (former Union Pacific Railroad); thence west along the centerline of the Cannonball Path to the centerline of the Badger State Trail (former Illinois Central Railroad) continuing on the centerline of the SW Commuter Path (former Illinois Central Railroad) to Raymond Road extended; thence westerly along the centerline of Raymond Road extended to the west line of CSM 5907; thence southerly along the west line of CSM 5907 to the south line of CSM 5907; thence easterly along the south line of CSM 5907 and CSM 8975 to the west line of the Hatfield Plat; thence southerly along the west line of the Hatfield Plat and CSM 1431 to the south line of CSM 1431; thence easterly along the south line of CSM 1431 to the Center line of Harley Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of Harley Drive extended to the centerline of Verona Road; thence southwest along the centerline of Verona Road to the centerline of McKee Road; thence east along the centerline of McKee Road to the point of beginning; excepting therefrom those lands now in the City of Madison. 
(4)  Ward 4. Ward 4 shall be bounded as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of the centerline of Seminole Highway and the Cannonball Path (former Union Pacific Railroad); thence west along the centerline of the Cannonball Path to the west line of Belmar subdivision extended; thence north along the west line of Belmar subdivision, Renaissance on the Park - 1 st Addition subdivision, Renaissance on the Park subdivision, centerline of Rosenberry Road, west line of Belmar subdivision to the north line of Section 5, T6N, R9E; thence easterly along the north line of Section 5 to the centerline of Seminole Highway; thence southwesterly along the centerline of Seminole Highway to the point of beginning; excepting therefrom those lands now in the City of Madison. 
(5)  Ward 5. Ward 5 shall be bounded as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of the centerline of McKee Road and Longford Terrace; thence west along the centerline of McKee Road to the centerline of Seminole Highway; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Seminole Highway to the north line of Section 5, T6N, R9E; thence east along the north line of Section 5, T6N, R9E and north line of the NW ¼ of Section 4, T6N, R9E to the east line of NW ¼ of Section 4, T6N, R9E; thence south along the east line of NW ¼ of Section 4, T6N, R9E to the centerline of Ashbourne Lane; thence east, south and west along the centerline of Ashbourne Lane to the centerline of Edenberry Street; thence south along the centerline of Edenberry Street to the centerline of Kilkenny Place; thence west along the centerline of Kilkenny Place to the centerline of Rothmore Lane; thence south along the centerline of Rothmore Lane to the centerline of Longford Terrace; thence south along the centerline of Longford Terrace to the point of beginning. 
(6)  Ward 6. Ward 6 shall be bounded as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of the centerline of McKee Road and Chapel Valley Road; thence west along the centerline of McKee Road to the centerline of Longford Terrace; thence northeast along the centerline of Longford Terrace to the centerline of Rothmore Lane; thence north along the centerline of Rothmore Lane to the centerline of Kilkenny Place; thence east along the centerline of Kilkenny Place to the centerline of Edenberry Street; thence north along the centerline of Edenberry Street to the centerline of the Capital City State Trail; thence east and south along the centerline of the Capital City State Trail to the centerline of McKee Road; thence west along the centerline of McKee Road to the centerline of Yarmouth Greenway Drive; thence north along the centerline of Yarmouth Greenway Drive to the centerline of Bantry Lane; thence west along the centerline of Bantry Lane to the centerline of Longford Terrace; thence west along the centerline of Longford Terrace to the centerline of Chapel Valley Road; thence south along the centerline of Chapel Valley Road to the point of beginning. 
(7)  Ward 7. Ward 7 shall be bounded as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of the centerline of McKee Road and Chapel Valley Road; thence south and west along the centerline of Chapel Valley Road to the centerline of Wilshire Drive; thence south and west along the centerline of Wilshire Drive to the centerline of Richardson Street; thence southeast and south along the centerline of Richardson Street to the centerline of Lacy Road; thence west along the centerline of Lacy Road to the western line of Section 9, T6N, R9E; thence northerly along the western line of Section 9, T6N, R9E to the centerline of McKee Road; thence easterly along the centerline of McKee Road to the point of beginning. 
(8)  Ward 8. Ward 8 shall be bounded as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of the centerline of McKee Road and Fish Hatchery Road; thence southerly along the centerline of Fish Hatchery Road to the centerline of Lacy Road; thence west along the centerline of Lacy Road to the centerline of Richardson Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Richardson Street to the centerline of Wilshire Drive; thence east and north along the centerline of Wilshire Drive to the centerline of Chapel Valley Road; thence east and north along the centerline of Chapel Valley Road to the centerline of Longford Terrace; thence east along the centerline of Longford Terrace to the centerline of Bantry Lane; thence east along the centerline of Bantry Lane to the centerline of Yarmouth Greenway Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of Yarmouth Greenway Drive to the centerline of McKee Road; thence east along the centerline of McKee Road to the point of beginning. 
(9)  Ward 9. Ward 9 shall be bounded as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of the centerline of High Ridge Trail and Fish Hatchery Road; thence southwest along the centerline of Fish Hatchery Road to the centerline of McKee Road; thence westerly along the centerline of McKee Road to the centerline of the Capital City State Trail; thence north and west along the centerline of Capital City State Trail to the centerline of Edenberry Street; thence north along Edenberry Street to the centerline of Ashbourne Lane; thence east, north and west along the centerline of Ashbourne Lane to the east line of the NW ¼ of Section 4, T6N, R9E; thence north along the east line of the NW ¼ of Section 4, T6N, R9E to the centerline of the Cannonball Path (former Union Pacific Railroad); thence easterly along the centerline of the Cannonball Path to the centerline of Post Road; thence east along the centerline of Post Road to the centerline of Leopold Way; thence southerly along the centerline of Leopold Way extended to the north line of Outlot 1 of Fitchburg Springs Subdivision; thence east along the north line of Outlot 1 of Fitchburg Springs Subdivision to the east line of Outlot 1 of Fitchburg Springs Subdivision; thence southerly along the east line of Outlot 1 of Fitchburg Springs Subdivision to the east line of the Highlands of Seminole - 1 st Addition Subdivision; thence south along the east line of the Highlands of Seminole - 1 st Addition Subdivision to the north line of Lot 1 of CSM 7705; thence easterly along the north line of Lot 1 of CSM 7705 extended to the centerline of High Ridge Trail; thence easterly along the centerline of High Ridge Trail to the point of beginning. 
(10)  Ward 10. Ward 10 shall be bounded as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of the centerline of High Ridge Trail and Fish Hatchery Road; thence northerly along the centerline of Fish Hatchery Road to the centerline of Traceway Drive; thence northwest along the centerline of Traceway Drive to the centerline of Post Road; thence west along the centerline of Post Road to the centerline of Leopold Way; thence southerly along the centerline of Leopold Way extended to the north line of Outlot 1 of Fitchburg Springs Subdivision; thence east along the north line of Outlot 1 of Fitchburg Springs Subdivision to the east line of Outlot 1 of Fitchburg Springs Subdivision; thence southerly along the east line of Outlot 1 of Fitchburg Springs Subdivision to the east line of the Highlands of Seminole - 1 st Addition Subdivision; thence south along the east line of the Highlands of Seminole - 1 st Addition Subdivision to the north line of Lot 1 of CSM 7705; thence easterly along the north line of Lot 1 of CSM 7705 extended to the centerline of High Ridge Trail; thence easterly along the centerline of High Ridge Trail to the point of beginning. 
(11)  Ward 11. Ward 11 shall be bounded as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of the centerline of Fish Hatchery Road and Traceway Drive; thence northwest along the centerline of Traceway Drive to the centerline of Post Road; thence east along the centerline of Post Road to city limits; thence northerly along city limits line to the south line of the Hasz Subdivision; thence westerly along the south line of the Hasz Subdivision extended to the city limits; thence northerly along the city limits line to the north line of T6N, R9E; thence east along the north line of T6N, R9E to the centerline of Fish Hatchery Road; thence southwesterly along the centerline of Fish Hatchery Road to the point of beginning. 
(12)  Ward 12. Ward 12 shall be bounded as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of the centerline of Syene Road and the Capital City State Trail; thence westerly along the Capital City State Trail extended to the Nine Springs Creek; thence westerly along the Nine Springs Creek and tributaries extended to the south line of Lot 2 of CSM 5798; thence west along the south line of Lot 2 of CSM 5798 extended to the centerline of Glacier Valley Road; thence northerly along Glacier Valley Road to the centerline of Fish Hatchery Road; thence northeast along the centerline of Fish Hatchery Road to the centerline of Greenway Cross; thence east along the centerline of Greenway Cross to the city limits; thence southeast along the city limit line to the centerline of Syene Road; thence south along the centerline of Syene Road to the point of beginning. 
(13)  Ward 13. Ward 13 shall be bounded as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of the centerline of S. Syene Road and Lacy Road; thence north along S. Syene Road to the centerline of the Capital City State Trail; thence westerly along the Capital City State Trail extended to the Nine Springs Creek; thence westerly along the Nine Springs Creek and tributaries extended to the south line of Lot 2 of CSM 5798; thence west along the south line of Lot 2 of CSM 5798 extended to the centerline of Glacier Valley Road; thence northerly along Glacier Valley Road to the centerline of Fish Hatchery Road; thence southerly along the centerline of Fish Hatchery Road to the centerline of Lacy Road; thence east along the centerline of Lacy Road to the point of beginning. 
(14)  Ward 14. Ward 14 shall be bounded as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of S. Syene Road and Lacy Road; thence west along the centerline of Lacy Road to the centerline of Fish Hatchery Road; thence south along the centerline of Fish Hatchery Road to the centerline of Irish Lane; thence east along the centerline of Irish Lane to the centerline of S. Syene Road; thence north along S. Syene Road to the point of beginning. 
(15)  Ward 15. Ward 15 shall be bounded as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of Goodland Park Road and County Highway MM; thence south along the centerline of County Highway MM to the centerline of Lacy Road; thence west along the centerline of Lacy Road to the centerline of S. Syene Road; thence north along the centerline of Syene Road to the city limits; thence north and east along the city limits line to the east line of T6N, R9E; thence south along the east line of T6N, R9E extended to the centerline of Goodland Park Road; thence west along the centerline of Goodland Park Road to the point of beginning. 
(16)  Ward 16. Ward 16 shall be bounded as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of Whalen Road and S. Fish Hatchery Road; thence north along the centerline of S. Fish Hatchery Road to the centerline of Irish Lane; thence east along the centerline of Irish Lane to the centerline of S. Syene Road; thence north along the centerline of S. Syene Road to the centerline of Lacy Road; thence east along the centerline of Lacy Road to the centerline of County Highway MM; thence north along the centerline of County Highway MM to the centerline of Goodland Park Road; thence east along the centerline of Goodland Park Road to the east line of T6N, R9E; thence south along the east line of T6N, R9E to the centerline of County Highway B; thence northwest along the centerline of County Highway B to the centerline of County Highway MM; thence south along the centerline of County Highway MM to the centerline of Byrne Road; thence west along the centerline of Byrne Road to the centerline of Caine Road; thence north along the centerline of Caine Road to the centerline of Whalen Road; thence west along the centerline of Whalen Road to the point of beginning. 
(17)  Ward 17. Ward 17 shall be bounded as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of Caine Road and Whalen Road; thence west along the centerline of Whalen Road to the centerline of S. Seminole Highway; thence north along the centerline of S. Seminole Highway to the centerline of Vroman Road; thence west along the centerline of Vroman Road to the centerline of Grandview Road; thence northwest and west along the centerline of Grandview Road to the west line of T6N, R9E; thence south along the west line of T6N, R9E to the south line of T6N, R9E; thence east along the south line of T6N, R9E to the east line of T6N, R9E; thence north along the east line of T6N, R9E extended to the centerline of County Highway B; thence northwest along the centerline of County Highway B to the centerline of County Highway MM; thence south along the centerline of County Highway MM to the centerline of Byrne Road; thence west along the centerline of Byrne Road to the centerline of Caine Road; thence north along the centerline of Caine Road to the point of beginning. 
(18)  Ward 18. Ward 18 shall be bounded as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of Lacy Road and S. Fish Hatchery Road; thence west along the centerline of Lacy Road to the centerline of Mutchler Road; thence south along the centerline of Mutchler Road to the centerline of Whalen Road; thence east along the centerline of Whalen Road to the centerline of S. Fish Hatchery Road; thence north along the centerline of S. Fish Hatchery Road to the point of beginning. 
(19)  Ward 19. Ward 19 shall be bounded as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of Whalen Road and S. Seminole Highway; thence north along the centerline of S. Seminole Highway to the centerline of Vroman Road; thence west along the centerline of Vroman Road to the centerline of Grandview Road; thence northwest and west along the centerline of Grandview Road to the west line of T6N, R9E; thence north along the west line of T6N, R9E to the centerline of Nesbitt Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Nesbitt Road extended to the west line of Lot 14 of Orchard Pointe Subdivision; thence northwest along the west line of Lot 14 of Orchard Pointe Subdivision to the north line of Lot 14 of Orchard Pointe Subdivision; thence east along the north line of Lot 14 of Orchard Pointe Subdivision to the west line of T6N, R9E; thence north along the west line of T6N, R9E to the centerline of McKee Road; thence east along the centerline of McKee Road to the western line of Section 9, T6N, R9E; thence southerly along the western line of Section 9, T6N, R9E to the centerline of Whalen Road; thence west along the centerline of Whalen Road to the point of beginning. 
(20)  Ward 20. Part of the northwest ¼ of the northeast ¼ of Section 2, T6N, R9E, City of Madison, Dane County, Wisconsin, described as follows: Commencing at the northeast corner of Lot 1, Watson Commercial & Industrial Plat, thence south 88°33'10? east, along the south line of Stewart Street extended, 117.15 feet, to the point of beginning; thence continuing south 88°33'10? east, along the south line of Stewart Street extended, 12.88 feet, to a point on a line that is parallel to and 70 feet east, as measured at right angles to, the centerline of Syene Road, said centerline also being the west line of the said northwest ¼ of the northeast ¼; thence south 2°43'26? west, along said line that is 70 feet east of said centerline, 66.03 feet, to a point on a line that is parallel to and 200 feet north of, as measured at right angles to, the south line of a parcel described in Volume 513 of Deeds, page 357, as document number 763139, Dane County Registry; thence north 88°32'06? west, along said line that is 200 feet north of the south line of said described parcel, 23.07 feet; thence north 11°27'49? east, 67.03 feet, to the point of beginning. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 31.03; Ord. No. 2011-O-17, § 1, 8-9-2011; Res. No. R-24-15, 3-10-2015)  
Secs. 2-23—2-47. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ALDERMANIC DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 2-48. - Number of aldermanic districts. 
The city shall be divided into four aldermanic districts by combining contiguous whole wards. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 31.04; Ord. No. 2011-O-17, § 1, 8-9-2011)  
Sec. 2-49. - Aldermanic boundaries. 
The boundaries of the Fitchburg aldermanic districts are as follows: 
(1)  First aldermanic district. The first aldermanic district shall consist of wards 1, 2, 3 and 4. 
(2)  Second aldermanic district. The second aldermanic district shall consist of wards 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9. 
(3)  Third aldermanic district. The third aldermanic district shall consist of wards 10, 11, 12, 13, and 14. 
(4)  Fourth aldermanic district. The fourth aldermanic district shall consist of wards 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, and 20. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 31.05; Ord. No. 2011-O-17, § 1, 8-9-2011; Res. No. R-24-15, 3-10-2015)  
Sec. 2-50. - Polling places. 
(a)  Each ward. All electors for each ward shall vote at the same polling place. 
(b)  Designation. Polling places are designated as follows: 
(1)  Ward 1. The polling place for ward 1 shall be at Fire Station #2, 5415 King James Way, Fitchburg, WI. 
(2)  Ward 2. The polling place for ward 2 shall be at Fire Station #2, 5415 King James Way, Fitchburg, WI. 
(3)  Ward 3. The polling place for ward 3 shall be at Fire Station #2, 5415 King James Way, Fitchburg, WI. 
(4)  Ward 4. The polling place for ward 4 shall be at Fire Station #2, 5415 King James Way, Fitchburg, WI. 
(5)  Ward 5. The polling place for ward 5 shall be at the Fire Station #1, 5791 Lacy Road, Fitchburg, WI. 
(6)  Ward 6. The polling place for ward 6 shall be at the Fire Station #1, 5791 Lacy Road, Fitchburg, WI. 
(7)  Ward 7. The polling place for ward 7 shall be at the Fire Station #1, 5791 Lacy Road, Fitchburg, WI. 
(8)  Ward 8. The polling place for ward 8 shall be at the Fire Station #1, 5791 Lacy Road, Fitchburg, WI. 
(9)  Ward 9. The polling place for ward 9 shall be at the Fire Station #1, 5791 Lacy Road, Fitchburg, WI. 
(10)  Ward 10. The polling place for ward 10 shall be at Fairways Apartments, 2301 Traceway Drive, Fitchburg, WI. 
(11)  Ward 11. The polling place for ward 11 shall be at Fairways Apartments, 2301 Traceway Drive, Fitchburg, WI. 
(12)  Ward 12. The polling place for ward 12 shall be at Fairways Apartments, 2301 Traceway Drive, Fitchburg, WI. 
(13)  Ward 13. The polling place for ward 13 shall be at Fairways Apartments, 2301 Traceway Drive, Fitchburg, WI. 
(14)  Ward 14. The polling place for ward 14 shall be at Fairways Apartments, 2301 Traceway Drive, Fitchburg, WI. 
(15)  Ward 15. The polling place for ward 15 shall be at the Community Center, 5510 Lacy Road, Fitchburg, WI. 
(16)  Ward 16. The polling place for ward 16 shall be at the Community Center, 5510 Lacy Road, Fitchburg, WI. 
(17)  Ward 17. The polling place for ward 17 shall be at the Community Center, 5510 Lacy Road, Fitchburg, WI. 
(18)  Ward 18. The polling place for ward 18 shall be at the Community Center, 5510 Lacy Road, Fitchburg, WI. 
(19)  Ward 19. The polling place for ward 19 shall be at the Community Center, 5510 Lacy Road, Fitchburg, WI. 
(c)  Change. Any change in a polling place must be adopted, by ordinance, 60 days before a September primary or general election or 30 days before any other election. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 31.06; Ord. No. 2011-O-17, § 1, 8-9-2011)  
Secs. 2-51—2-73. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTION PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 2-74. - Polling hours. 
The polls at any election shall be open from 7:00 a.m. until 8:00 p.m. Any elector waiting his/her turn to vote, whether within the polling booth or in the line outside the booth, at the time the polls officially close, shall be permitted to vote. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 31.07; Ord. No. 2011-O-17, § 1, 8-9-2011)  
Sec. 2-75. - Voting machines required. 
Voting machines complying with Wis. Stats. § 5.37 shall be used in every ward in the city at every election, subject to the exceptions and requirements of Wis. Stats. § 5.40. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 31.08; Ord. No. 2011-O-17, § 1, 8-9-2011)  
Sec. 2-76. - Common polling place. 
(a)  Combining wards. No later than 60 days before each September primary and general election, and no later than 30 days before each other election, the common council may by resolution combine two or more wards for voting purposes to facilitate using a common polling place. 
(b)  Returns. Whenever wards are so combined, the original ward number shall continue to be utilized for all official purposes except the council may provide in the resolution that returns shall be maintained only for each group of combined wards. Separate returns, however, shall be maintained for each separate ballot for wards so combined. 
(c)  Resolution. A resolution combining wards and providing for combined returns shall remain in effect for each election until modified or rescinded, or until a new ward division is made under Wis. Stats. § 5.15. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 31.09; Ord. No. 2011-O-17, § 1, 8-9-2011)  
Sec. 2-77. - Registration. 
(a)  All electors for all elections shall be required to be registered. The city clerk shall receive applications for registration at his/her office in person during regular office hours throughout the year, except that mail-in registration for any election shall be closed at 5:00 p.m. on the third Wednesday preceding the election. Registration made by mail under Wis. Stats. § 6.30(4) must be delivered to the office of the city clerk or postmarked no later than the third Wednesday preceding the election. 
(b)  Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 6.29, any qualified elector of the city who has not previously filed a registration form or whose name does not appear on the registration list of the municipality may register after the close of registration but not later than 5:00 p.m. or the close of business, whichever is later, on the Friday before an election at the office of the city clerk. 
(c)  In addition, according to Wis. Stats. § 6.55, any qualified elector in the ward or election district where the elector desires to vote whose name does not appear on the registration list but who claims to be registered to vote in the election may request permission to vote at the polling place for that ward or election district. When the request is made, the inspector shall require the person to give his/her name and address. If the elector is not at the polling place which serves the ward or election district where the elector resides, the inspector shall provide the elector with directions to the correct polling place. If the elector is at the correct polling place, the elector shall complete registration as provided in this section. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 31.10; Ord. No. 2011-O-17, § 1, 8-9-2011)  
Sec. 2-78. - Election dates. 
(a)  Spring election. The spring election for judicial and city officers shall be held on the first Tuesday in April. 
(b)  General election. The general election for United States senators, representatives in congress, presidential electors, state senators, representatives to the state assembly, state officers other than the state superintendent and judicial officers and county officers other than supervisors and county executives shall be held on the Tuesday next preceding the first Monday in November in even-numbered years. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 31.11; Ord. No. 2011-O-17, § 1, 8-9-2011)  
Sec. 2-79. - Nonpartisan primary. 
(a)  Candidates for elective city offices shall be nominated by a nonpartisan primary as described in Wis. Stats. § 8.11. The candidate shall file with his/her nomination papers a declaration that he/she will qualify for the office if elected. Nomination papers shall be signed by electors as required in Wis. Stats. § 8.10. 
(b)  If the number of candidates for an elective city office does not exceed two times the number to be elected to the office, no primary shall be held for the office and the names of the candidates shall be printed on the official ballot for the ensuing election. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 31.12; Ord. No. 2011-O-17, § 1, 8-9-2011)  
Sec. 2-80. - Election officials. 
(a)  Number. There shall be a minimum of five inspectors for each polling place at each election held under Wis. Stats. chs. 5 through 12. The city clerk may require as many poll workers as needed to work, providing there is always an odd number of election inspectors working at anytime. This section will also allow the use of tabulators, as needed, to be called in at the close of any election to help tabulate results in accordance to Wis. Stats. § 7.30(3). This section shall also allow the reduction of poll workers to not less than three in accordance to Wis. Stats. § 7.32, for elections which are known to have a very small turnout. 
(b)  Appointment. Inspectors of elections shall be nominated by the mayor to the common council for appointment no later than the last council meeting in December of each odd-numbered years, as provided in Wis. Stats. § 7.30. 
(c)  Alternate shifts. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 7.30(1), the city shall allow for selection of two or more sets of officials to work at different times on election days and permit the clerk or his/her designee to establish different working hours for different officials assigned to the same polling place. Alternate officials may also be appointed in a number sufficient to maintain adequate staffing of the polling places. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 31.13; Ord. No. 2011-O-17, § 1, 8-9-2011)  
APPENDIX A. - ORDINANCES AMENDING CITY BOUNDARIES, WARDS, ALDERMANIC DISTRICTS AND ELECTION PROCEDURE[2] 
The ordinances amending the boundaries, wards, aldermanic districts and election procedure of the city are as follows: 
Ordinance Number 	Adoption Date 	Description 
89-0-43 	1/23/1990 	Wards created (10 Wards) 
91-0-18 	9/24/1991 	Repeal & Recreating Common Polling Place Section 31.12 
92-0-08 	4/14/1992 	Repeal & Recreating Section III Aldermanic Districts 
92-0-03 	3/10/1992 	Repeal & Recreating Ord. No. 01-O-13, adopted 8/18/2001, Repeal and Recreate Boundaries (Re-Districting 2000 Census) 
05-O-15 	5/10/2005 	Repeal & Recreate Boundaries (portion of McCoy Road attachment, portion of Seminole Road detachment) 
07-O-02 	1/23/2007 	Changes to Ward boundaries as a result of the annexation of a parcel of land from the Town of Verona. Name of the polling place for wards 4 through 6 was changed, and Act 451 resulted in changes to voter registration. 
 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The ordinances listed herein are not included in the codification of this chapter but are available in the office of the city clerk. 
 
Chapter 3 - OFFICIAL MAP[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— At the direction of the city, chapter 26 of the 2009 Compiled Ordinances has been renumbered as a new chapter 3. 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Intent. 
It is the intent of the common council to establish an official map for the purpose of conserving and promoting the public health, safety, convenience, economy, orderliness and general welfare of the community; to further the orderly layout in the use of land; to stabilize the location of real property boundary lines; to insure proper legal description and proper monumenting of land; to facilitate adequate provision for transportation, parks, playgrounds and storm water drainage; and to facilitate the further subdivision of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land.  
Sec. 3-2. - Authority. 
This chapter is enacted under the authority granted by § 62.23(6), Wis. Stats.  
Sec. 3-3. - Description of official map. 
(a)  Official map adopted. The official map of the former Town of Fitchburg established and maintained by the City of Madison in effect on the date of incorporation of the City of Fitchburg, specifically sections 1 through 12, together with all existing conditions for the remaining sections of the map and all amendments heretofore or hereafter duly adopted by the common council is hereby adopted as the City of Fitchburg's Official Map. The official map, together with all information shown thereon, shall be as much as part of this chapter as if fully set forth and described herein. 
(b)  Streets, highways, parkways, parks and playgrounds to be shown. The official map shall show the location and width of all platted and existing streets, highways, parkways, historic districts, parks and playgrounds heretofore laid out, adopted and established by law and shall also show the exterior lines, widening or extending of any existing, proposed or planned streets, highways, parkways, historic districts, railroad rights-of-way, public transit facilities, waterways or parks and playgrounds. The official map is deemed to be final and conclusive with respect to the location and width of streets, highways, historic districts, waterways and parkways and the location and extent of railroad rights-of-way, public transit facilities, parks and playgrounds.  
Sec. 3-4. - Extraterritorial areas may be mapped. 
As set forth in § 62.23(6)(d), Wis. Stats., the street, highway, waterway, railroad right-of-way, public transit facility or parkway systems shown on the official map may be shown as extending beyond the boundaries of the city in extraterritorial approval areas as provided by Wis. Stat. § 236.10(1)(b)2.  
Sec. 3-5. - Amendments. 
(a)  Common council to initiate. The common council whenever and as often as it deems necessary for the public interest, may amend the official map of the city so as to establish the exterior lines of planned new streets, highways, waterways, historic districts, parkways, railroad rights-of-way, public transit facilities, waterways, parks or playgrounds; or to widen, narrow, extend or close existing streets, highways parkways, railroad rights-of-way, public transit facilities, parks or playgrounds. When adopted amendments become a part of the official map and are conclusive with respect to location and width of the streets, highways, parkways and the location and extent of parks, railroad rights-of-way, public transit facilities and playgrounds shown thereon. 
(b)  Referral to plan commission. The common council shall refer any proposed amendment to the official map to the city plan commission for review and report thereon prior to adoption. The city plan commission must report its recommendation to the common council within 60 days. In the event the city plan commission does not make its report within 60 days of such reference, it forfeits the right to further suspend action. 
(c)  Public hearing on amendment. A public hearing before the common council of parties in interest and citizens shall be required before any amendments to the official map, as defined by Wis. Stat. § 62.23(6), are effective. Notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be given by publication as a Class 2 under Wis. Stat. ch. 985 in the official city newspaper. Notice of the time, place and purpose of such public hearing shall also be sent to the owners of record who are owners of property in whole or in part situated within 200 feet of the boundaries of the properties affected, and whose post office address is known or can be ascertained with reasonable diligence. If the properties affected are outside the city limits, notice shall also be sent to the clerk of the township involved. All said notices shall be set at least ten days prior to the date of such public hearing. 
(d)  Amendments by subdivision plat. The locating, widening or closing or the approval of the locating, widening or closing of streets, highways, waterways, parkways, railroad rights-of-way, public transit facilities, parks or playgrounds by the city under provision of law other than this section, shall be deemed to amend the official map and are subject to this section, except that changes and additions made by a subdivision plat, approved by the common council under Wis. Stat. ch. 236 do not require the public hearing specified in subsection (c) if the changes or additions do not affect any land outside the platted area.  
Sec. 3-6. - Effect of placement upon official map. 
(a)  Not construed as opening or dedication. The placing of any street, highway, historic district, parkway, railroad right-of-way, public transit facility, waterway, park or playground line or lines upon the official map does not constitute the opening or establishment of any street, highway, parkway, railroad right-of-way, public transit facility, waterway, park or playground or the taking or acceptance of any land for these purposes. 
(b)  No building permit issued without street access. No building permit shall be issued for erection of a building unless a street, highway or parkway giving access thereto has been duly placed on the official map. 
(c)  Restriction on building in streets, etc. No permit may be issued for any building in the bed of any street, highway, waterway, railroad right-of-way, public transit facility or parkway shown or laid out on the official map except as provided in this chapter. 
(d)  Building permit prerequisite to compensation. Any person desiring to construct a building within the limits of a street, highway, waterway, railroad right-of-way, public transit facility or parkway shown as extended beyond the boundaries of the city within its extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction or within the limits of the city may apply to the building inspector and zoning administrator of the city for a building permit. Unless an application is made and the building permit granted or not denied within 30 days, the person is not entitled to compensation for damage to the building in the course of construction of the street, highway, waterway, railroad right-of-way, public transit facility or parkway shown on the official map. Applicant for such a building permit shall submit with the application, an accurate plot plan certified by a qualified surveyor showing the location of the proposed building with reference to any street, highway, waterway, railroad right-of-way, public transit facility, historic district, parkway or park or playground shown on the official map. 
(e)  Buildings to access mapped streets, etc. No permit for the erection of any building may be issued unless the street, highway or parkway giving access to such proposed building has been duly placed on the official map. For purposes of this section a street, highway, or parkway shall be considered duly placed on the official map at the time that the governing body accepts such street, highway or parkway.  
Sec. 3-7. - Municipal improvements. 
No public sewer or other municipal street utility or improvement shall be constructed in any street, highway or parkway until such street, highway or parkway is duly placed on the official map. For purposes of this section, a street, highway or parkway shall be considered duly placed on the official map at the time that the governing body accepts such street, highway or parkway.  
Sec. 3-8. - Appeals. 
(a)  Zoning board of appeals authority. The zoning board of appeals, created under chapter 22 shall have the following powers: 
(1)  Upon finding that the land within a mapped street, highway, waterway, railroad right-of-way, public transit facility or parkway is not yielding a fair return, the zoning board of appeals may review any administrative decision of the city building inspector or zoning administrator denying a permit for the erection of a building or addition under this chapter and may, by the vote of a majority of its members, grant, conditionally grant or refuse a permit for the building or addition which will as little as practicable increase the cost of opening the street, highway, waterway, railroad right-of-way, public transit facility or parkway or tend to cause a change of the official map. 
(2)  The board shall also have authority to hear appeals under 3-6(e) from denial of building/zoning permits for buildings not having access to a mapped street, highway or parkway and to grant permits for such construction upon finding that enforcement of 3-6(e) would cause practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and that the circumstances of the case do not require the structure to be so related. 
(b)  Appeal procedure. Before taking any action authorized in this section, the board of appeals shall hold a hearing in accordance with the procedures set forth in Wis. Stat. § 62.23(6)(g). The board may impose reasonable requirements to promote the health, safety, convenience or general welfare as a condition of granting a permit and may refuse a permit where the applicant will not be substantially affected and will not incur practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship by not constructing the addition or building outside the mapped street, highway, waterway, railroad right-of-way, public transit facility or parkway.  
Sec. 3-9. - Certified copy of official map to be maintained. 
A certified copy of the official map shall be kept in the offices of the assessor, building inspector and zoning administrator and shall be available for inspection by an interested person during regular office hours. The certified copy shall bear on its face a certification that it is a true copy of the official map described in the ordinance and shall show the date of adoption of this chapter and shall be signed by the mayor and countersigned by the city clerk. Thereafter every amendment of a proposed street, proposed highway, proposed waterway, proposed historic district, proposed parkway, proposed railroad right-of-way, proposed public transit facility, proposed park or proposed playground on the official map shall be indicated by the appropriate convention on the aforesaid certified copy of the official map and a certificate placed thereon or attached thereto bearing the number or date of adoption of the amendment. The certificate shall be signed by the mayor and countersigned by the city clerk. For purposes of this section, plats, certified survey maps and property transactions complying with applicable laws or ordinances do not require certification when being placed on the official map.  
Sec. 3-10. - Filing with register of deeds. 
Upon adoption of the official map, the city clerk shall immediately file with the Dane County register of deeds a certificate showing that the city has established an official map.  
Sec. 3-11. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the city departments of assessing, building inspection and zoning to enforce the provisions of this chapter.  
Sec. 3-12. - Penalties. 
See forfeiture/bond/deposit schedule for penalties for any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter.  
Chapter 4 - MAYOR AND COMMON COUNCIL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Cities generally, Wis. Stats. § 62.01 et seq.; municipal budget systems, Wis. Stats. § 65.01 et seq.; general municipality law, Wis. Stats. § 62.11; municipal borrowing and municipal bonds, Wis. Stats. § 67.01 et seq.; municipal disposal of abandoned property, Wis. Stats. § 66.0139; local government purchasing, Wis. Stats. § 66.0131; municipal finance, Wis. Stats. § 62.12; manner of exercise of home rule, Wis. Stats. § 66.0101; municipal police and fire departments, Wis. Stats. § 62.13; municipal administrative procedures, Wis. Stats. § 68.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Form of government. 
The city is a state political corporation, has the powers and privileges afforded cities under the constitution and laws of the state and of the United States of America. Its corporate authority is vested in a mayor and common council comprised of the mayor and eight alderpersons, two from each of four aldermanic districts. Commencing with the spring election in April of 2020, the mayor is to be elected for a three-year term, and the alderpersons are to be elected for two-year terms on a staggered basis with alderpersons for district 1 seat 2, district 2 seat 4, district 3 seat 6, and district 4 seat 8 elected in even years and alderpersons for district 1 seat 1 district 2 seat 3, district 3 seat 5, and district 4 seat 7 elected in odd years. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.01; Ch. Ord. No. 4, § 1, 1-9-2018) 
State Law reference— Incorporation of cities, Wis. Stats. § 66.0201 et seq.; classes of cities, Wis. Stats. § 62.05; common council, Wis. Stats. § 62.11; powers of constitutionally incorporated city, Wis. Stats. § 66.0213.  
Sec. 4-2. - Official newspaper. 
(a)  Eligibility. To be eligible to submit a proposal for contracting with the city for publication of the city's legal notices or common council proceedings under the terms of this section a newspaper must: 
(1)  Be published at a minimum once a week; 
(2)  Meet the eligibility requirements set forth in Wis. Stats. § 985.03(1); 
(3)  Be a newspaper published in the city, if any, otherwise be published in the county and have general circulation in the city. 
(b)  Certification of qualification. A newspaper may not be designated as the official city newspaper for publication of city legal notices unless and until it files proof that a certificate stating that it qualifies under Wis. Stats. § 985.03 and stating its place of publication has been filed with the county clerk. 
(c)  Designation. The common council, at its last regular meeting in April or as soon as possible thereafter, shall designate one or more newspapers eligible under Wis. Stats. § 985.03 and published in the city, if any, otherwise published in the county and having a general circulation in the city, for publication of the common council proceedings and as the official city newspaper for the publication of the city's legal notices for the ensuing year. 
(d)  Absence of official newspaper. If for any reason the city is at any time without an official newspaper, legal notices and other matters required to be published not otherwise provided for in accordance with this section shall be published in a newspaper designated by the common council, at not more than the legal rate for like work in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 985.03. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.80) 
State Law reference— Official municipal newspapers, Wis. Stats. § 985.05.  
Secs. 4-3—4-22. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COMMON COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Common council, Wis. Stats. § 62.11. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 4-23. - Composition. 
(a)  Two classes of alders. The common council shall consist of the mayor and eight alderpersons elected for seats numbered as follows: district 1, seats 1 and 2; district 2, seats 3 and 4; district 3, seats 5 and 6; and district 4, seats 7 and 8. Alderpersons shall be divided into two classes, one class of alderpersons to be elected in odd years and one class to be elected in even years as follows: 
Alderpersons for district 1 seat 2, district 2 seat 4, district 3 seat 6, and district 4 seat 8 to be elected in even years. 
Alderpersons for district 1 seat 1 district 2 seat 3, district 3 seat 5, and district 4 seat 7 to be elected in odd years. 
For purposes of nominations, primaries, ballots, election procedures and filling of vacancies, each numbered seat shall be considered a separate office. The mayor and all alderpersons shall be elected in the spring election held on the first Tuesday in April. 
(b)  Transition to staggered terms. During the spring election in April of 2019, the alderpersons of the city shall be elected as follows: 
(1)  Alderpersons for district 1 seat 2, district 2 seat 4, district 3 seat 6, and district 4 seat 8 shall be elected for a one-year term. 
(2)  Alderpersons for district 1 seat 1, district 2 seat 3, district 3 seat 5, and district 4 seat 7 shall be elected for a two-year term. 
Commencing with the spring election in April of 2020, the alderpersons are to be elected for two-year terms on a staggered basis as described in subsection (a) above. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.02(1); Ch. Ord. No. 4, § 2, 1-9-2018) 
State Law reference— Vacancies in city office, Wis. Stats. § 17.23; authority for city to provide for election of one alderman from each district, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(1)(b); manner of choosing mayor and aldermen, Wis. Stats. § 62.09; council composition under city manager plan of government, Wis. Stats. § 64.07.  
Sec. 4-24. - Rules. 
(a)  The common council shall preserve order at its meetings, compel attendance of members, punish nonattendance and shall be judge of the election and qualification of its members. 
(b)  Meetings of the common council shall be conducted in accordance with Robert's Rules of Orders, Newly Revised, 10th Edition, Perseus Publishing, 2000, (Robert's Rules of Order), as amended, except to the extent that it contradicts any provision herein. Additionally, debate rules shall be modified so that, during common council debates on motions, alderpersons shall be able to speak to an issue each time they are recognized by the chairperson, but shall be limited to five minutes each time they are recognized, except for the annual budget approval meeting, which shall be governed by rules set forth in this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.02(2)) 
State Law reference— Common council procedure, Wis. Stats. § 62.11(3).  
Sec. 4-25. - Compensation. 
(a)  The salaries of all elected and appointed officials, including members of boards and commissions, shall be as determined by the common council from time to time; provided, however, that neither the mayor nor any alderperson shall during the term of such office be paid a salary in excess of that provided at the time the person took office since the person's most recent election or appointment. 
(b)  The salaries of the mayor, the municipal judge, and the alderpersons shall only be changed upon the favorable vote of three-fourths of all the members of the common council. Whenever such salaries are to be changed or established the common council shall, not later than the first regular meeting in February, fix the amount of salary of any such officer entitled to a salary that may be elected or appointed for a definite term during the ensuing year. 
(c)  Common council members serving on any board, commission, or committee shall not be entitled to receive any remuneration or per diem if such member receives any compensation for serving as a common council member. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.02(3)) 
State Law reference— Compensation of mayor and aldermen, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(6); compensation of councilmembers, Wis. Stats. § 64.08.  
Sec. 4-26. - Quorum. 
Two-thirds of the members shall be a quorum but fewer may compel the attendance of absent members and adjourn. The mayor shall not be counted in determining whether a quorum is present at a meeting, but may vote in case of a tie, as provided in this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.02(4)) 
State Law reference— Common council quorum, Wis. Stats. § 62.11(1).  
Sec. 4-27. - Confirmations. 
The favorable vote of a majority of all members of the common council shall be required to confirm any nomination that requires confirmation by the common council. In case of a tie, the mayor shall have a casting vote as provided in this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.02(5))  
Sec. 4-28. - Member voting. 
The ayes and noes may be required by any member. The vote shall be by ayes and noes on confirmation and on the adoption of any measure assessing or levying taxes, appropriating or disbursing money, or creating any liability or charge against the city or any fund thereof. All aye and no votes shall be recorded by the clerk. A measure shall carry upon obtaining the favorable vote of the requisite number of common council members. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.02(6)(a)) 
State Law reference— Common council voting, Wis. Stats. § 62.11(1).  
Sec. 4-29. - Mayor's vote. 
The mayor may vote in case of a tie as set forth herein. When the mayor does vote in case of a tie, the mayor's vote shall be counted in determining whether a sufficient number of the common council have voted favorably or unfavorably on any measure. The mayor's vote shall be limited only to breaking a tie vote. The mayor shall not be permitted to vote to create or break a supermajority in cases where a supermajority is required. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.02(6)(b)) 
State Law reference— Voting by mayor, Wis. Stats. § 62.11(1).  
Sec. 4-30. - Chairperson. 
The chairperson of all common council meetings shall be the mayor. In the event that the mayor is unavailable, the chairperson shall be determined in the order as follows: council president; chairperson of the finance committee; chairperson of the public safety and human services committee; chairperson of the personnel committee. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.02(8))  
Sec. 4-31. - Election of council president. 
(a)  The common council shall appoint a council president at the organizational meeting. The mayor shall accept nominations from the floor. Once nominations are complete, each nominee shall be afforded not more than five minutes to present reasons he/she should be appointed. A vote shall be taken by secret ballot. 
(b)  If there are more than two nominations, and no one receives enough votes to constitute a majority of the entire council, the top two nominations shall be voted upon. If more than two nominations tie for the largest number of votes, the common council shall vote again. If no one receives a majority and there are still more than two who tie for the largest number of votes, those names shall be written by the clerk on individual pieces of paper, and the mayor shall draw two names to be voted upon. 
(c)  In the event that there is a tie between the two nominees or no one receives enough votes to constitute a majority of the entire common council after five successive votes, the mayor shall select the council president by choosing between the two final nominees. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.02(9)(A)) 
State Law reference— Appointment of council president, Wis. Stats. § 64.07(2).  
Sec. 4-32. - Duties of president. 
The council president shall nominate common council members to the standing committees (finance, personnel, and public safety and human services) who shall be confirmed by a majority of the common council members present and voting, and shall preside at committee of the whole meetings. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.02(9)(B)) 
State Law reference— President as presiding officer who may vote but has no veto power, Wis. Stats. § 64.07(2).  
Sec. 4-33. - Powers of the common council. 
(a)  General powers. The common council shall have the management and control of city property, finances, highways, streets, navigable waters, and the public service, and shall have the power to act for the government and good order of the city, for its commercial benefit and for the health, safety, welfare and convenience of the public. The common council may carry out its powers by license, regulation, suppression, borrowing of money, tax levy, appropriation, forfeiture, and other necessary or convenient means. The powers herein referred to shall be in addition to any other statutory and constitutional powers the common council may have and shall be limited only by express language. 
(b)  Powers regarding property. The common council may acquire property, real or personal, within or without the city, for parks, libraries, historic places, recreation, beautification, streets, waterworks, sewage or waste disposal, harbors, improvements of watercourses, public grounds, vehicle parking areas, and for any other public purpose; may acquire real property within or contiguous to the city, by means other than condemnation, for industrial sites; may improve and beautify the same; may construct, own, lease and maintain buildings on such property for instruction, recreation, amusement and other public purposes; and may sell and convey such property. 
(c)  Powers to finance city government. The common council may levy and provide for the collection of taxes and special assessments; may refund any tax or special assessment paid, or any part thereof, when satisfied that the same was unjust or illegal; and generally manage city finances in accordance with this chapter. 
(d)  Emergency powers. All powers enumerated in Wis. Stats. § 323.14(2) shall be reserved and exercised by the common council, or the mayor, as provided in said statute. The mayor may designate temporary and permanent emergency routes, and may designate or suspend traffic control restrictions along such routes. 
(e)  Construction of powers. All powers given herein shall be liberally construed in favor of the rights, powers, and privileges of the city to promote the general welfare, peace, good order and prosperity of the city inhabitants thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.03(1)—(5)) 
State Law reference— Powers of common council, Wis. Stats. § 62.11(5).  
Sec. 4-34. - Style of ordinances. 
The style of all ordinances shall be: "The common council of the City of Fitchburg do ordain as follows:…." 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.02(7)) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Wis. Stats. § 62.11(3)(f).  
Sec. 4-35. - Ordinance and resolution review. 
(a)  No ordinance or resolution may be acted upon by the common council until it has been reviewed by all the committees, commissions, and boards to which it is referred and returned to the common council with a recommendation for adoption, disapproval, amendment, or with no recommendation. 
(b)  If a committee fails to return an ordinance or resolution to the common council within 30 days of the date the ordinance or resolution was referred to the committee, the ordinance or resolution may be deemed to have been returned without recommendation and may be acted upon by the common council and shall be placed on the agenda by the request of two or more alderpersons or the mayor as provided in this article. 
(c)  No ordinance, resolution or other matter referred to a committee, commission, or board for action shall be reported out until it has first been considered at a properly noticed meeting of each body to which it was referred. 
(d)  The recommendation to approve, to approve with amendments or to disapprove any measure shall be determined upon motion by a majority vote. 
(e)  All action taken by committees, commissions, and boards shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting. 
(f)  The recommendation of the committee shall be reported to the common council when the item is scheduled for voting on the common council agenda. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.03(6))  
Sec. 4-36. - Items referred by mayor to common council. 
The mayor may, after informing the council president, refer items of an immediate nature, to the common council that are not to be reviewed by any other body. These items shall be properly noticed and placed on the common council agenda, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.03(7))  
Secs. 4-37—4-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS 
 
Sec. 4-61. - Regular meetings. 
(a)  Regular meetings of the common council shall be held on the second and fourth Tuesday evening of each calendar month at 7:30 p.m. Regular meetings shall adjourn no later than 11:00 p.m. unless extended by a majority vote of the common council members present and voting. 
(b)  If the date of any regular meeting falls on a legal holiday, such meeting will be canceled or rescheduled to another date or time by order of the common council. Following a regular city election, the new common council shall hold its first meeting on the third Tuesday of April. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.04(1)) 
State Law reference— Council meetings to be held not less than once monthly on first Tuesday or as otherwise fixed by council, Wis. Stats. § 62.11(2).  
Sec. 4-62. - Orientation meeting. 
Every year, immediately after the adjournment of the first monthly meeting in April (held on the second Tuesday of the month and which shall be held by the outgoing common council members), there shall be held a common council orientation meeting for the new common council members who will assume their positions the third Tuesday in April. The orientation meeting shall include, but not be limited to a discussion of Robert's Rules of Order, open meetings law, open records law, ethics code, and other topics of interest. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.04(1)(A); Ch. Ord. No. 4, § 3, 1-9-2018)  
Sec. 4-63. - Organizational meeting. 
(a)  The organizational meeting is to be held on the third Tuesday in April every year. At this meeting the council president will be elected. The council president may present nominations for standing committees for immediate action by the common council. A majority of those present and voting shall be required to confirm nominations. 
(b)  The mayor may also present nominations for other committees and commissions for immediate action by the common council as provided in this article. Referrals to committees and commissions may be made at the organizational meeting, as well as approval of bills, and any item deemed necessary for immediate action. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.04(1)(B); Ch. Ord. No. 4, § 4, 1-9-2018) 
State Law reference— New council to meet on third Tuesday in April after regular city election, Wis. Stats. § 62.11(2).  
Sec. 4-64. - Special meeting for approval of nominations. 
Provided the council president or mayor did not make all nominations at the organizational meeting, or, if the common council did not act or did not approve any or all of the nominations, a special meeting of the common council shall be held at 6:00 p.m. on the fourth Tuesday in April for the sole purpose of approving nominations to committees, commissions, and boards. The nominations not yet approved shall be provided to the clerk by 8:00 a.m. on the Friday before the fourth Tuesday in April for distribution to the common council. The common council shall then take action on the nominations at the special meeting on the fourth Tuesday in April. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.04(1)(C))  
Sec. 4-65. - Other special meetings. 
(a)  Who may call. The mayor or any three alderpersons may call a special meeting of the common council by filing a signed written notice thereof with the clerk at least 24 hours before the meeting is to be called stating the purpose, time and place of the meeting. 
(b)  Notice. Immediately upon the filing of a notice of a special meeting, the clerk shall notify the members of the council in a manner likely to give each member notice of the meeting and provide the notice at least six hours before the meeting. 
(c)  Held without common council notice. A special meeting can be held without notice being given when all of the members of the common council are present, or consent in writing. If all of the members consent in writing each member shall file a written consent with the clerk prior to the beginning of the meeting. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.04(2); Ch. Ord. No. 2018-O-09, § 1, 2-27-2018) 
State Law reference— Call by mayor and notice of special meetings, Wis. Stats. § 62.11(2).  
Sec. 4-66. - Compliance with open meeting law. 
Neither any regular nor special meeting of the common council shall be held unless and until the public notice requirements of the state open meeting law have been complied with. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.04(3)) 
State Law reference— Open meeting of public bodies, Wis. Stats. § 19.81 et seq.  
Sec. 4-67. - Review of agendas. 
(a)  Common council meeting. The common council meeting agenda shall be developed and reviewed by the mayor and the city administrator before the agendas are distributed. 
(b)  Items initiated by common council members. Any two common council members may agree to have an item placed on the common council agenda. These agenda items may be items for referral to other committees, items for immediate action under unfinished business or new business, or may be items for discussion only. Items placed on the agenda this way must be received in the clerk's office, with all background materials, no later than 24 hours prior to the distribution deadline, as provided in this article. Items not in format ready for immediate distribution must be submitted to the clerk's office at least 48 hours prior to the distribution deadline. 
(c)  Item format. The clerk shall distribute to all common council members, upon their induction into office, the format to be used for agenda items. All items submitted by common council members shall be presented to the clerk with all required information. 
(d)  Committee of the whole agenda. The committee of the whole agenda shall be developed and may be reviewed by the mayor and the council president before the agendas are distributed. 
(e)  Standing committee. Agendas for the standing committees (finance, public safety and human services, and personnel) shall be developed by appropriate staff and may be reviewed by the chairperson and the staff representative before the agendas are distributed. 
(f)  Board, committee, and commission. Agendas for all other boards, committees, and commissions shall be developed by staff and may be reviewed by the chairperson and the staff representatives before the agendas are distributed. 
(g)  Distribution. Agendas for meetings listed in this section shall be distributed to members of boards, committees, and commissions by noon of the Friday before the scheduled meeting. Changes to agendas must be submitted to the appropriate staff contact at least four hours before distribution. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.04(4))  
Sec. 4-68. - Meeting start times. 
No meeting of any committee, commission, or board may commence to take any official action unless a quorum is present within 30 minutes of the designated time for the meeting. In the event that a meeting is posted to occur after the conclusion of another meeting or event, the meeting may still commence after the 30-minute period provided the posting also states, "or as soon as possible thereafter" or "as soon as possible after the conclusion of (specified) meeting" or similar language. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.04(5))  
Sec. 4-69. - Publication of proceedings. 
Proceedings of the common council shall be published in the official city newspaper as a Class 1 notice, under Wis. Stats. § 985.07. For the purpose of publication, the term "proceedings" means the substance of every official action taken by the common council at any meeting, regular or special. All ordinances shall be published as a Class 1 notice within 15 days of passage and shall take effect on the day after publication or at a later date if expressly prescribed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.05) 
State Law reference— Publication of council proceedings, Wis. Stats. § 62.11(4).  
Secs. 4-70—4-96. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STANDING COMMITTEES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 4-97. - Designated. 
There shall be standing committees of the common council as established by the council from time to time, including the committee of the whole, the finance committee, the public safety and human services committee, and the personnel committee. Nominations to the standing committees shall be as set forth in this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.06(1))  
Sec. 4-98. - Composition. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, each standing committee shall consist of at least three alderpersons one of whom shall act as chairperson. The council president shall designate the chairperson at the time of nominations, or the first person named for each committee shall be the chairperson according to Robert's Rules of Order. The second person named shall be vice-chairperson. 
(b)  The council president shall act as presiding officer at meetings of the committee of the whole. 
(c)  Each common council member may serve on two standing committees but may only act as the chairperson of one. 
(d)  The council president may alter membership on the committees at the time of the election or appointment of any new common council members. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.06(2))  
Sec. 4-99. - Additional duties of chairpersons. 
The chairperson of the finance committee or the chairperson's designee and the chairperson of the personnel committee or the chairperson's designee shall serve on the bargaining team for all labor negotiations. A designee selected by either chairperson shall be selected from among the membership of their committee. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.06(3))  
Secs. 4-100—4-126. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FUNCTIONS 
 
Sec. 4-127. - Finance committee. 
The finance committee shall: 
(1)  Oversee appropriations for and expenditures from the city budget and fund accounts. 
(2)  Oversee the actions and affairs of the city treasurer, the assessor, the board of review, the TIF district advisory committee, and the community development authority. 
(3)  Review all bills and claims submitted to the city and upon completing such review, recommend payment, disallowance or tabling of any such bills or claims to the common council. Except for the routine payment of recurring expenses, such as wages, utilities, insurance and retirement fund contributions, no expenditure of city funds in excess of $10,000.00 shall be made unless it has been first approved by the committee. 
(4)  Review the annual budget, and hold a meeting at which the mayor, the city administrator and all department heads appear to explain and respond to questions concerning their respective budget requests. 
(5)  Review and make recommendations to the common council concerning the borrowing of funds in any manner for any municipal purpose, the issuance of revenue bonds of any sort for any municipal purpose, the purchase or lease of real property, personal property or air space for public use, the sale of city property, insurance coverage and policies, labor contracts, the levy or imposition of any tax or forfeiture, the levy of and manner of levying any special assessment by the city, the need for a treasurer's bond under Wis. Stats. § 70.67 and the authorization of installment payments for any tax or special assessment under Wis. Stats. § 70.12. In addition to any public hearings required by law, the committee may conduct such public hearings as it deems appropriate with respect to any such review performed by it. 
(6)  Oversee the disposition of any personal property which has been abandoned or remained unclaimed for a period of 30 days after the taking of possession thereof by any city officer, in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0139. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.07(1))  
Sec. 4-128. - Personnel committee. 
The personnel committee shall: 
(1)  Oversee all boards, commissions, officers, officials and employees in any matter concerning labor contracts, salaries, benefits, compliance with affirmative action, equal employment opportunity, or other employment-related programs. 
(2)  Approve all application forms, hiring guidelines, employee training programs, employee guidelines and handbooks, disciplinary procedures and discharge and termination procedures. 
(3)  Oversee all personnel matters. 
(4)  Consider and make recommendations to the common council the reassignment of duties of any office which is eliminated, recreation of any office previously eliminated, or the elimination of any office which may be eliminated under state law and the method by which city officers, other than the mayor, the municipal judge, the alderpersons, the police chief and the fire chief, should be selected. 
(5)  Have charge of all matters arising under Wis. Stats. ch. 111 and shall oversee all personnel matters involving employees of the city including any matters involving the state employment relations commission relative to collective bargaining including the following: 
a.  Certification and decertification of collective bargaining units, including proceedings for the determination of the number of employees, type of bargaining unit and eligibility of employees in the classified service. 
b.  Participation in such elections and fact-finding proceedings, mediation, and arbitration. 
c.  Judicial or administrative proceedings arising out of or in any way related to personnel matters. 
(6)  Be responsible for conducting disciplinary hearings involving employees covered by the city's civil service provisions and shall have the duties and powers prescribed in section 16-10 and Wis. Stats. § 66.0509. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.07(2))  
Sec. 4-129. - Public safety and human services committee. 
The public safety and human services committee shall: 
(1)  Oversee fire and police service, public health, and services for the elderly. 
(2)  Review and make recommendations to the common council concerning the issuance of any license, permit or franchise required by the city in connection with the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  Consider, ascertain the need for and make recommendations to the common council concerning the enactment, implementation and enforcement of any criminal codes, fire, building or residence codes, traffic codes, and such other codes, ordinances, and resolutions as may be appropriate to ensure the good order of the city, its commercial benefit and the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(4)  Review and approve or deny all applications for outdoor sound permits, permits for the installation of basketball hoops within the city's right of way, and permits for the sale of tobacco products. 
(5)  Oversee the use of any public buildings, lands, easements, streets, or property for special events and other purposes as the common council may deem necessary. 
(6)  Review and provide recommendations on contracts for senior services, garbage collection, library services, emergency medical services, and other goods and services that the committee oversees. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.07(3))  
Sec. 4-130. - Committee of the whole. 
(a)  Composition and rules. The committee of the whole shall consist of all common council members and the mayor, all of whom shall be voting members, unless otherwise provided herein. The committee of the whole shall operate using the same rules as the common council. A majority of the committee of the whole shall be a quorum. 
(b)  Meetings and function. The committee of the whole meet as needed, generally monthly, as called by the council president, for the purpose of examining various issues before the common council in greater depth. The common council may refer issues to the committee of the whole for recommendation, or the committee of the whole may address other issues. 
(c)  Chairperson. The council president shall be the chairperson of the committee of the whole. In the event that the council president is unavailable, the chairperson shall be determined in order as follows: chairperson of the finance committee; chairperson of the public safety and human services committee; chairperson of the personnel committee. 
(d)  Annual review meeting. A meeting of the committee of the whole shall be held in July, and at that meeting the committee of the whole, with the advice of the city administrator, shall recommend issues for future committee of the whole meetings. In addition, the committee may discuss items of interest to the city to be forwarded to legislators at the county, state, and federal levels. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.08)  
Chapter 6 - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AUTHORITIES AND COMMITTEES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Appointment, term and removal of members; chair; staff contact; scope and exceptions. 
(a)  Scope; exceptions. The terms and provisions of this section apply to all committees, commissions and boards other than special and ad hoc committees included in article VI. 
(b)  Appointments. Members of citizen committees, commissions, and boards shall be nominated by the mayor, subject to the approval of the common council. 
(c)  Terms. 
(1)  Common council members appointed to citizen committees, commissions, and boards shall have terms that end every year on the third Tuesday in April. 
(2)  Citizen members shall have three-year staggered terms that expire on the third Tuesday in April of the year scheduled except as otherwise provided in this article. If no successor has been named, an occupant of an expired term may continue to serve until July 31 of the year in which the term is scheduled to end. If no successor is named by then, the seat shall be deemed vacant until a successor is named. 
(3)  For any newly created committee, commission, or board, the first members shall be appointed to staggered terms of one, two, or three years, and the term of office thereafter shall be three years, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(d)  Cross committee appointments. 
(1)  Members of citizen committees, commissions, or boards may be appointed as representatives to other committees, commissions, or boards, as provided in this article. Such appointments shall be known as "cross-committee appointments", and the committee that a member is initially appointed to shall be known as the "committee of origin." 
(2)  Council members or citizen members may be appointed, and their term shall be concurrent with the term of their committee of origin. In addition, a cross committee appointment will terminate if, for any reason, an appointee is no longer a member the committee of origin. 
(3)  Cross committee appointments shall be made by a duly noticed, majority vote of the committee of origin, and should occur at the first regularly scheduled committee meeting following a vacancy in a cross committee appointment. 
(e)  Chair. Citizen committees, commissions, and boards shall appoint by majority vote of those present and voting a chair at the May meeting of each odd-numbered year, or whenever a vacancy occurs in that position, unless otherwise stated in this chapter. Except as otherwise provided in this article, common council members appointed to citizen committees, commissions, and boards shall not be the chair. No person may be appointed chair of a citizen committee, commission, or board for a third or greater consecutive term. 
(f)  Staff contact. The mayor shall assign a staff representative to each citizen committee, commission, and board. The staff representative or their designee shall be the secretary of the committee, commission, or board, and shall take and keep the minutes of all meetings. 
(g)  Removal. Removal of appointees shall be as stated in section 8-6. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.30(1)—(6); Ord. No. 2012-O-17, 11-13-2012; Ord. No. 2019-O-27 , § 1, 10-22-2019)  
Secs. 6-2—6-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BOARDS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 6-19—6-39. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF REVIEW 
 
Sec. 6-40. - Composition. 
(a)  The board of review shall consist of five city residents nominated by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the common council. The mayor shall also nominate, subject to confirmation by the common council, three alternate members of such board. 
(b)  The mayor shall designate one of the alternate members as first alternate, one as second alternate and one as third alternate. The first alternate shall act, with full power, only when a member of the board refuses to vote because of interest or when a member is absent. The second alternate shall so act only when the first alternate so refuses or is absent or when more than one member of the board so refuses or is absent. The third alternate shall so act only when the second alternate so refuses or is absent or when more than two members of the board so refuse or are absent. The provisions with regard to removal and the filling of vacancies shall apply to such alternates but upon any vacancy or removal, the mayor shall redesignate all of the alternates as first, second or third alternate. 
(c)  At least one member of the board of review in attendance at the board of review shall be certified to conduct board of review. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.34(1))  
Sec. 6-41. - Chairperson. 
(a)  The mayor shall biennially appoint one member of the board to act as its chairperson. Such person shall be the mayor's designee for purposes of Wis. Stats. § 70.46 and shall attend the certification training for board of review. 
(b)  The chairperson shall hold that position for the duration of his/her term of appointment or until the next biennial appointment, whichever first occurs. Service as chairperson shall commence, except when appointed to fill a vacancy on May 1 of the year of appointment. 
(c)  The chairperson shall preside over proceedings and meetings of the board of review but in all other respects shall have the same powers and duties as any other member of the board. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.34(2); Ch. Ord. No. 2018-O-27, § 1, 7-10-2018) 
State Law reference— Local boards of review, members and organization, Wis. Stats. § 70.46.  
Sec. 6-42. - Meetings. 
(a)  The board of review shall meet annually at any time during the 45-day period beginning on the 4 th Monday of April, but no sooner than seven days after the last day on which the assessment roll is open for examination as required by Wis. Stats. § 70.45. 
(b)  A majority shall constitute a quorum and a majority vote of a quorum shall be required to raise or lower the assessor's valuation of any property. 
(c)  Two members may hold an evidentiary hearing, but no member may vote or constitute part of a quorum for purposes of determining an assessment unless the member attended the hearing of the evidence, or received a transcript or a mechanical recording of the hearing not less than five days prior to the meeting and read such transcript or listened to such recording; or received a copy of a summary of the hearing and all exceptions thereto not less than five days prior to the meeting at which the determination is made. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.34(3); Ch. Ord. No. 2018-O-27, § 2, 7-10-2018) 
State Law reference— Proceedings of local boards of review, Wis. Stats. § 70.47.  
Sec. 6-43. - Duties and powers. 
The board shall have all of the powers and duties delegated to it by state law including, but not limited to, the following duties: 
(1)  To examine the assessment rolls, to correct all apparent errors in description or computation and to add omitted property thereto. 
(2)  To conduct public hearings, in the manner prescribed by statute, concerning any objection to the amount or valuation of property. 
(3)  To correct any assessment which it determines, from evidence before it, to be too high or too low. 
(4)  To review the assessment of any property which it has reason to believe may have been over-assessed, under-assessed or omitted from the roll. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.34(4))  
Sec. 6-44. - Rules of procedure. 
The board may adopt rules governing its own proceedings; provided, however, that any such rules are in accordance with the statutes governing the board and have been reviewed and approved by the common council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.34(5)) 
State Law reference— Proceedings of local boards of review, Wis. Stats. § 70.47.  
Sec. 6-45. - Clerk. 
The clerk or designee shall serve as clerk of the board. The clerk may not vote. The clerk shall keep an accurate record of all board proceedings. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.34(5))  
Secs. 6-46—6-63. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS 
 
Sec. 6-64. - Created. 
A board of public works is hereby created. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.42(1))  
Sec. 6-65. - Composition. 
The board of public works shall be comprised of an alderperson, three residents of the utility district, and the mayor unless the mayor names a designee to serve in the stead and at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor may change a designee or choose to assume membership on the board at any time. The mayor or the designee of the mayor shall serve as chairperson of the board and the alderperson shall serve as vice-chairperson. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.42(2))  
Sec. 6-66. - Organization. 
The director of public works shall serve as the executive secretary of the board of public works, but shall not vote. All matters to be considered by the board of public works shall be submitted to the director of public works who shall summarize these proposals, provide additional information as he/she may deem to be appropriate, append his/her recommendations, and submit them to the board of public works for consideration. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.42(3))  
Sec. 6-67. - Quorum; records; report. 
A majority of the board shall constitute a quorum for doing business. The board of public works shall keep a record of all of its proceedings which shall be open at all reasonable times to inspection of any elector of the city and shall make a report to the common council on or before March 1 in each year and oftener, if requested. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.42(4))  
Sec. 6-68. - Powers and duties. 
The board of public works shall, subject to review and advice by the common council, have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  To superintend all public works and keep the streets, alleys and public works in repair in accordance with law, division 5 of article IV of chapter 10 and the direction of the common council. 
(2)  To determine the time and manner of using streets for laying or changing water or gas pipes, placing or maintaining electric light, telegraph and telephone poles therein. 
(3)  To superintend the city's refuse collection and recycling programs, including the collection of yard waste. 
(4)  To cause, in accordance with the law and division 5 of article IV of chapter 10, the restoration of streets, alleys and sidewalks. 
(5)  To oversee all municipal building, maintenance and engineering activities within the city. 
(6)  To conduct public hearings on special assessments under Wis. Stats. § 66.0703(7)(a) and report thereon to the common council. 
(7)  To take charge and manage Fitchburg Utility District 1, as now or hereafter constituted, and to undertake the responsibilities prescribed in Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0805(1) and 66.0805(6). In this regard, the board shall: 
a.  Supervise and control the buildings and grounds and the waterworks and sewerage systems of the district to ensure the collection, transmission and treatment of potable water and wastewater. 
b.  Make adequate provision for enforcement of district rules and regulations. 
c.  See that all contracts relating to the district are faithfully complied with and that all utility taxes, charges and special assessments for use of the district water and sewage disposal system are duly made, collected and paid into the appropriate city accounts. 
d.  Make provision for management and control of the affairs of the district, including the hiring and termination of district employees, and take charge of the installation of new machinery and of the projection, planning, construction and maintenance of district improvements, including a system or systems of waterworks and sewerage, including sanitary sewers, provide for sewage collection and perform such related activities as may be necessary for the promotion of public health, comfort, convenience or public welfare of the district. 
e.  Place the director of public works in direct control of district operations and place under his/her supervision all work let by contract, or where work shall not have been let by contract, the general supervision of such work, and may, by rule or regulation grant authority to the director to purchase the material therefore and to employ the necessary help and labor for such work. 
f.  Undertake such related activities and responsibilities as set forth in chapter 40. 
(8)  To take charge and manage the city stormwater utility, as now or hereafter constituted, and to undertake the responsibilities prescribed in Wis. Stats. §§ 62.04, 62.11, 62.16, 62.175, 62.18, 66.0621, 66.0809, 66.0811, and 66.0821. In this regard the board shall: 
a.  Supervise and control the structures and grounds of the utility to ensure the collection and transmission of stormwater. 
b.  Make adequate provision for enforcement of utility rules and regulations. 
c.  See that all contracts relating to the utility are faithfully complied with and that all utility taxes, charges and special assessments for use of the stormwater utility are duly made, collected and paid into the appropriate city accounts. 
d.  Make provision for management and control of the affairs of the utility, including the hiring and termination of utility employees, and take charge of the installation of new machinery and of the projection, planning, construction and maintenance of utility improvements, including a system or systems of stormwater collection and dispersal as may be necessary for the promotion of public health, comfort, convenience or public welfare of the residents of the utility. 
e.  Place the director of public works in direct control of utility operations and place under his/her supervision all work let by contract, or where work shall not have been let by contract, the general supervision of such work, and may, by rule or regulation grant authority to the director to purchase the material therefore and to employ the necessary help and labor for such work. 
f.  Undertake such related activities and responsibilities as set forth in chapter 40. 
g.  Appoint one person from among its membership to be a member of the transportation and transit commission. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.42(5))  
Secs. 6-69—6-94. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - BOARD OF POLICE AND FIRE COMMISSIONERS 
 
Sec. 6-95. - Composition. 
The board of police and fire commissioners shall consist of five city residents nominated by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the common council. One member shall be appointed annually between the last Monday in April and the first Monday of May for a term of five years. No more than three members may be of the same political party. Before May 31 of each year, the board shall appoint by majority vote of those present and voting one member to be president/chair. Three members shall constitute a quorum. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.41(1)) 
State Law reference— City police and fire commissioners board, Wis. Stats. § 62.13.  
Sec. 6-96. - Duties and powers. 
The board shall, within the limits of the funds available for such purpose, have the following powers and duties prescribed in Wis. Stats. § 62.13: 
(1)  To appoint the police chief and the fire chief. 
(2)  To approve or disapprove the written hiring protocol the police chief and fire chief will follow in making all personnel decisions, including hiring, promotion, suspension, demotion, and termination, prior to the implementation of any such procedure. 
(3)  To prepare a list of persons eligible to appointment as police officers or firefighters. For choosing of such list, the board shall adopt, repeal or modify rules calculated to secure the best service in the department, provide for examination of physical and educational qualifications and experience and may provide for competitive examinations and for classification of positions with special examination for each class. 
(4)  To approve or disapprove the appointment of any subordinate by the police chief or fire chief. This power shall include any promotion or reclassification that results in any change in title, position, or pay. Any change in pay shall be subject to review by the personnel committee and must remain within budget constraints as established by the common council. 
(5)  To print and distribute all rules relating to examination and qualification of police officers and firefighters and all changes therein at city expense. 
(6)  To conduct or provide for conducting, at city expense, examinations for appointments to the police or fire department. Such examinations shall be free for all United States citizens over 18 and under 55 years of age with proper limitations as to residence and health and, subject to Wis. Stats. §§ 111.321, 111.322 and 111.335, proper limitations as to arrest and conviction records. 
(7)  To suspend, reduce in rank, or remove the police chief, fire chief, or any firefighter or sworn law enforcement personnel for cause after hearing on charges filed with the president/chair of the board in accordance with the procedures of Wis. Stats. § 62.13(5). The board may also suspend the police chief, fire chief, or any firefighter or sworn law enforcement personnel pending disposition of charges filed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.41(2))  
Sec. 6-97. - Optional powers not granted. 
The option powers set forth in Wis. Stats. § 62.13(6) are not delegated to the board and the board may not exercise them. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.41(3))  
Sec. 6-98. - Judicial review. 
Any person suspended, reduced, suspended and reduced, or removed by the board may appeal from the order of the board to the county circuit court in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.13(5)(i). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.41(4))  
Secs. 6-99—6-124. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local zoning boards of appeal, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7). 
 
Sec. 6-125. - Created. 
The zoning board of appeals is hereby created. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.45(1)) 
State Law reference— Authority for creation of board of appeals, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e)(1).  
Sec. 6-126. - Composition. 
The zoning board of appeals shall be comprised of five citizen members and two alternates. The mayor shall annually, between April 30 and May 31, designate one of the members as chairperson, and shall designate one of the alternate members as first alternate and the other as second alternate. The first alternate shall act, with full power, only when a member of the board refuses to vote because of interest or when a member is absent. The second alternate shall so act only when the first alternate so refuses or is absent or when more than one member of the board so refuses or is absent. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.45(2)) 
State Law reference— Composition of local board of appeals, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e)(2).  
Sec. 6-127. - Powers and responsibilities. 
The zoning board of appeals shall have the powers and duties prescribed by Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7) and by chapters 22, 24, 25 and 35 and such other and further powers and duties as may be prescribed by statute or ordinance. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.45(3)) 
State Law reference— Powers of local board of appeals, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e)(7).  
Secs. 6-128—6-152. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - PUBLIC LIBRARY BOARD 
 
Sec. 6-153. - Board committed. 
The city has created a board known as the "Fitchburg Public Library Board" (hereafter called the board), pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 43.54. The purpose of this committee is to govern and administer the city public library. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.46(1)) 
State Law reference— Authority for municipal public library boards, Wis. Stats. § 43.52.  
Sec. 6-154. - Membership. 
(a)  Number of members. The board shall initially consist of seven members. Up to five additional members may be appointed by the county pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 43.60(3). 
(b)  Selection. Seven members of the board shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the common council. 
(c)  Term of office. Upon first appointment, the members shall be divided into three groups, one group of three members and two groups of two members, to serve for two-, three- and four-year terms, respectively. Thereafter each regular appointment shall be for a term of three years. Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms in the same manner as regular appointments are made. 
(d)  Composition. The mayor shall appoint as one of the members a school district administrator, or the administrator's representative, to represent the public school districts in which the library is located. Not more than one member of the common council shall be at any one time a member of the board. Members shall be residents of the city, except that not more than two members may be residents of other municipalities. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.46(2)) 
State Law reference— Composition of municipal public library boards, Wis. Stats. § 43.54.  
Sec. 6-155. - Powers and duties. 
The board shall have all the powers and duties set forth in Wis. Stats. ch. 43, including, but not limited to, Wis. Stats. § 43.58. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.46(3))  
Secs. 6-156—6-178. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - COMMISSIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 6-179—6-209. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ARCHITECTURAL CONTROL COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 6-210. - Created; members; duties. 
The architectural control commission is hereby created and shall consist of the members of the plan commission. The architectural control commission shall examine all applications for building permits required under this Code and after review of the site plans for the proposed structure, addition or alteration, determine whether a certificate of compliance shall be granted under chapters 25 and 35. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, §§ 1.33, 1.40(7))  
Secs. 6-211—6-228. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FITCHRONA EMS COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 6-229. - Created. 
By municipal agreement with the Town of Verona and the City of Verona, the FitchRona EMS District is created. As used in this division, the term "EMS" means emergency medical services. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.52(1))  
Sec. 6-230. - Composition. 
The commission shall be comprised of nine representatives, three of whom shall be from the city Two shall be citizen members, and one shall be a common council member, appointed according to the guidelines set forth in section 6-481. Terms of citizen commissioners shall be as defined in the municipal agreement. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.52(2))  
Sec. 6-231. - Duties. 
The commission shall execute all duties described in the municipal agreement. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.52(3))  
Secs. 6-232—6-250. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-O-22, § 1, adopted November 8, 2011, amended the Code by repealing former div. 4, §§ 6-251—6-257, in its entirety. Former div. 4 pertained to the broadband telecommunications commission, and derived from the Compiled Ordinances of 2009, §§ 1.35 and 20.10. 
 
Secs. 6-251—6-264. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 6-265. - Established. 
A civil service commission is hereby established and shall consist of the members of the personnel committee. It shall be responsible for all duties under section 4-128(6). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.36)  
Secs. 6-266—6-271. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - LANDMARKS PRESERVATION COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 6-272. - Membership. 
A landmarks preservation commission is hereby created, consisting of seven members. Of the membership, one shall be a registered architect; one shall be a member of the city's historical society; one shall be a licensed real estate broker or appraiser; one shall be a common council member; and three shall be city residents at large. Each member shall have, to the highest extent practicable, a known interest in historic preservation. If a vacancy occurs for any reason, and a person fitting the distinct categories of this section cannot be found within three months, a resident with a known interest in historic preservation may be considered for the vacancy. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.38(1); Ord. No. 2016-O-04, § 1, 1-26-2016)  
Sec. 6-273. - Powers, duties and responsibilities. 
The landmarks preservation commission shall perform the duties prescribed in section 29-4 and such other duties as may be prescribed, from time to time, by ordinance, by the mayor or by the common council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.38(2))  
Secs. 6-274—6-294. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - PARK COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 6-295. - Composition. 
The park commission shall consist of one alderperson and six citizen members. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.39(1))  
Sec. 6-296. - Powers and duties. 
The park commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To review proposed plats and subdivisions and determine the size and location of any required park land dedications or reservations or in lieu of fees which will be acceptable to the city under section 24-2(d)(2). 
(2)  To prepare and recommend to the common council master plans for the city's park system as well as for individual parks or sites. 
(3)  To review and monitor city parks and recreational programs and recommend changes or additions thereto. 
(4)  To review and report to the common council on ordinances or proposals involving use of city parks and the city community center. 
(5)  To adopt, subject to common council direction, policies and procedures for rental and operation of the city park system and community center. 
(6)  To oversee the operation of all city-owned cemeteries in accordance with this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.39(2))  
Secs. 6-297—6-325. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - PLAN COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 6-326. - Created. 
The plan commission is hereby established. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.40(1)) 
State Law reference— Authority for creation of city plan commission, Wis. Stats. § 62.23.  
Sec. 6-327. - Composition. 
The plan commission shall consist of the mayor or mayor's designee, an alderperson, and five citizens. The citizen members shall include at least one person from each aldermanic district and at least one citizen member shall reside outside the urban service area. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.40(2)) 
State Law reference— Composition of city plan commission, Wis. Stats. § 62.23.  
Sec. 6-328. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The plan commission shall have the powers and duties prescribed by Wis. Stats. § 62.23 and this Code and such other and further powers and duties as may be prescribed by statute, by ordinance, or by the common council. 
(b)  The plan commission shall appoint one person from among its membership to serve on the transportation and transit commission and one person from District 4 from among its membership to serve on the agriculture and rural affairs committee. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.40(3)) 
State Law reference— Powers, duties and functions of city plan commission, Wis. Stats. § 62.23.  
Sec. 6-329. - Organization. 
The mayor or mayor's designee shall be the presiding officer and chairperson of the plan commission. The zoning administrator/planner shall keep a written record of commission proceedings, including all actions taken by it, and a copy thereof filed with the clerk. Four members shall constitute a quorum, but all actions shall require the affirmative approval of a majority of the seven voting members. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.40(4))  
Sec. 6-330. - Staff and budget. 
The plan commission may employ experts and such staff as may be necessary, and pay for their services and such other expenses as may be necessary and proper, within the limits of the budget established by the common council, or placed at its disposal through gift, and subject to any ordinance or resolution enacted by the common council. As far as possible the commission shall utilize the services of existing city officials and employees. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.40(5))  
Sec. 6-331. - Procedures. 
The plan commission may adopt such policies, rules, and procedures governing its meetings and activities as it deems necessary and appropriate to fulfill its duties and responsibilities. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.40(6))  
Secs. 6-332—6-350. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - RESOURCE CONSERVATION COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 6-351. - Membership. 
A resource conservation commission is hereby created, consisting of seven members. One member shall be an alderperson, and six shall be city residents at large, who shall serve staggered three-year terms. Each member shall have, to the highest extent practicable, a demonstrated interest in conservation of natural resources and preservation of the environment. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.43(1))  
Sec. 6-352. - Powers, duties and responsibilities. 
The resource conservation commission shall recommend policy, enforcement, and information programs that will implement and carry out the findings and provisions of chapter 41, solid waste and recycling, chapter 30, article II, erosion control and stormwater management, and chapter 40, article V, stormwater utility. The resource conservation commission shall also recommend policy, enforcement, and information programs that serve to promote the general preservation and improvement of the environment, including but not limited to groundwater, stormwater, waste material, energy efficiency, and climate protection. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.43(2))  
Secs. 6-353—6-377. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - TRANSPORTATION AND TRANSIT COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— City, village and town transit commissions, Wis. Stats. § 66.1021. 
 
Sec. 6-378. - Created. 
The transportation and transit commission is hereby created. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.44(1))  
Sec. 6-379. - Composition. 
(a)  The transportation and transit commission shall be comprised of seven members: four citizen members, nominated by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the common council shall serve staggered three-year terms; one alderperson, subject to confirmation by the common council, whose term shall be concurrent with his/her common council term; one citizen member appointed by the plan commission from its membership; and one citizen member appointed by the board of public works from its membership. 
(b)  No person holding stocks or bonds in any corporation subject to the jurisdiction of the transportation and transit commission, or who is in any other manner pecuniarily interested in any such corporation may be a member of nor be employed by the transportation and transit commission. 
(c)  Each nominee shall certify, before confirmation by the common council, that they are not in violation of this section and agree that they shall not acquire any investments in any corporation or organization that violates that section during the term of their appointment. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.44(2))  
Sec. 6-380. - Powers and responsibilities. 
In addition to the duties set forth in Wis. Stats. § 66.1021, the transportation and transit commission shall: 
(1)  Assist in developing the transportation component of the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  Develop and maintain a mass transit plan. 
(3)  Integrate city mass transit plans with county, state, federal, and other local transit plans. 
(4)  Address any other transportation concerns as the common council may deem necessary. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.44(3))  
Sec. 6-381. - Other responsibilities. 
The transportation and transit commission shall review all new development plans and shall recommend, to the plan commission and to the common council, changes to be incorporated which conform to the comprehensive plan. The transportation and transit commission shall also be responsible for any other duties assigned to it by the common council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.44(4))  
Sec. 6-382. - Organization. 
A written record of commission proceedings, including all actions taken by it, shall be kept by the city engineer, or his/her designee, and a copy thereof filed with the city clerk. A majority of members shall constitute a quorum, and all actions shall require the affirmative approval of a majority of those present and voting. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.44(5); Ord. No. 2010-O-03, § 1(1.44(5)), 2-23-2010)  
Sec. 6-383. - Staff and budget. 
The transportation and transit commission may employ experts and such staff as may be necessary pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.1021 and pay for their services and such other expenses as may be necessary and proper, within the limits of the budget established by the common council, or placed at its disposal through gift, and subject to any ordinance or resolution enacted by the common council. As far as possible the commission shall utilize the services of existing city officials and employees. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.44(6))  
Sec. 6-384. - Procedures. 
The transportation and transit commission may adopt such policies, rules, and procedures governing its meetings and activities as it deems necessary and appropriate to fulfill its duties and responsibilities. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.44(7))  
Secs. 6-385—6-411. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - AUTHORITIES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 6-412—6-435. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Housing authorities for elderly persons, Wis. Stats. § 66.1213; housing and community development authorities, Wis. Stats. § 66.1335. 
 
Sec. 6-436. - Created. 
Pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 66.1213 and 66.1335, the community development authority (the authority) is created. The authority shall be deemed a separate body politic exercising necessary public powers and having the powers, duties and functions conferred on housing authorities for the elderly under Wis. Stats. § 66.1213 and on housing and community development authorities under Wis. Stats. § 66.1335, except as otherwise herein provided. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.37(1))  
Sec. 6-437. - Composition. 
The governing body of the community development authority shall consist of seven commissioners. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.37(2))  
Sec. 6-438. - Appointment of commissioners. 
The mayor shall, subject to confirmation of the common council, nominate seven residents of the city having sufficient ability and experience in the fields of urban renewal, community development, and housing, as community development authority commissioners. Two of the commissioners shall be members of the common council and five shall be citizen members. Terms of citizen members shall be four years pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.1335(2)(b). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.37(2)(A))  
Sec. 6-439. - Officers. 
(a)  The commissioners shall annually appoint by a majority vote of those present and voting a chairperson and vice-chairperson of the authority from among the commissioners, at the first authority meeting in May. Vacancies occurring in the office of chairperson or vice-chairperson shall be filled from among the commissioners for the unexpired portion of the term. 
(b)  The economic development coordinator shall be the executive director of the authority and shall be the chief administrative officer of the authority and shall direct, manage and supervise the authority's administrative operations and technical activities in accordance with the directives of the authority. The executive director shall also act as secretary of the authority and shall perform such other duties and have such other powers and responsibilities as may, from time to time, be delegated to him/her by the authority. 
(c)  In carrying out its duties, the authority may form committees of commissioners or others, hold public meetings and utilize the services of the city or other public or private services as it deems necessary, subject to the policy and budgetary approval of the common council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.37(2)(B))  
Sec. 6-440. - Meetings; quorum; bylaws. 
(a)  All meetings of the authority shall be held in compliance with the provisions of the state open meeting law, Wis. Stats. § 19.81 et seq. 
(b)  Four commissioners shall constitute a quorum of the authority for the purpose of conducting its business and exercising its powers and for all other purposes. Action may be taken by the authority upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the commissioners present at any meeting of the authority at which a quorum is present. No vacancy in the membership of the authority shall impair the right of a quorum to exercise the powers and perform the functions of the authority. 
(c)  The authority may adopt and from time to time amend or repeal such bylaws and other rules and regulations not inconsistent with applicable law as it deems necessary in the performance of its functions. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.37(2)(C))  
Sec. 6-441. - Evidence of authority. 
The filing of a certified copy of the ordinance from which this section is derived with the clerk shall be prima facie evidence of the authority's right to transact business. In any suit, action or proceedings commenced against the authority, a certified copy of the ordinance from which this section is derived or of this division shall be conclusive evidence that the authority is established and authorized to transact business and exercise its powers. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.37(3))  
Sec. 6-442. - Statutory powers. 
The authority shall have all powers necessary to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.1213, and all powers, duties and functions set out in Wis. Stats. §§ 66.1201, 66.1333, and 66.1335 for housing and community development authorities. In this regard, it is authorized to: 
(1)  Exercise all powers, duties and functions of a housing authority under Wis. Stats. § 66.1201. 
(2)  Exercise all powers, duties and functions of a housing authority for the elderly under Wis. Stats. § 66.1213. 
(3)  Exercise all powers, duties and functions of redevelopment authority under Wis. Stats. § 66.1333. 
(4)  Act as agent of the city in planning and carrying out community development programs and activities approved by the mayor and common council funded under the Federal Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, 42 USC 5301 et seq., and other federal and state laws relating to housing and community development, and, following review and recommendation by the plan commission, to perform all acts, except development of the general plan of the city and other duties performed by the plan commission, under Wis. Stats. §§ 66.1301 to 66.1337, and 66.1105. 
(5)  Act as agent of the city in performing all functions required to be performed by a sponsor of a housing rehabilitation program, as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 66.1325, both within and outside of neighborhoods or areas designated by the common council as reinvestment neighborhoods or areas pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.1107 and in performing all other functions related to the operation and administration of the city's housing rehabilitation program and any other programs of rehabilitation financing involving financial assistance from either the federal or state government, or both, in which the city participates. 
(6)  Issue bonds in aid of its powers and duties and functions as permitted under Wis. Stats. § 66.1201 or Wis. Stats. §§ 66.1301 to 66.1329, Wis. Stats. § 66.1331, 66.1333, or 66.1337. Such bonds are declared to be issued for essential governmental and public purposes and to be public instrumentalities and, together with interest thereon and income therefrom, are exempt from taxes. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.37(4))  
Sec. 6-443. - Additional powers. 
In addition to its statutory powers, the authority is further authorized, within the limits of the funds available for such purposes, to: 
(1)  Employ such technical experts and such other agents and employees, permanent and temporary, as may be required from time to time in the performance of its duties and functions. 
(2)  Contract with the city or any other agency or entity, public, or private, for the provision by the city, or such agency or entity, of any necessary staff services associated with or required by the authority in the staff of the authority. Any staff services provided to the authority by the city pursuant to such contract shall be coordinated through the executive director of the authority or his/her designee. 
(3)  Call upon any department, board, commission or agency of the city for assistance and cooperation in the performance of the authority's duties and functions, and all city departments, boards, commissions and agencies are hereby authorized and directed to cooperate with, and furnish assistance to the authority in the performance of the authority's duties and functions. 
(4)  Work with business, education, government, labor and citizens to: 
a.  Retain and expand existing business and commercial enterprises within the city. 
b.  Recruit new businesses and encourage the expansion and diversification of business and commercial enterprises within the city to expand local employment opportunities and the tax base. 
c.  Foster and facilitate economic development activities through cooperative efforts with area business organizations, adjoining municipalities, the county, and the state. 
d.  Assist new and existing businesses through programs and resources which facilitate quality growth and development within the city. 
e.  Publicize and promote the business, employment, residential, educational, and recreational opportunities available in the city. 
f.  Foster, develop, and enhance a sense of community, a positive community image, and civic pride. 
(5)  To identify itself as the community and economic development authority in anything other than contracts, resolutions, and financial reports. 
(6)  Administer the hotel room tax as provided in chapter 10, article III, division 3. 
(7)  Encourage the development and preservation of affordable housing in the city by: 
a.  Serving as a focal point for housing issues, including landlord tenant issues. 
b.  Overseeing the creation and coordination of city housing policies. 
c.  Making recommendations to the mayor and common council on all aspects of housing policy. 
d.  Holding public hearings on and recommending to the common council specific policies and programs to encourage and assess the city's housing efforts. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.37(5))  
Sec. 6-444. - Manner of proceeding. 
(a)  As to all housing projects initiated by the authority it shall proceed under Wis. Stats. § 66.1201, and as to all projects relating to blight elimination, slum clearance, urban renewal and redevelopment programs it shall proceed under Wis. Stats. §§ 66.1105 and 66.1301 to 66.1337, as determined appropriate by the common council on a project by project basis. As to all community development programs and activities undertaken by the city under the Federal Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, 42 USC 5301 et seq., the authority shall proceed under all applicable laws and ordinances not inconsistent with state law. 
(b)  The authority and its commissioners shall comply or cause compliance strictly with all provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 66.1201 to 66.1211 and state law and in addition thereto, with each and every term, provision and covenant in any contract of the authority on its part to be kept or performed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.37(6))  
Sec. 6-445. - Plans; recommendation; reports. 
The authority in consultation with the city plan commission, the TIF district advisory committee, and other appropriate bodies and staff shall: 
(1)  Prepare and periodically update an economic development plan and development strategy for use by the mayor and common council. In formulating said plan, the authority shall monitor and evaluate economic conditions in the city, identify economic problem areas, and prioritize any economic problems identified. 
(2)  Consider alternative approaches to improving economic deficiencies in the city in problem areas identified. 
(3)  Recommend specific programs and projects to allocate available city resources among the elements of the city's economic development effort. 
(4)  Recommend items for inclusion in the annual city budget to implement the development strategy adopted by the common council. 
(5)  Prepare an annual report on the city's economy. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.37(7))  
Sec. 6-446. - Budget. 
The authority together with the economic development coordinator shall prepare an annual budget which shall be submitted to the mayor as part of the general budget process. The budget shall include estimated fees for consultants, travel expense for staff, publication costs and other ordinary and necessary expenses. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.37(8))  
Sec. 6-447. - Staff. 
The authority shall receive primary staffing through the offices of the economic development coordinator and the city planner/zoning administrator. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.37(9))  
Sec. 6-448. - Construction. 
All powers, duties and functions of a community development authority, as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 66.1335 are deemed to have been granted to the authority as though set forth in this section. This section and the powers granted hereunder shall be construed liberally to effectuate its purposes. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.37(11)) 
State Law reference— Local housing and community development authorities, Wis. Stats. § 66.1335.  
Secs. 6-449—6-479. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CITIZEN COMMITTEES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-480. - Created. 
A housing advisory committee is hereby created. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-23 , § 1, 8-27-2019)  
Sec. 6-481. - Composition. 
The housing advisory committee will be made up of nine members as follows: one alderperson, one community economic development authority (CEDA) member, and seven citizen members. The citizen members shall have a background in one of the following areas: housing finance, housing development, non-profit with an emphasis on housing, attorney, real estate broker or appraiser, housing expert, property management or economist. At least three of the seven citizen members shall be residents of the city. A majority of members shall constitute a quorum. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-23 , § 1, 8-27-2019)  
Sec. 6-482. - Powers, duties and responsibilities. 
The committee shall act as an advisory to the community and economic development authority, plan commission and common council. The committee may study, research and recommend policies and actions to the common council and other committees as appropriate to promote affordable homeownership and rental housing, and implement the goals, strategies and action items of the Fitchburg Housing Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-23 , § 1, 8-27-2019)  
Sec. 6-483. - Staff. 
The housing advisory committee shall receive primary staffing and support from the economic development specialist. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-23 , § 1, 8-27-2019)  
Secs. 6-484—6-510. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - COMMISSION ON AGING WELL[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— The title of division 2 was amended by Ord. No. 2017-O-24, § 1, adopted September 26, 2017. 
 
Sec. 6-511. - Created. 
The city commission on aging well is hereby created. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.31(1); Ord. No. 2017-O-24, § 2, 9-26-2017)  
Sec. 6-512. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the commission shall be to enhance the well-being of older residents of the city, to promote their independence, and to promote their involvement in community affairs and activities. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.31(2))  
Sec. 6-513. - Composition. 
The commission shall be comprised of one alderperson and six residents of the city. No less than five of the resident members shall be 55 years old or older. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.31(2))  
Sec. 6-514. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The commission shall: 
(1)  Investigate the changing needs of older persons in the city and the programs available to meet and serve such needs. 
(2)  Develop a network of volunteer and private sector resources, community-based programs and services with the direct involvement of older people in planning, implementing and evaluating such programs and services. 
(3)  Plan programs and services of interest to senior citizens that shall be implemented by the senior services director. 
(4)  Assist the senior services director in preparing an annual budget for submittal to the mayor each year covering the activities, services, programs and the needs of the commission during the next fiscal year. The budget shall include recommendations for action that may be taken by the city to improve the quality of life of senior citizens. 
(5)  Consider and make recommendations to the senior services director and common council concerning any proposals for services, programs, activities or facilities for older people in the community. 
(6)  Adopt such policies, rules, and procedures governing its meetings and activities as it deems necessary and appropriate to fulfill its duties and responsibilities and to accomplish its purpose. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.31(4))  
Secs. 6-515—6-536. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - AGRICULTURE AND RURAL AFFAIRS COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 6-537. - Created. 
An agriculture and rural affairs committee is hereby created. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.32(1))  
Sec. 6-538. - Membership. 
(a)  The committee shall have seven members: one alderperson from district 4 or whichever district contains the most rural residents, one plan commission member from district 4 or whichever district contains the most rural residents, two city farmers, one resident who resides outside the urban service area and two city residents at large. 
(b)  The committee may seek advice, as needed, from various experts who could include individuals from the UW College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, the UW Extension, or other individuals as meet the committees' needs, within the limits of the funds available for such purpose. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.32(2); Ord. No. 2010-O-18, § 1, 12-14-2010)  
Sec. 6-539. - Powers; duties; responsibilities. 
The agriculture and rural affairs committee shall act as an advisory committee to the plan commission. The agriculture and rural affairs committee shall: 
(1)  Study the potential future of agriculture in the city. 
(2)  Develop and recommend policies to promote sustainable and economically viable agriculture in the city. 
(3)  Recommend areas to be preserved for agriculture, if any. 
(4)  Study and recommend any potential compensation to landowners in areas designated for agricultural preservation. 
(5)  Take action on any items referred to it by the plan commission or the common council. 
(6)  Make recommendations on all rezoning requests in which any property zoned A-T or A-X outside the urban service area is being considered. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.32(3))  
Sec. 6-540. - Staff. 
The agriculture and rural affairs committee shall receive primary staffing and support from the office of the city planner/zoning administrator. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.32(4))  
Secs. 6-541—6-549. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - TREE ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 6-550. - Created. 
A tree advisory committee is hereby created. 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-11, § 1, 5-9-2017)  
Sec. 6-551. - Membership. 
The committee shall have seven members: one alderperson and six residents of the city. Each member shall have, to the highest extent practicable, a working knowledge of arboriculture, a love for trees, and a demonstrated interest in the enhancement, maintenance, and protection of Fitchburg's urban forest. 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-11, § 1, 5-9-2017)  
Sec. 6-552. - Powers; duties; responsibilities. 
The tree advisory committee shall act as an advisory committee to the park commission. The tree advisory committee shall provide oversight of the city's forestry program and urban forest, including but not limited to, advising the park commission and common council on policies for maintenance, planting programs, tree preservation, vegetation management, public outreach, and such other matters on which the city forester/naturalist desires input. 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-11, § 1, 5-9-2017)  
Sec. 6-553. - Staff. 
The tree advisory committee shall receive primary staffing and support from the city forester. 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-11, § 1, 5-9-2017)  
DIVISION 5. - BICYCLE COMMITTEE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-O-28 , § 2, adopted August 27, 2019, renumbered div. 6, §§ 6-691—6-693 as div. 5, §§ 6-554—6-556. 
 
Sec. 6-554. - Created. 
A bicycle committee is hereby created. 
(Ch. Ord. No. 2018-O-13, § 1, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-O-28 , § 2, 8-27-2019)  
Sec. 6-555. - Membership. 
The committee will be comprised of one alderperson, one Fitchburg Chamber of Commerce representative and five Fitchburg residents. Members shall have a strong interest and varied levels of experience with cycling, be it recreational or for transportation; or a strong interest and background in developing and promoting events. 
(Ch. Ord. No. 2018-O-13, § 1, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-O-28 , § 2, 8-27-2019)  
Sec. 6-556. - Powers; duties; responsibilities. 
The purpose of this committee is to encourage and promote bicycling at all levels in Fitchburg. This shall be done by engaging the community through public information programs, by organizing citywide events, and by promoting the city as a venue for all types of cycling events. This committee shall identify bicycle tour routes and promote the safe use of roads, trails and road crossings. They shall also work to identify social and economic barriers to cycling and identify opportunities to make cycling more accessible for everyone. This committee shall use the Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan as a map to accomplish these goals and will be the lead committee for the periodic review of this document. 
(Ch. Ord. No. 2018-O-13, § 1, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-O-28 , § 2, 8-27-2019)  
Secs. 6-557, 6-558. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SPECIAL, AD HOC, AND OTHER COMMITTEES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-559. - Appointment. 
Ad-hoc, select or special committees may be appointed by the mayor and are not subject to confirmation by the common council, to consider any special matter. Each such committee shall consider only those matters specifically referred to it and shall exist only so long as may be required to complete its work, but may not exist for longer than one year without annual approval by the common council. All ad-hoc, special, and select committees that exist for more than one year shall provide a written annual report of their activities and findings to the common council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.60(1))  
Sec. 6-560. - Common council to be apprised. 
The mayor shall inform the common council of the specific assignment given to each special or select committee together with the name, address, occupation, education, and community involvement of each person appointed to the committee and the reason for recommending the appointment of each committee member. This information shall be provided to the common council at least three days prior to the common council meeting at which the appointments will be considered. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.60(2))  
Sec. 6-561. - Size and membership. 
The mayor shall determine the size and composition of select and special committees at the time the committee is created. All ad-hoc, select and special committees shall contain at least one common council member. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.60(3))  
Sec. 6-562. - Common council representation. 
The common council may be represented on city boards and commissions. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.61)  
Secs. 6-563—6-587. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BARGAINING TEAM 
 
Sec. 6-588. - Collective bargaining. 
Collective bargaining with certified bargaining units shall be carried on by a bargaining team which may adopt, and thereafter amend, rules and procedures governing the conduct of such bargaining (not in conflict with any other existing ordinances of the city). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.50(1))  
Sec. 6-589. - Composition. 
The bargaining team shall consist of the chairperson of the finance committee or the chairperson's designee, the chairperson of the personnel committee or the chairperson's designee, the city administrator, and labor counsel for the city. The department heads shall provide such assistance and advice as may be requested by the bargaining team and may attend bargaining sessions. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.50(2))  
Sec. 6-590. - Agreements. 
Any agreement reached at the conclusion of collective bargaining shall be reduced to writing by the bargaining team, and may be submitted as a proposed resolution to the personnel committee which shall review the agreement and recommend its approval or rejection to the common council, or the agreement may be direct referred to the common council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.50(3))  
Sec. 6-591. - Public hearing. 
Recognized city employee organizations shall submit their proposals to the common council which shall refer these matters to the bargaining team. The bargaining team may then conduct a public hearing on the requests, and all interested persons may appear and state their view thereon. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.50(4))  
Sec. 6-592. - Employees excluded from recognized bargaining. 
The mayor and city administrator shall annually review the wages, hours and conditions of employment of all employees not represented by recognized city employee organizations and submit their recommendations to the finance committee each year for the budget review. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.50(5))  
Sec. 6-593. - Distribution of negotiating materials restricted. 
No department heads, supervisory personnel or member of the bargaining team shall distribute any information or written communication bearing upon the subject matter of any collective bargaining or other employment relations matters to any employee unless such distribution or communication has been expressly authorized by the bargaining team, the city labor attorney, the principal labor negotiator designated by the bargaining team, or the mayor. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.50(6))  
Secs. 6-594—6-619. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TIF DISTRICT ADVISORY COMMITTEE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Tax increment law, Wis. Stats. § 66.1105 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-620. - Created and defined. 
The TIF district advisory committee is hereby created. As used in the designation of this committee, the term "TIF," as used in this division, means tax increment financing. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.51(1))  
Sec. 6-621. - Composition. 
The TIF district advisory committee shall consist of the economic development coordinator, the city planner, the city administrator, the mayor or mayor's designee, the chairperson of the finance committee, the chairperson of the community development authority, a member of the plan commission appointed by the mayor, and one other alderperson appointed by the mayor. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.51(2))  
Sec. 6-622. - Duties. 
The TIF district advisory committee is an advisory committee which shall meet only as needed, by recommendation of the mayor, finance committee, community development authority, or the common council. The TIF district advisory committee shall study, analyze, and recommend TIF district policies to the community development authority, finance committee and common council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.51(3))  
Secs. 6-623—6-649. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - MULTIJURISDICTIONAL PUBLIC SAFETY INFORMATION SYSTEM COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 6-650. - Created. 
By agreement with various municipalities, the multijurisdictional public safety information system committee (MPSIS) is created. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.53(1))  
Sec. 6-651. - Composition. 
The committee shall have representation from all jurisdictions involved, and the representatives from the city shall be appointed according to the guidelines set forth in section 6-481. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.53(2))  
Sec. 6-652. - Duties. 
The committee shall execute all duties described in the municipal agreement. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.53(3))  
Secs. 6-653—6-677. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - MADISON DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION VENTURE DEBT FUND LOAN COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 6-678. - Created. 
By agreement with various organizations, the Madison Development Corporation Venture Debt Fund Loan Committee (MDCVDFLC) is created. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.54(1))  
Sec. 6-679. - Composition. 
The committee shall have representation from all organizations involved, and the representatives from the city shall be appointed according to the guidelines set forth in section 6-481. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.54(2))  
Sec. 6-680. - Duties. 
The committee shall execute all duties described in the municipal agreement. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.54(3))  
Secs. 6-681—6-690. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - RESERVED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— See editor's note, § 6-554. 
 
Secs. 6-691—6-693. - Reserved.  
Chapter 8 - CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal officers, Wis. Stats. § 62.09; eligibility for office, Wis. Stats. § 66.0501; elections, Wis. Stats. § 5.01 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Qualifications for elected officials. 
No person shall be eligible for election or appointment as an official of the city unless he/she is a citizen of the United States and of the city and satisfies the statutory qualifications for the office. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.70) 
State Law reference— Qualifications of city officers, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(2).  
Sec. 8-2. - Vacancies—Cause. 
A municipal office shall be vacant whenever: 
(1)  The incumbent dies, resigns, or is removed. 
(2)  In the office of mayor, the incumbent ceases to be a resident of the city. 
(3)  In the office of alderperson, the incumbent ceases to be a resident of the district from which elected. 
(4)  The incumbent is convicted and sentenced by a state or federal court for treason, felony or any crime punishable by imprisonment in any prison or jail for one year or more or any offense involving a violation of the incumbent's official oath. A vacancy so created shall not be affected by a stay of execution of judgment. Reversal of the judgment, but not a pardon, immediately restores the incumbent to office if the term has not expired and entitles the incumbent to the emoluments of the office for the time the incumbent would have served in the office but for the judgment. 
(5)  A competent tribunal voids the election or appointment; or adjudges the officeholder to be incapable of understanding the objective of the elective process; or places the incumbent under guardianship or limited guardianship unless the court finds the incumbent is competent to exercise the right to vote. 
(6)  A person elected, reelected, appointed or reappointed neglects or refuses to take and file the official oath or to execute or renew the official bond if required, or to file the oath or bond as prescribed by law. 
(7)  The incumbent neglects or refuses to execute and file an additional bond, whenever lawfully required, as prescribed by law. 
(8)  A person elected or appointed to fill a vacancy or for a full term declines the office in writing or dies before qualifying or before the time when, by law, the person should enter upon the duties of the office to which elected or appointed. 
(9)  The incumbent accepts another incompatible public office. 
(10)  The incumbent's term expires if the office is elective. 
(11)  Any other event occurs which is declared by any special provision of law to create a vacancy. 
(12)  An elected or appointed official enters the active component of the Armed Forces of the United States and removes himself/herself temporarily from the city or district for which that person is an officer or employee. Vacancies arising out of any such military service shall be temporary and be filled in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 17.035(3). 
(13)  An elected or appointed official becomes temporarily incapacitated or is required to absent himself/herself from the city for an extended period. Vacancies arising out of any such temporary incapacity or absence shall be temporary. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.71(1)) 
State Law reference— Terms of municipal officers and substitutes, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(5).  
Sec. 8-3. - Same—How filled. 
Except when a recall election is held or the common council by resolution orders a special election, a vacancy in the office of mayor or alderperson shall be filled by a majority vote of the common council who are present and voting. A vacancy in the office of municipal judge shall be filled by special election pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 8.50. Vacancies in other elective offices shall be filled by appointment by the mayor. Vacancies in appointed offices or on any committee, board, or commission shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment. If the vacancy occurs on or after January 1 of a regular election for that seat, the seat shall remain vacant until after the election. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.71(2)) 
State Law reference— Terms of municipal officers and substitutes, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(5).  
Sec. 8-4. - Term of person filling office. 
(a)  An appointee to an elective office shall hold office until a successor is elected and qualified or as set forth in section 8-3. A successor shall be elected for the residue of the unexpired term on the first Tuesday of April next after the vacancy happens, in case it happens no later than December 1 preceding the first Tuesday in April, but if the vacancy happens after December 1 preceding the first Tuesday in April and before that day, then the successor shall be elected on the first Tuesday in April of the next ensuing year; but no election to fill a vacancy in such office may be held at the time of holding the regular election for that office. 
(b)  Temporary vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as other vacancies are filled, except that no election need be held to fill any part of a temporary vacancy. The term of the person appointed temporarily shall not extend beyond the expiration of the term of the vacant office or position and shall expire upon when person whose temporary disability, military service or absence created the vacancy files a statement with the city clerk that the cause for the vacancy no longer exists and that he/she elects to resume the office or position. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.71(3)) 
State Law reference— Terms of municipal officers and substitutes, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(5).  
Sec. 8-5. - Procedure for filling. 
(a)  Upon notification and verification of a mayoral or alderperson vacancy, the city clerk shall, in writing, immediately notify the common council and mayor of the vacancy. The clerk shall also immediately publish legal notice of the vacancy with one insertion in the official newspaper (unless it is the Wisconsin State Journal) and three insertions in the Wisconsin State Journal and ask for qualified candidates to fill the vacancy. Publication in the newspapers shall occur within seven days following notification to the mayor and common council of the vacancy. 
(b)  Qualified and interested individuals shall submit within 14 days of the last published notice of the vacancy a resume detailing personal history, and completed nomination papers in accordance with statutory election requirements for incorporated municipalities. Upon return of the documents to the city clerk, the clerk shall verify the accuracy of the documents and forward them to the committee of the whole. 
(c)  The committee of the whole shall be convened within 14 days of receipt of the documents from the city clerk and shall interview the prospective candidates. 
(d)  At the first common council meeting following the committee of the whole meeting the common council shall vote the appointment. Immediately following the common council appointment, the individual shall be sworn in and take office. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.71(4)) 
State Law reference— Manner of choosing municipal officers, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(3).  
Sec. 8-6. - Removal from office. 
(a)  Elected officials may be removed by the common council as provided in Wis. Stats. § 17.13(2), 17.16, or 17.12(1)(a). Appointed officials may be removed as provided in Wis. Stats. § 17.13(1), 17.12(1)(c) or 17.16. 
(b)  Absence of a member from any committee, board or commission meeting for three consecutive meetings, unless authorized by the head of such committee, board or commission shall, upon recommendation of the chairperson following consultation with the mayor, constitute cause for removal of such member from the committee, board or commission. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.72)  
Sec. 8-7. - Bonds to be filed by city officers. 
Every bond required of a city officer shall be executed with sufficient sureties in a sum fixed by the common council when not otherwise prescribed and be approved by the mayor. Whenever the common council shall deem any bond insufficient it may require an additional bond to be executed and filed in a sum and within a time to be set by them. No city officer shall be accepted as a surety on any bond, note, or other obligation of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.73) 
State Law reference— Official bonds required by certain municipal officers, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(4)(b).  
Sec. 8-8. - Oaths of office. 
Elected and appointed officials shall take and file the official oath within ten days after notice of their election or appointment as provided in Wis. Stats. § 62.09(4). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.74) 
State Law reference— Official oath of office, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(4)(a).  
Sec. 8-9. - Elections. 
(a)  Spring election. The spring elections for judicial and municipal officers shall be held on the first Tuesday in April. 
(b)  General elections. The general election prescribed in the state constitution shall be held on the Tuesday next succeeding the first Monday in November in even-numbered years. 
(c)  Nonpartisan primary. Candidates for elective city offices shall be nominated by a nonpartisan primary conducted pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 8.11. Such candidate shall file with his/her nomination papers a declaration that he/she will qualify for the office if elected. Nomination papers shall be signed by electors as required in Wis. Stats. § 8.10. If the number of candidates for an elective city office does not exceed twice the number to be elected to such office, no primary shall be held for such office and the names of such candidates shall be printed on the official ballot for the ensuing election. When required, the primary election shall be held on the third Tuesday in February. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.75) 
State Law reference— Selection of mayor and alderpersons by election, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(3)(a); spring primary elections, Wis. Stats. § 8.11.  
Secs. 8-10—8-36. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR 
 
Sec. 8-37. - Election. 
During the spring election in 2019 only, the mayor shall be elected for a one-year term commencing on the third Tuesday of April 2019 and continuing for a one-year term or until a successor is elected and qualified. 
Commencing with the 2020, the mayor shall be elected every three years for a term of office commencing on the third Tuesday of April in the year of election and continuing for three years or until a successor is elected and qualified. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.09(1); Ch. Ord. No. 4, § 5, 1-9-2018) 
State Law reference— Election and term of mayor, Wis. Stats. §§ 62.09(3)(a), 62.09(5)(b).  
Sec. 8-38. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city and shall have all of the powers and duties delegated to a mayor by state law or city ordinance. 
(b)  The mayor shall take care that city ordinances and state laws are observed and enforced and that all city officers and employees discharge their duties. 
(c)  The mayor shall preside at all common council meetings and shall sign all ordinances, rules, bylaws, regulations, contracts, and proclamations adopted or authorized by the common council and all orders drawn on the treasury except as otherwise prescribed by law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.09(2)) 
State Law reference— Powers and duties of mayor, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(8).  
Sec. 8-39. - Veto power. 
(a)  The mayor shall have the authority to veto all acts of the common council, including all resolutions, ordinances, and other actions. The mayor may only veto entire actions, and does not have the authority to veto individual provisions of common council actions. Specifically, the mayor does not have a line-item veto authority. However, the mayor shall have the authority to veto any budget amendment or any amendment to the capital improvement plan. 
(b)  Any action the mayor wishes to veto must be vetoed within five calendar days of the time the common council passed such action. In computing the five-day veto period the first day should be excluded and the last day should be included, as set forth under Wis. Stats. § 990.001(4), if the last day falls on a Sunday or holiday, as listed in Wis. Stats. § 995.20, the mayor may exercise a veto on the next succeeding secular day. 
(c)  The clerk shall immediately inform all common council members of the veto, and any two common council members may request that the item be placed on the agenda for override at the next regular common council meeting. Any request for an override vote not submitted by the agenda deadline as set forth in chapter 4, article II, division 2, shall not be permitted. 
(d)  A two-thirds vote of the entire common council shall be required to override any mayoral veto. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.09(3)) 
State Law reference— Powers and duties of mayor, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(8); computation of time, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(4); legal holidays, Wis. Stats. § 995.20.  
Sec. 8-40. - Emergency powers. 
The mayor shall have such emergency powers as set forth in section 4-33(d). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.09(4))  
Sec. 8-41. - Nominations. 
Any mayoral nomination shall be subject to confirmation by a majority vote of the common council. All confirmed appointees shall be directly subordinate to the mayor and subject to the policy direction of the common council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.09(5))  
Sec. 8-42. - Committees, boards, and commissions. 
(a)  The mayor shall make all nominations to committees, boards, and commissions, except standing committees, in a timely manner. All nominations should be made before April 30 each year. All nominations to committees, boards, and commissions are subject to confirmation by a majority vote of the common council. 
(b)  In the event that there is difficulty finding residents who wish to serve a full term, the mayor may nominate interim members to fill citizen positions on committees, boards, and commissions. If an interim nomination is made, the original term for that seat shall not change. 
(c)  If a vacancy or term expiration occurs in such committees, boards, or commissions, the mayor shall nominate a replacement within three months of notification of vacancy or date of term expiration, subject to confirmation by a majority of the common council. If the mayor does not nominate a replacement who is confirmed by the common council within three months, the common council may, by resolution and a two-thirds vote of those present and voting, appoint someone to fill a vacancy. The mayor continues to have the power of nomination unless the common council exercises its authority under this section. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.09(6))  
Secs. 8-43—8-72. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - MUNICIPAL JUDGE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal courts, Wis. Stats. § 755.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8-73. - Office created. 
Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 755.01, the office of municipal judge for the city is hereby created. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.10(1)) 
State Law reference— Authority for creation of office of municipal judge, Wis. Stats. § 755.01(1); method of filling office of municipal judge, Wis. Stats. § 8.50(4)(fm).  
Sec. 8-74. - Qualifications; election; term. 
The municipal judge shall be licensed to practice law in the State of Wisconsin and have been so licensed for at least five years immediately prior to election or appointment. The municipal judge shall be elected at large at the spring city election for a term of four years, in the year following the presidential election, or until a successor is elected and qualifies. The term of office shall commence on May 1 of the year of the judge's election. Mid-term vacancies in the office of municipal judge shall be filled by election under Wis. Stats. § 8.50. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.10(2); Ord. No. 2018-O-18, § 1, 4-10-2018) 
State Law reference— Term of municipal court judge, Wis. Stats. § 755.02.  
Sec. 8-75. - Salary. 
The municipal judge shall receive such salary as may be set from time to time by the common council, which shall be in lieu of fees and costs. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.10(3)) 
State Law reference— Salary and fees with regard to municipal judge, Wis. Stats. § 755.04.  
Sec. 8-76. - Training. 
Except as otherwise provided in Wis. Stats. § 755.18(3), the municipal judge shall participate in the program of continuing judicial education as required by the state supreme court at city expense. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.10(4)) 
State Law reference— Municipal judge training, Wis. Stats. § 755.18.  
Sec. 8-77. - Oath; bond or dishonesty insurance policy. 
The municipal judge shall, after election, designation or appointment, take and file the official oath as prescribed in Wis. Stats. § 757.02(1) and at the same time execute and file an official bond in the amount of no less than the judge's salary. In the alternative, the governing body, acting through the city clerk, shall obtain a dishonesty insurance policy or other appropriate insurance that covers the judge, in the amount of no less than the judge's salary, in lieu of the bond requirement. The governing body shall pay the costs of the bond or insurance policy. 
Within ten days after a municipal judge takes the oath, the judge shall file the oath and, if required to do so, the official bond with the city clerk and shall also file a certified copy of the oath with the office of director of state courts in accordance with Wis. Stat. § 755.03(2). No judge may act as such until the oath and bond, if required, have been so filed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.10(5); Ord. No. 2019-O-04, § 1, 2-12-2019) 
State Law reference— Oath and bond of municipal judges, Wis. Stats. § 755.03; oath of office of justices and judges, including municipal judges, Wis. Stats. § 757.02; oaths and bonds of public officials, Wis. Stats. § 19.01.  
Sec. 8-78. - Jurisdiction. 
The municipal judge shall preside over the municipal court created by chapter 18 and shall have such jurisdiction as is conferred by statute and this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.10(6)) 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction of municipal courts, Wis. Stats. § 755.045.  
Secs. 8-79—8-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - APPOINTED OFFICERS 
 
Sec. 8-100. - City administrator. 
(a)  Appointment. An administrator shall be nominated by the mayor pursuant to the terms and conditions of a written contract between the city and the nominee. Any such nomination shall be subject to confirmation by a majority vote of the common council. 
(b)  Term, compensation and benefits. The term of the administrator shall not have a fixed end date. The terms, compensation, and benefits of the administrator shall be as provided in a written contract. The contract may be terminated at any time, with or without cause, by a majority vote of the entire common council. If the contract is terminated without cause, there may be severance provisions established in the contract. 
(c)  Duties and responsibilities. The administrator shall perform such duties as are from time to time assigned by the mayor, by the common council, or by ordinance. Unless otherwise provided by contract, the administrator shall oversee the day-to-day operations of the city, shall be directly responsible for the day-to-day operations of city facilities, shall supervise the city staff, and shall assist the mayor in preparing the annual budget for review by the common council. 
(d)  Acting as city comptroller. The powers outlined under Wis. Stats. § 62.09(10) are hereby assigned to and shall be performed by the administrator during the term of his/her appointment and any extension thereof. Any reports submitted by the city comptroller shall be submitted to the finance committee. 
(e)  Subordinate to the mayor. The administrator shall be directly subordinate to the mayor and subject to the policy direction of the common council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.11) 
State Law reference— Authority for consolidation of city offices, Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0101, 62.09(3)(c).  
Sec. 8-101. - City assessor. 
(a)  Selection. An assessor shall be selected in accordance with the procedure outlined in chapter 16 whenever a vacancy in that office occurs. No person shall hold the office of assessor unless certified by the department of revenue under Wis. Stats. § 73.09 as qualified to perform the function of the office of assessor. 
(b)  Duties. The assessor shall make the assessments of general property for taxation as required by and in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 70 and shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by statute, by ordinance, by the mayor or by the common council. 
(c)  Subordinate to the mayor and administrator. The assessor shall be subordinate to the mayor, subject to the policy directions of the common council, and shall act under the direct supervision of the administrator. 
(d)  Civil service position. The assessor shall be entitled to the benefits and protection afforded by chapter 16. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.12) 
State Law reference— Requirement for appointment and exceptions, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(1)(a)—(c); certification required, Wis. Stats. §§ 62.09(1)(d), 73.09; qualifications, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(2); appointment, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(3); oath and bond, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(4); term, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(5).  
Sec. 8-102. - City attorney. 
(a)  Appointment. An attorney shall be nominated by the mayor pursuant to the terms and conditions of a written contract between the city and the nominee. Any such nomination shall be subject to confirmation by a majority vote of the common council. 
(b)  Term, compensation and benefits. The term of the attorney shall not have a fixed end date. The terms, compensation and benefits of the attorney shall be as provided in a written contract. The contract may be terminated at any time with or without cause, upon the recommendation of the mayor and by a majority vote of the entire common council. If the contract is terminated without cause, there may be severance provisions established in the contract. 
(c)  Duties and responsibilities. The attorney shall have the duties and responsibilities of the city attorney as is provided in Wis. Stats. § 62.09(12), along with such other similar services as are from time to time requested or delegated by the mayor or common council. 
(d)  Subordinate to the mayor. The attorney and any assistant attorneys shall be directly subordinate to the mayor and subject to the policy direction of the common council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.13) 
State Law reference— Requirement for appointment, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(1)(a); qualifications, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(2); appointment, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(3); oath and bond, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(4); term, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(5); duties, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(12).  
Sec. 8-103. - Building inspector. 
(a)  Selection. A building inspector shall be selected in accordance with the procedure outlined in chapter 16 and the qualification requirements of chapter 35, article II, division 2 whenever a vacancy in that office occurs. 
(b)  Duties. The building inspector shall have the duties and responsibilities assigned by chapter 35 and such other duties as may be prescribed by statute, by ordinance, by the mayor or by the common council. 
(c)  Subordinate to the mayor and administrator. The building inspector shall be subordinate to the mayor, subject to the policy directions of the common council, and shall act under the direct supervision of the administrator. 
(d)  Civil service position. The building inspector shall be entitled to the benefits and protection afforded by the chapter 16. 
(Comp. Ord. 2009, § 1.14) 
State Law reference— Authority to establish and fill office of building inspector, Wis. Stats. §§ 62.09, 62.23(9).  
Sec. 8-104. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-O-22, § 2, adopted November 8, 2011, amended the Code by repealing former § 8-104. Former § 8-104 pertained to the cable director, and derived from the Compiled Ordinances of 2009, § 1.15.  
Sec. 8-105. - Clerk. 
(a)  Selection. A clerk shall be selected in accordance with the procedure outlined in chapter 16 whenever a vacancy in that office occurs. 
(b)  Duties. The clerk shall perform the duties prescribed in Wis. Stats. §§ 62.09(11) and 7.30 and such other duties as may be prescribed by statute, by ordinance, by the mayor or by the common council. The clerk shall submit such written reports as may be requested from time to time by the mayor or common council concerning the operations of the department for the previous fiscal year. The clerk shall provide, by the last day of February, to the mayor, all common council members, all department heads, and all staff contacts to committees, boards, and commissions, a list of all board, committee, and commission members whose terms will be expiring in April of each year. 
(c)  Deputy clerks. The clerk may, in writing filed in the clerk's office, appoint deputies, who shall act under the clerk's direction, and in the clerk's absence or disability or in case of a vacancy shall perform the clerk's duties and shall have power to administer oaths and affirmations. The deputies shall receive such compensation as the common council shall provide. The clerk and the clerk's sureties shall be liable on the clerk's official bond for the acts of such deputies. 
(d)  Subordinate to the mayor and administrator. The clerk shall be subordinate to the mayor, subject to the policy directions of the common council, and shall act under the direct supervision of the administrator. 
(e)  Civil service benefits. The clerk shall be entitled to the benefits and protection afforded by the chapter 16. 
(f)  Bond. The city clerk shall be covered by a fidelity bond of not less than $5,000.00. 
(g)  Compensation. The salary of the clerk shall be as fixed by the city council. 
(h)  Deposit of fees collected. The salary of the clerk shall be in full compensation for all services of any kind rendered by the clerk and all fees paid to and received by the clerk shall be turned in to the city treasurer for deposit into the city treasury. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, §§ 1.16, 2.03(5), (6)) 
State Law reference— Requirement for appointment, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(1)(a); qualifications, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(2); appointment, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(3); oath and bond, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(4); term, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(5); duties, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(11).  
Sec. 8-106. - Treasurer. 
(a)  The city treasurer shall be covered by a fidelity bond of not less than $250,000.00 for collection of taxes. 
(b)  The salary of the city treasurer shall be fixed by the council. The salary of the city treasurer shall be in full compensation for all services of any kind rendered by the treasurer for the city, and all fees paid to and received by the treasurer shall be deposited by the treasurer into the city treasury. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.03(5), (6)) 
State Law reference— Requirement for appointment, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(1)(a); qualifications, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(2); appointment, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(3); oath and bond, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(4); term, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(5); duties, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(9).  
Sec. 8-107. - Economic development coordinator. 
(a)  Selection. An economic development coordinator shall be selected in accordance with the procedure outlined in chapter 16 whenever a vacancy in that office occurs. 
(b)  Subordinate to the mayor and administrator. The economic development coordinator shall be subordinate to the mayor, subject to the policy direction of the common council, and shall act under the direct supervision of the administrator. 
(c)  Duties and responsibilities. The economic development coordinator shall be responsible for initiating activities designed to promote job growth, new investment, and economic growth in the city, shall facilitate and encourage existing firms to expand facilities in the city, shall encourage new industries and business to locate in the city and shall promote development. The economic development coordinator shall be the executive director of the community development authority. 
(d)  Civil service position. The economic development coordinator shall be entitled to the benefits and protection afforded by chapter 16. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.17; Ord. No. 2018-O-08, § 1, 2-13-2018; Ord. No. 2019-O-24 , § 1, 9-24-2019) 
State Law reference— Authority for appointment of discretionary officers, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(1).  
Sec. 8-108. - Engineer/director of public works. 
(a)  Selection. An engineer shall be selected in accordance with the procedure outlined in chapter 16 and the qualification requirements of chapter 35, article II, division 2 whenever a vacancy in that office occurs. 
(b)  Acting as director of public works. The engineer shall also act as and have the title of director of public works. 
(c)  Duties. The engineer shall have such powers and duties as prescribed by statute and this Code for the engineer and for the director of public works. The engineer shall also have any other duties as may be assigned by the mayor or by the common council. 
(d)  Subordinate to the mayor and the administrator. The engineer/director of public works shall be subordinate to the mayor, subject to the policy directions of the common council, and shall act under the direct supervision of the administrator. 
(e)  Civil service position. The city engineer/director of public works shall be entitled to the benefits and protection afforded by the chapter 16. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.18; Ord. No. 2018-O-08, § 2, 2-13-2018; Ord. No. 2019-O-24 , § 2, 9-24-2019) 
State Law reference— Authority for appointment of discretionary officers, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(1); municipal board of public works, Wis. Stats. § 62.14; municipal public works, Wis. Stats. § 62.15.  
Sec. 8-109. - Fire chief and subordinates. 
(a)  Appointment. The board of police and fire commissioners shall appoint the fire chief in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 62.13 and on the basis of demonstrated qualifications in fire prevention, control, and management, and shall be a resident of the city within 60 days of the time his/her probationary period ends. 
(b)  Term of office. The fire chief shall hold office during good behavior, subject to suspension or removal by the board of police and fire commissioners for cause. 
(c)  Duties and responsibilities. The fire chief shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  Shall have command of the fire department under the direction of the mayor and administer the fire department under the supervision of the mayor and common council; 
(2)  May appoint and promote subordinates and firefighters subject to approval by the board of police and fire commissioners. Such appointments shall be made by promotion when this can be done with advantage, otherwise from an eligible list provided by examination and approval by the board and kept on file by the police and fire commission. Any such appointment shall be in accordance with the personnel policies of the city, the rules and regulations of the board and the policies and procedures of the fire department; 
(3)  Shall administer and enforce all laws relating to fire prevention and control; 
(4)  Shall develop organizational structure, policies, and procedures to achieve the goals of the department; 
(5)  Shall develop and implement policies for operating the department at the highest levels of safety and for the prevention of accidents, injuries, and occupational illnesses both within the department and in any activities of the department; 
(6)  Shall develop and administer the annual department budget in accordance with this chapter; 
(7)  Shall provide the mayor and common council with projections of the goals and needs of the department over a five-year time span. Such projections shall include anticipated personnel, equipment and facility requirements and anticipated budget requests; and shall be supplemented, modified, or revised whenever any change in circumstances or conditions dictates; 
(8)  Shall identify the need for, negotiate and draft mutual and/or automatic aid agreements with agencies of other communities. Such agreements shall be submitted to the mayor and common council for review, consideration and approval; 
(9)  Shall maintain liaison with other city departments on matters of importance to the goals of the fire department; and 
(10)  Shall provide a written quarterly report to the public safety and human services committee regarding the status of the department as directed by the public safety and human services committee. 
(d)  Civil service benefits. The fire chief shall be afforded the fringe benefits provided to city employees by chapter 16, article III. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.19) 
State Law reference— Requirement for appointment, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(1)(a); qualifications, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(2); appointment, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(3); oath and bond, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(4); term, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(5); municipal police and fire departments, Wis. Stats. § 62.13; fire chief defined, Wis. Stats. § 990.01(7g).  
Sec. 8-110. - Parks director. 
(a)  Selection. A parks director shall be selected in accordance with the procedure outlined in chapter 16 whenever a vacancy in that office occurs. 
(b)  Subordinate to the mayor and administrator. The parks director shall be subordinate to the mayor, subject to the policy direction of the common council, and shall act under the direct supervision of the administrator. 
(c)  Duties and responsibilities. The parks director shall be responsible for formulating and implementing all policies, procedures and practices relating to city parks and recreation including the planning, design, construction, maintenance and usage of all parks, green ways, highway boulevards, municipal building grounds, cemetery, and golf course. 
(d)  Civil service position. The parks director shall be entitled to the benefits and protection afforded by the chapter 16. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.20) 
State Law reference— Authority for appointment of discretionary officers, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(1).  
Sec. 8-111. - Police chief and subordinates. 
(a)  Appointment. The chief of police shall be appointed by the board of police and fire commissioners in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 62.13 and shall be a resident of the city within 60 days of the time his/her probationary period ends. 
(b)  Term of office. The chief of police shall hold office during good behavior, subject to suspension or removal by the board of police and fire commissioners for cause. 
(c)  Powers, duties and responsibilities of chief of police. The chief of police shall: 
(1)  Have command of the police department of the city under the direction of the mayor, shall obey all lawful written orders of the mayor or common council and may appoint subordinates subject to approval by the board of police and fire commissioners. Such appointments shall be made by promotion when this can be done with advantage, otherwise from an eligible list provided by examination and approval by the board and kept on file by the police and fire commission. 
(2)  Develop organizational structure, policies, and procedures to achieve the goals of the department. 
(3)  Develop and implement policies for operating the department at the highest levels of safety and for the prevention of accidents, injuries and occupational illnesses both within the department and in any activities of the department. 
(4)  Develop and administer the annual department budget in accordance with this chapter. 
(5)  Provide the mayor and common council with projections of the goals and needs of the department over a five-year time span. Such projections shall include anticipated personnel, equipment and facility requirements and anticipated budget requests and shall be supplemented, modified, or revised whenever any change in circumstances or conditions dictates. 
(6)  Identify the need for, negotiate and draft cooperative agreements with other departments and communities. Such agreements shall be submitted to the mayor and common council for review, consideration and approval. 
(7)  Maintain liaison with other city departments on matters of importance to the goals of the police department. 
(8)  Provide a written quarterly report to the public safety and human services committee regarding the status of the department as directed by the public safety and human services committee. 
(d)  Powers, duties and responsibilities all police personnel. The chief of police and each police officer shall: 
(1)  Possess the powers, enjoy the privileges and be subject to the liabilities conferred and imposed by law upon constables, and be taken as included in all writs and papers addressed to constables. 
(2)  Arrest with or without process and with reasonable diligence take before the municipal judge or other proper court every person found in the city engaged in any disturbance of the peace or violating any state law or city ordinance. 
(3)  Collect the same fees prescribed for sheriffs by Wis. Stats. § 814.70 for similar services unless a higher fee is applicable under Wis. Stats. § 814.705(2). 
(4)  Administer and enforce all laws as provided by state statutes and city ordinances. 
(e)  Civil service benefits. The chief of police shall be afforded the fringe benefits provided to city employees by chapter 16, article III. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.21) 
State Law reference— Requirement for appointment, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(1)(a); qualifications, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(2); appointment, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(3); oath and bond, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(4); term, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(5); duties, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(13); municipal police and fire departments, Wis. Stats. § 62.13; sheriff's fees, Wis. Stats. § 814.70; authority for establishment of higher fees by local governments, Wis. Stats. § 814.705.  
Sec. 8-112. - Senior center director. 
(a)  Selection. A senior center director shall be selected in accordance with the procedure outlined in chapter 16 whenever a vacancy in that office occurs. 
(b)  Subordinate to the mayor and administrator. The senior center director shall be subordinate to the mayor, subject to the policy direction of the common council, and shall act under the direct supervision of the administrator. 
(c)  Duties and responsibilities . The senior center director shall be responsible for implementing the policies, programs, services, and activities of the commission on aging well, shall manage and administer such programs, services and activities, and shall provide such assistance to the commission on aging well as may be necessary to accomplish its purpose. 
(d)  Civil service position. The senior center director shall be entitled to the benefits and protection afforded by chapter 16. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.22; Ord. No. 2017-O-24, § 3, 9-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Authority for appointment of discretionary officers, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(1).  
Sec. 8-113. - Treasurer/finance director. 
(a)  Appointment. A treasurer/finance director shall be appointed by the mayor in accordance with the procedure outlined in chapter 16 and the qualification requirements of Wis. Stats. § 62.09 whenever a vacancy in that office occurs. 
(b)  Duties. The treasurer/finance director shall: 
(1)  Be responsible for managing and directing the city's accounting functions, formulating and implementing policies and procedures to maintain accounting controls, investing the city's funds, and preparing and presenting financial reports on the city's financial status. 
(2)  Submit such written reports as may be requested from time to time by the mayor or common council concerning the operations of the department or the city. 
(3)  Have the duties assigned to the treasurer by Wis. Stats. § 62.09(9) and such other duties as may be assigned by statute, by ordinance, by the mayor or by the common council. Any reports submitted by the treasurer shall be submitted to the finance committee. 
(4)  Present the annual audit report to the finance committee by April 15 of each year, but may receive up to two 60-day extensions, approved separately, by a majority vote of the finance committee, of those present and voting. 
(c)  Deputy treasurer. The treasurer/finance director may in writing, filed in the office of the clerk, appoint deputies who shall act under the treasurer's direction and in the treasurer's absence or disability, or in case of a vacancy shall perform the treasurer's duties. The deputies shall receive such compensation as the common council shall provide and the acts of the deputies shall be covered by official bond, as the common council shall direct. 
(d)  Subordinate to the mayor and administrator. The treasurer/finance director shall be subordinate to the mayor, subject to the policy directions of the common council, and shall act under the direct supervision of the administrator. 
(e)  Civil service benefits. The treasurer/finance director shall be entitled to the benefits and protection afforded by the chapter 16. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.23) 
State Law reference— Requirement for appointment, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(1)(a); qualifications, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(2); appointment, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(3); oath and bond, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(4); term, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(5); duties, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(9).  
Sec. 8-114. - Weed commissioner. 
(a)  Designated. Until otherwise provided by ordinance or resolution, the superintendent of highways shall act as the weed commissioner. 
(b)  Duties and responsibilities. The weed commissioner shall have the duties and powers delegated to weed commissioners by Wis. Stats. § 66.0517. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.24) 
State Law reference— Authority for appointment of discretionary officers, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(1); municipal weed commissioner appointment, powers, duties and compensation, Wis. Stats. § 66.0517.  
Sec. 8-115. - Zoning administrator/planner. 
(a)  Selection. A zoning administrator/planner shall be selected in accordance with the procedure outlined in chapter 16 whenever a vacancy in that office occurs. 
(b)  Duties. The zoning administrator/planner shall have the duties and responsibilities assigned by this Code and such other duties as may be prescribed by statute, by ordinance, by the mayor or by the common council, including, but not limited to, enforcement of the master plan and zoning code of the city, coordination of current and long range city planning; providing input to the common council concerning the overall development of the city. 
(c)  Subordinate to the mayor and administrator. The zoning administrator/planner shall be subordinate to the mayor, subject to the policy direction of the common council, and shall act under the direct supervision of the administrator. 
(d)  Civil service position. The zoning administrator/city planner shall be entitled to the benefits and protection afforded by chapter 16. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 1.25; Ord. No. 2018-O-08, § 3, 2-13-2018; Ord. No. 2019-O-24 , § 3, 9-24-2019) 
State Law reference— Authority for appointment of discretionary officers, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(1).  
Chapter 10 - FINANCE, TAXATION AND PUBLIC CONTRACTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal finance, Wis. Stats. § 62.12; municipal budgets, Wis. Stats. § 65.90. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 10-1—10-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 10-19. - Water facilities impact fee established. 
The city has established, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0617, a water facilities impact fee. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-34, § 1, 1-12-2010) 
State Law reference— Municipal impact fees, Wis. Stats. § 66.0617.  
Secs. 10-20—10-41. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BUDGET 
 
Sec. 10-42. - Preparation of budget. 
(a)  Budget schedule. Before the end of June of each year the mayor shall recommend and the common council shall adopt a schedule for the preparation and consideration of the budget for the next fiscal year. The budget schedule shall include specific dates for completion of commission, committee, board, and department consideration of the budget; all public hearings including the statutorily required common council public hearing on the budget. 
(b)  Recommendations. Each of the various boards, committees, commissions, departments and authorities shall prepare a budget for their respective financial activities including expenditures and anticipated revenues for the next fiscal year together with recommended policy changes and priorities. Department heads functioning as staff contacts shall prepare budgets for their respective commissions, committees and boards these recommendations shall be submitted to the mayor for consideration prior to drafting of the mayor's executive budget. 
(c)  Mayor's budget submitted to finance committee. The mayor shall on the date indicated in the budget schedule, submit to the finance committee the consolidated budget of expenditures and anticipated revenues and be present to explain the document and respond to questions. 
(d)  Finance committee deliberations and optional hearing. The finance committee shall review the budget, may hold a public hearing and shall submit their recommendations on the mayor's budget to the council at a regular meeting prior to the required public hearing. The mayor, department heads, commission, committee and board chairpersons and members shall participate in the finance committee deliberations. 
(e)  Common council review and public hearing. The common council shall hold one or more meetings to review the proposed budget and recommendations of the finance committee. The common council shall also hold a public hearing on the budget in accordance with state statutes and the budget schedule as developed under this division. 
(f)  Recommendation for referendum. The finance committee shall recommend and the common council shall take action on any request for a public referendum pertaining to the budget. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.01(1)) 
State Law reference— Municipal budgets, Wis. Stats. §§ 62.12(2), 65.90.  
Sec. 10-43. - Contents. 
(a)  Summary format. The budget shall provide a complete financial picture for the ensuing year. It shall be in tabular form, and shall include: 
(1)  A general summary prepared in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 65.90; 
(2)  Detailed estimates of all anticipated revenues applicable to proposed expenditures; 
(3)  All proposed expenditures; 
(4)  A compensation schedule to provide uniform rates of pay for offices and positions in the city service; 
(5)  The total of such proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total of such anticipated revenues. 
(b)  Projected revenues and expenditures. Such budget shall list all existing indebtedness and all anticipated revenue from all sources during the ensuing year and shall likewise list all proposed appropriations for each committee, commission, board, authority and department, and any activity accounts during the ensuing year. 
(c)  Historical revenues and expenditures. The budget shall also show actual revenues and expenditures for the last completed year, actual revenues and expenditures for not less than the first six months of the current year combined with estimated revenues and expenditures for the balance of the current year, and the current year budget. 
(d)  Personnel cost schedule. The budget shall also include a schedule of the proposed salary for each department and position of the city. This schedule shall be considered part of the budget when adopted as an estimate of departmental personnel costs, but shall not be construed to imply a granting of individual increases. 
(e)  Fund balances. The budget shall also show for informational purposes any anticipated, unexpended, or unappropriated balances and surpluses. 
(f)  Capital expenditures. The budget shall list all proposed capital improvements for the succeeding year as set forth in the capital improvement plan adopted under division 3 of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.01(2))  
Sec. 10-44. - Public inspection and hearing. 
(a)  Official public hearing before council. This section pertains only to the common council public hearing referred to in section 10-42(c). 
(b)  Publication of notice. A summary of such budget and notice of the place where such budget is available for public inspection and notice of the time and place for holding the public hearing thereon shall be published in the official city newspaper at least 15 days prior to the time of such public meeting. All notices and copies of the budget summary shall indicate that a detailed budget is available for inspection at the office of the city clerk. 
(c)  Public hearing. Not less than 15 days after the publication of the proposed budget and the notice of hearing thereon a public hearing shall be held at the time and place stipulated at which time any resident or taxpayer of the city shall have an opportunity to be heard on the proposed budget. The budget hearing may be adjourned from time to time. 
(d)  Public inspection. Copies of the summary budget shall be available to all who attend the public hearing or who make a specific request following the 15-day notice in subsection (c) of this section. Copies of the detailed budget shall be made available to the press prior to the public hearing, and at least three copies of the detailed budget shall be available for the public at the hearing. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.01(3)) 
State Law reference— Procedure for adoption of municipal budget, Wis. Stats. § 65.05.  
Sec. 10-45. - Amendments to mayor's proposed budget. 
(a)  Authority to amend. The common council, by a vote of the majority of all the alderpersons, may make such changes in the proposed budget submitted, either as to purposes or amounts for which money may be expended and as to purposes or amounts for which bonds or notes may be issued as it may deem best. 
(b)  Submission of amendments for consideration. Council members may offer amendments in accordance with timeframes, as stated on the budget schedule. All such amendments shall be in writing, utilizing the budget amendment form available from the city administrator. 
(c)  Omnibus amendment. The mayor or the finance committee shall be permitted to introduce one housekeeping or omnibus amendments to deal with prior year audit findings, year-end fund deficits, technical corrections or other necessary adjustments which have little or no fiscal impact on the general levy. 
(d)  Introduction of amendments. At the annual budget meeting, the finance chairperson will introduce and request a second for the annual levy resolution, necessary to adopt the final budget, prior to any debate and action on any amendments. 
(e)  Debate limitations. Debate on each proposed amendment will be limited to five minutes, with each council member speaking no more than twice on each amendment. A majority vote of the common council may extend debate to ten minutes. A separate vote must be taken for each added extension. 
(f)  Closing statements. Council members wishing to make closing statements prior to their vote on the budget shall be limited to a total of five minutes for explanation of votes. 
(g)  Floor amendments prohibited. New budget amendments offered the night of council consideration will not be accepted. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.01(4)) 
State Law reference— Procedure for adoption of municipal budget, Wis. Stats. § 65.05.  
Sec. 10-46. - Adoption. 
(a)  Council adoption. Following the public hearing, the common council shall adopt the annual budget. Adoption of the budget shall require a majority vote of the entire council. The vote shall be taken by roll call vote. 
(b)  Mayoral veto. Following the adoption of the budget, the mayor shall have five days to veto the entire budget or any specific line items in the adopted budget. The mayor may delete a dollar amount within a line item and substitute a lower dollar amount. 
(c)  Council override of veto. The common council may override the veto of the mayor by a two-thirds vote of the council. The vote shall be taken on each item separately and shall be by a roll call vote. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.01(5)) 
State Law reference— Procedure for adoption of municipal budget, Wis. Stats. § 65.05.  
Sec. 10-47. - Amendments to adopted budget. 
(a)  Internal adjustment by department heads. Department heads are authorized, with the consent of the mayor, to make internal adjustment to their respective department budgets up to a maximum of $5,000.00 or five percent of the department budget, whichever is less. 
(b)  Amendment that does not alter total revenue and expenses. The common council may shift funds in making internal alterations of the budget without changing the adopted totals for all revenues and expenditures by a majority vote. 
(c)  Amendment that alters total revenue and expenses. The authorization of funds or any change to the budget which would alter total revenues and expenditures shall require a two-thirds vote of the entire council. 
(d)  Publication of budget amendments. Any changes made to the total revenues or expenditures shall be published within ten days after the change is approved by Class 1 notice in accordance with Wis. Stats. ch. 985. Failure to give notice shall preclude any changes in the proposed budget and alterations thereto made under subsection (c) of this section. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.01(7)) 
State Law reference— Amendments to municipal budget, Wis. Stats. § 65.05.  
Secs. 10-48—10-67. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS AND EQUIPMENT 
 
Sec. 10-68. - Capital improvement plan. 
(a)  Items included in plan. A five-year capital improvement plan setting forth the capital improvements, estimated costs and proposed funding sources for each project or capital expenditure shall be maintained. All capital improvements and capital expenditures which are expected to exceed $10,000.00 in value, and which are likely to have a useful life of five years or more shall be included in the five-year capital plan. 
(b)  Retained on file permanently. The capital improvement plan, as amended annually, shall be kept permanently on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(c)  Annual review required. The capital improvement plan shall be reviewed by the board of public works, plan commission and finance committee, generally in May of each year and the plan may be modified, supplemented, altered, extended or amended from time to time by the common council by majority vote. 
(d)  Amendments to the annual capital improvements plan. The mayor shall provide the common council members, at the time of submittal of the budget to the committee, a statement setting forth any project or amount in the capital improvement plan for that budget year which has not been included in the annual budget submitted to the committee and the mayor's reasons for not including such project or amount. Such statement shall be in writing and a copy filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.01(6))  
Sec. 10-69. - Protection of general obligation borrowing capacity. 
Borrowing for the purpose of funding the capital improvements in the plan shall not exceed an aggregate of three percent of the total equalized value of taxable property within the city without two-thirds vote to amend said percent of the total equalized value. The vote shall be by roll call vote. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.02(3))  
Sec. 10-70. - Financing of capital equipment. 
Debt incurred for the purchase of capital equipment shall be payable in not more than five annual installments unless specifically authorized by a majority vote of the common council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.02(4))  
Sec. 10-71. - Matching of revenues and expenditures and non-debt capital financing sources. 
Debt incurred for the financing of public improvements for which special assessments are intended to be used to offset the cost of the debt shall be payable in annual installments with a term similar to that allowed for the repayment of the special assessments, unless specifically authorized by a majority vote of the common council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.02(5)  
Sec. 10-72. - Special assessment B bonds. 
As a complete alternative to any other financing method the common council may provide for the payment of the initial cost of any public improvement from the proceeds of special assessment B bonds issued under Wis. Stats. § 66.54(10) and (11). Special assessments to retire such bonds and pay the interest thereon shall be levied under Wis. Stats. § 66.60, payable in not more than ten annual installments unless specifically authorized by a majority vote of the common council, bearing interest at the rate directed by the city council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.02(6))  
Secs. 10-73—10-102. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - REVENUE COLLECTION AND INVESTMENT 
 
Sec. 10-103. - Internal controls. 
The city treasurer shall review and update as necessary, a policy for the collection of money from any source, including the internal controls established and the segregation of duties for receipting, recording and reconciling said funds. Such policy shall be approved by the finance committee and common council by resolution, and kept on file with the city clerk. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.03(1))  
Sec. 10-104. - Treasurer to issue receipt for payments into treasury. 
The city treasurer or his/her designee shall not receive any money into the treasury from any source, except on account of taxes levied and collected during the fiscal year, without issuing a receipt therefor. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.03(2))  
Sec. 10-105. - Treasurer to charge proper account. 
Upon the receipt of any money (except for taxes as provided in this chapter), the city treasurer or designee shall prepare a receipt in duplicate for the money so received. The treasurer shall charge the amount thereof to the treasury and credit the proper account. The payment of the money to any receiving agent of the city or to the city treasurer shall be safeguarded in such manner as the council shall direct. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.03(3))  
Sec. 10-106. - Investments. 
The treasurer is hereby authorized to invest any funds which are not immediately needed in any of the investments authorized under the investment policy of the city, or as listed under Wis. Stats. § 66.0603. Said investment policy shall be reviewed and updated as necessary, approved by the finance committee and common council by resolution, and kept on file with the city clerk. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.03(4))  
Sec. 10-107. - Payment of financial obligations as prerequisite to grant of license or permit. 
(a)  Issuance prohibited; exception. No license or permit, except a dog license or a bicycle license may be granted for any premises for which taxes, assessments, utility bills or other claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid, or to any person delinquent in payment of such claims, including unpaid forfeiture judgment, except where hardship is demonstrated claiming specifications in article III of this chapter. 
(b)  Notice. Prior to final action by the common council the city clerk shall notify in writing an applicant whose license or permit the common council is required by this section to refuse prior to final action by the common council that the license or permit cannot be granted because of outstanding delinquent claims, specifying them. The notice shall also inform the applicant of the right to a hearing as provided in this section. 
(c)  Request for hearing. If a written request is filed by the applicant within ten days of the date of the clerk's notice, the clerk shall schedule a hearing before the common council on the proposed refusal to grant the license or permit. Hearings on proposed refusals to renew alcohol beverage licenses shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures of Wis. Stats. § 125.12. 
(d)  When seller's permit required. No license or permit may be issued by the city clerk for any business involving the sale of tangible personal property unless proof of a valid seller's permit, if required, is provided pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 77.61(11). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.04)  
Secs. 10-108—10-127. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - GRANTS 
 
Sec. 10-128. - Summary of funding request required. 
Prior to completing full application, summary of funding request should be submitted to mayor for approval and should include the following information: 
(1)  Proposed program benefits. Identification of proposed funding use, including goals and objectives of new projects or programs, and benefit to city (i.e., number of persons served); 
(2)  Cost estimates. Identification of costs of program including administrative personnel, audit, space and insurance costs in addition to direct costs associated with grant, and percent which would be reimbursed; 
(3)  Duration of funding. Identification of duration of grant funding, approximate cost to continue program and likelihood of program continuance once grant funding has been depleted. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.05(1))  
Sec. 10-129. - Authorization to submit grant application. 
Application for grant funding must be authorized in writing by the mayor prior to submission. If grant requires application authorization by the common council, such authorization shall be in the form of a resolution. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.05(2))  
Sec. 10-130. - Mayor and clerk to sign acceptance; records retention. 
Mayor and clerk shall sign all grant acceptance contracts. All grant contracts shall be retained in the clerk's office, along with copies of all funding draw requests and receipts of funding in a separate file for each grant accepted. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.05(3))  
Sec. 10-131. - Accounting and audit of grant funds. 
All grants shall be logged and recorded in a central file maintained by the treasurer. The treasurer shall assign separate accounts for the recording of revenues and expenditures as necessary to provide a clear audit trail of grant transactions. All grants shall be audited during the course of the annual audit, in accordance with any state, federal or other guidelines governing such audits. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.05(4))  
Secs. 10-132—10-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - DONATIONS AND SOLICITATIONS 
 
Sec. 10-161. - Official acceptance. 
The city must officially accept all donations of funds or equipment. If it is determined that the donation is not in the best interest of the citizens of the city, the donation shall be refused. If donation is refused, return of equipment or refund by city check shall be accomplished as soon as practicable. Policies included under article II of chapter 14 shall also apply and take precedence over this section. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.06(1)) 
State Law reference— Authority for municipality to accept gifts, Wis. Stats. § 62.22(1).  
Sec. 10-162. - Review prior to acceptance. 
A staff committee consisting of the city planner, parks director and city administrator shall review all donations for appropriateness and best use. Report of donations shall be made to the common council at least annually. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.06(2))  
Sec. 10-163. - Specific use donations. 
All donated funds which are given for a specific use shall be recorded in such a manner as to easily identify the intended use. Donations shall be receipted by the treasurer, and a budget notation shall be prepared for all donations in excess of $1,000.00 specifying the intended revenue and expenditure accounts to be increased. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.06(3))  
Sec. 10-164. - Memorials, donations in honor of individuals. 
Donations which are contingent upon recognition of an individual by plaque, sign or other insignia shall be accepted only after approval of the proposed plaque, sign or other insignia by the donation review committee. Such plaque, sign or other insignia shall not be attached to a public facility unless approved by the common council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.06(4))  
Sec. 10-165. - Nonspecific use donations. 
Donations shall be receipted by the treasurer, and a budget notation shall be prepared for all donations in excess of $1,000.00 specifying the intended revenue and expenditure accounts to be increased. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.06(5))  
Sec. 10-166. - Solicitations for community events. 
All solicitations on behalf of the city, or which are distributed on the official letterhead of the city, shall be approved by the mayor prior to solicitation. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.06(6))  
Secs. 10-167—10-175. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TAXATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Property taxes generally, Wis. Stats. § 70.01 et seq.; property tax credits, Wis. Stats. § 79.10 et seq.; payments for municipal services, Wis. Stats. § 70.119; tax rolls, Wis. Stats. § 70.65; duties of clerk to examine and correct tax rolls, Wis. Stats. § 70.52; collection of taxes, Wis. Stats. § 70.68; return and collection of delinquent taxes, Wis. Stats. § 74.45 et seq.; taxation of public utilities, Wis. Stats. § 76.01 et seq.; general sales and use taxes, Wis. Stats. § 77.51 et seq.; local food and beverage tax, Wis. Stats. § 77.98 et seq.; local rental car tax, Wis. Stats. § 77.99 et seq.; municipal and county shared revenue, Wis. Stats. § 79.005 et seq.; beverage taxes, Wis. Stats. § 139.01 et seq.; cigarette taxes, Wis. Stats. § 139.30 et seq.; tobacco products taxes, Wis. Stats. § 139.75 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 10-176—10-10-185. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PROPERTY TAXES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— General property taxes, Wis. Stats. § 70.01 et seq.; tax, property tax collection, Wis. Stats. § 74.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-186. - Taxes levied against real and personal property. 
The common council shall have the power as authorized under state statute to levy annually, a tax upon all the taxable property in the city for the operating and capital improvement needs of the city, or for any other purpose authorized under Wis. Stats. § 65.07. The adoption of the annual tax levy shall be by a two-thirds vote of the entire council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.02(1))  
Sec. 10-187. - Time for payment of taxes. 
Real property taxes in excess of $100.00, may be paid in two installments, on January 31 and July 31 in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 74.11. Personal property taxes, special assessments and special charges shall be paid in full on or before January 31. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.02(2)) 
State Law reference— Delinquent property taxes, Wis. Stats. § 74.43 et seq.; interest and penalty on delinquent amounts, Wis. Stats. § 74.47.  
Secs. 10-188—10-212. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Special assessments generally, Wis. Stats. § 66.0703; special assessments by local ordinance, Wis. Stats. § 66.0701. 
 
Sec. 10-213. - Annual installments. 
Whenever any special assessments shall be levied to defray the cost of any public improvement, such special assessments may be paid in annual installments as determined by the council. 
(1)  Interest to be added. Installments shall include a proportionate part of the principal of the special assessment determined by the number of installments. All installments shall also include interest at a rate to be determined by the council on the deferred balance of principal. Interest during the initial year of the installment shall be as stated in the final assessment resolution adopted by the common council. Each subsequent installment shall include a like proportion of the deferred principal and interest at the rate determined by the council upon the unpaid deferred balance of such assessment. 
(2)  Certification to the tax roll. The first installment shall be entered in the first tax roll prepared after such installments have been determined as a special tax on the property upon which the special assessment was levied, and thereafter this tax shall be treated in all respects as any other municipal tax. All of the subsequent installments shall be entered in a like manner and with like effect in each of the annual tax rolls thereafter until all are levied. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.07(1))  
Sec. 10-214. - Delinquent special assessment installments. 
If any deferred installment so entered in the tax roll shall not be paid to the treasurer with the other taxes, it shall be returned to the county as delinquent and accepted and collected by the county on behalf of the city in the same manner as delinquent general taxes on real estate. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.07(2))  
Sec. 10-215. - Use of alternate special assessment procedures authorized. 
In addition to other methods provided by law, special assessments for any public work or improvement or any current service may be levied in accordance with the provisions of this section, and with the special assessments policy adopted by the city. 
(1)  Resolution to be adopted. Whenever the council determines that any public work or improvement or any current service shall be financed in whole or in part by special assessments levied under this section, it shall adopt a resolution specifying this intention and the time, either before or after completion of the work or improvement, when the amount of the assessments will be determined and levied, the number of annual installment, if any, in which assessments may be paid, the rate of interest to be charged on the unpaid balance and the terms on which any of the assessments may be deferred while no use of the improvement is made in connection with the property. 
(2)  Estimated costs to be provided prior to public hearing. The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0703 shall apply to special assessments levied under this section; when the Council determines by resolution that the hearing on the assessments shall be held subsequent to the completion of the work or improvement or the rendering of the service, the report required by Wis. Stats. § 66.070(5) shall contain a statement of the final cost of the work, service or improvement in lieu of an estimate of the cost. 
(3)  Public hearing notice. Notice of the time and place of the public hearing on any special assessment proposed to be levied; a notice of the final assessment; and terms of payment thereof shall be given in the manner prescribed in Wis. Stats. § 66.0703. 
(4)  Lien against property. Any special assessment levied under this section shall be a lien against the property assessed from the date of the final resolution by the council determining the amount of the levy. 
(5)  Appeal of special assessment. Any person against whose property a special assessment is levied under this section may appeal therefrom in the manner prescribed by Wis. Stats. § 66.0703(12) within 40 days of the date of the final determination by the council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.07(3))  
Sec. 10-216. - Exception in cases of financial hardship. 
(a)  Findings. The common council of the city hereby finds: 
(1)  In the interest of public health, welfare and safety, it is often necessary to construct improvements in areas in which property owners reside for whom the payment of the special assessments for the improvements could be considered as a severe financial hardship. 
(2)  It is in the public interest for the city to temporarily assume the cost of special assessments for public improvements in those instances where the high cost of such assessments might result in a severe economic burden on the property owner and possibly force sale and loss of a home. 
(b)  When city treasurer to pay or defer assessments. To ensure that persons will not be unduly economically burdened or forced to move from their homes by reason of a decision of the city authorities ordering construction of public improvements at the cost of the property benefitted, the city treasurer is hereby directed and authorized to pay or defer any special assessment legally charged against the real estate of any individual for whom the immediate payment of the assessment would be a severe financial hardship as determined under subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Qualifying individual. For the purpose of this section, an individual described in subsection (b) of this section is defined as any individual property owner or owners within a household who meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  An individual who owns and resides on a property located within or abutting a special assessment improvement district whose property has been specially assessed for said improvement. 
(2)  An individual who has an annual gross income equal to or less than 72 percent of the median income of the county as most recently determined by the United States Department of Housing And Urban Development. 
(3)  An individual who has less than $25,000.00 in liquid assets. Liquid assets are defined as cash, marketable securities (stocks, bonds, treasury bills, notes and commercial papers), savings bonds, savings accounts and the cash surrender value of life insurance policies. 
(4)  An individual who certifies to the city clerk that payment of the special assessment or any installment of the special assessment is a financial hardship, and that the individual meets the criteria set forth in subsections (c)(1), (2) and (3) of this section. 
(5)  An individual who executes to the city consent to have the city record a lien, as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  Payment recorded as lien against property benefitted. A copy of such resolution with a statement of the amount and date paid and description of the properties certified by the city clerk shall be recorded with the register of deeds of the county, and the amount shall thereby become a lien upon such real property in favor of the city prior to any other lien other than prior outstanding tax certificates or prior liens hereunder for the amount paid, with legal interest, and shall be enforceable after transfer of title of the property by sale, inheritance or will, in the manner provided by law, except when such transfer is to a surviving spouse who meets the criteria set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  Lien to be discharged on sale. The owner of such property, or the owner's heirs, personal representative or assigns shall discharge such lien at any time the owner fails to meet the criteria set forth in subsection (c) of this section or upon sale or transfer of the property by will, bequest or in any other manner, whichever comes sooner, by paying the total amount of the outstanding special assessments against the property with accrued interest to the city treasurer, who shall execute a proper satisfaction which may be duly recorded with the county register of deeds. 
(f)  Annual review of program. The treasurer shall annually no later than December 15 report to the council on the impact of this section, including the level of current activity in comparison to previous years and a summary of unpaid liens. 
(g)  Owner to pay interest. The interest for such liens shall be simple interest paid by either of the methods set forth in this subsection. The owner shall elect the method of payment at the time the application for payment by the city under this section is made. The interest rate shall be the rate in effect for a special assessment at the time the assessment was approved. 
(1)  Interest may be accrued and paid in its entirety at the time the lien is discharged. 
(2)  Interest may be paid annually until the lien is discharged. 
(h)  Applicant to attest to qualifications. All applicants will annually file with the city clerk an affidavit attesting to continued compliance with the criteria set forth in subsection (c) of this section. Until such time as the lien is discharged, the qualifications of said owner pursuant to the criteria enumerated in subsections (c)(1) through (4) of this section shall be reviewed annually by the city clerk. 
(i)  Foreclosure of lien. In the event the owner no longer meets any of the criteria, the assessment, together with accrued interest, shall become due and payable according to the full established payment schedule for said assessment and the city clerk shall place the same on the next tax roll as a special charge and deliver an executed copy of the lien to the city attorney for collection in the usual manner of foreclosure of a lien in circuit court. False information furnished on the affidavit will be subject to penalties for violation of this chapter and the entire amount of the special assessment plus interest will be due immediately. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.07(4))  
Secs. 10-217—10-240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ROOM TAX AND PERMIT[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal room tax, Wis. Stats. § 66.0615. 
 
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 10-241. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gross receipts has the meaning as defined in Wis. Stats. § 77.51(4)(a), (b) and (c) insofar as applicable. 
Hotel or motel means a building or group of buildings in which the public may obtain accommodations for consideration including, without limitation, such establishments as inns, motels, tourist homes, tourist houses or courts, bed and breakfast establishments, lodginghouses, roominghouses, summer camps, apartment hotels, resort lodges and cabins and any other building or group of buildings in which accommodations are available to the public, except accommodations, including mobile homes as defined in Wis. Stats. § 66.0435(1)(d), rented for a continuous period of more than one month and accommodations furnished by any hospitals, sanatorium, or nursing homes, or by corporations or associations organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes, provided that no part of the net earnings of such corporations and associations inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual. 
Lodging marketplace means an entity that provides a platform through which an unaffiliated 3rd party offers to rent a short-term rental to an occupant and collects the consideration for the rental from the occupant. 
Occupant means a person who rents a short-term rental through a lodging marketplace. 
Operator means a person who is the owner or lessee of property being used as both a short-term rental and their primary residence and who is conducting the short-term rental business by, among other things, interacting digitally and in person with guests and is identified in short-term listings and advertisements as the short-term rental "host." An operator may not be a LLC, trust, non-profit, or other corporate entity. 
Primary residence means a dwelling unit that serves as an individual's true, fixed and permanent home for at least 183 days in a calendar year and to which, whenever absent therefrom, that individual intends to return. Additional characteristics of a primary residence include, but are not limited to, where an individual receives mail, claims residence for purposes of voter registration, pays for utilities, and lists as their address on state issued identification cards. An individual can have only one primary residence. 
Short-term rental means a residential dwelling that is offered for rent for a fee and for fewer than 28 consecutive days. 
Transient means any person residing for a continuous period of less than one month in a hotel, motel or other furnished accommodations available to the public. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.17(1); Ord. No. 2020-O-04 , § 1, 1-28-2020)  
Sec. 10-242. - Levy. 
Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0615, a tax is hereby imposed on the privilege and service of furnishing, at retail, except sales for resale, rooms or lodging to transients or occupants by hotel keepers, motel operators, lodging marketplaces, and operators of short-term rentals, and any other persons furnishing accommodations that are available to the public, irrespective of whether membership is required for the use of the accommodations. For rentals made through lodging marketplaces, the lodging marketplace shall collect and remit the tax to the city treasurer, according to the provisions of this chapter 10 article III division 4. Beginning January 1, 2017, such tax shall be as set by the annual budget appendix fee schedule. Such tax shall not be subject to the selective sales tax imposed by Wis. Stats. § 77.52(2)(a)1. and may not be imposed on sales to the federal government and persons listed under Wis. Stats. § 77.54(9a). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.17(2); Ord. No. 2016-O-22, § 1, 9-13-2016; Ord. No. 2020-O-04 , § 1, 1-28-2020)  
Sec. 10-243. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-O-22, § 1, adopted September 13, 2016, amended the Code by repealing former § 10-243 in its entirety. Former § 10-243 pertained to disposition of proceeds, and derived from the Comp. Ords. of 2009, § 2.17(3).  
Sec. 10-244. - Administration; payment; returns; extensions. 
(a)  This section shall be administered by the city treasurer. 
(b)  The tax imposed for each calendar quarter is due and payable on the last day of the month next succeeding the calendar quarter for which imposed. 
(c)  A return shall be filed with the city treasurer, by those furnishing at retail such rooms and lodging, on or before the same date on which such tax is due and payable. Such return shall show the gross receipts of the preceding calendar quarter from such retail furnishing of rooms or lodging, the amount of taxes imposed for such period, and such other information as the city treasurer deems necessary. 
(d)  Every person required to file such quarterly return shall, with his/her first return, elect to file an annual calendar-year or fiscal-year return. Such annual return shall be filed within 90 days of the close of each such calendar or fiscal year. The annual return shall summarize the quarterly returns, reconcile and adjust for errors in the quarterly returns, and shall contain certain such additional information as the city treasurer requires. Such annual returns shall be made on forms as prescribed by the city treasurer. All such returns shall be signed by the person required to file a return or his/her duly authorized agent, but need not be verified by oath. 
(e)  The city treasurer may, for good cause, extend the time for filing any return, but in no event longer than one month from the filing date. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.17(4))  
Sec. 10-245. - Disposition of proceeds and oversight by community and economic development authority. 
(a)  The city's community and economic development authority, ("CEDA"), shall monitor, by reviewing quarterly reports from the city treasurer, collection and allocation of room taxes from hotels and motels located within the city. 
(b)  CEDA shall establish a contract with a tourism entity, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 66.0615(1)(f), to assist with tourism promotion and tourism development. 
(c)  CEDA shall provide the tourism entity contracted with pursuant to subsection (b) of this section with 70 percent of the room tax revenue on a quarterly basis within 45 days following collection of that quarter's room tax, to carry out the activities set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  The tourism entity contracted with pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall submit an annual report to CEDA by March 1 each year detailing how their percentage of the hotel room tax revenue was spent on tourism promotion and tourism development in the preceding year. This report shall, at the minimum, include the information required to be filed with the Wisconsin Department of Revenue pursuant to subsection (f) of this section. 
(e)  The 30 percent of the hotel room tax retained by CEDA shall be distributed according to the fee schedule. 
(f)  Beginning May 1, 2017, on or before May 1 of each year, CEDA shall file an annual report with the Wisconsin Department of Revenue, using the form created and provided by the Department of Revenue. The report shall include all of the following: 
(1)  The amount of room tax collected and the room tax rate imposed in the previous year; and 
(2)  A detailed accounting of the amounts of revenue forwarded to the tourism entity pursuant to subsection (c) of this section and a detailed accounting of expenditures of $1,000.00 or more made by the tourism entity; and 
(3)  A list of each member of the governing body of the tourism entity and the name of the business entity each member owns, operates, or is employed by, if any. 
(g)  CEDA shall submit an annual report to the city common council by May 1 each year detailing and summarizing how the room tax revenue was spent on tourism promotion and tourism development. 
(h)  Neither CEDA nor the tourism entity contracted with pursuant to subsection (b) of this section may use any of the room tax revenue it receives to construct or develop a lodging facility. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.17(19); Ord. No. 2016-O-22, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
Sec. 10-246. - Sale of business. 
If any person liable for any amount of tax under this section sells out his/her business or stock of goods or quits the business, his/her successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the city treasurer that it has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. If a person subject to the tax imposed by this section fails to withhold such amount of tax from the purchase price as required, he/she shall become personally liable for payment of the amount required to be withheld by him/her to the extent of the purchase price valued in money. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.17(9))  
Sec. 10-247. - Office audits. 
The city treasurer may, by office audit, determine the tax required to be paid to the city or the refund due to any person under this section. This determination may be made upon the basis of the facts contained in the return being audited or on the basis of any other information within the city treasurer's possession. One or more such office audit determinations may be made of the amount due for anyone or for more than one period. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.17(10))  
Sec. 10-248. - Field audits. 
The city treasurer or designee may, by field audit, determine the tax required to be paid to the city or the refund due to any person under this section. The determination may be made upon the basis of the facts contained in the return being audited or upon any other information within the city treasurer's possession. Whenever the city treasurer has probable cause to believe that the correct amount of room tax has not been assessed or that the tax return is not correct, the city treasurer, and designees, is authorized to examine and inspect the books, records, memoranda, and property of any person in order to verify the tax liability of that person or of another person. Nothing herein shall prevent the city treasurer from making a determination of tax at any time. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.17(11); Ord. No. 2016-O-22, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
Sec. 10-249. - Required recordkeeping. 
Every person liable for the tax imposed by this section shall keep or cause to be kept such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the city treasurer requires. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.17(15))  
Sec. 10-250. - Records confidential; exceptions. 
(a)  All tax returns, schedules, exhibits, writings or audit reports relating to such returns on file with the city treasurer are deemed to be confidential, except the city treasurer may divulge their contents to the following, and no others: 
(1)  The person who filed the return. 
(2)  Officers, agents, or employees of the Federal Internal Revenue Service or the Wisconsin Department of Revenue. 
(3)  Officers, employees, or agents of the city administrator. 
(4)  Such other public officials of the city, when deemed necessary. 
(5)  Pursuant to a valid subpoena or search warrant. 
(b)  Any person who violates or is in noncompliance with, any of the provisions of this section or section 10-251 shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100.00, nor more than $500.00. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.17(16); Ord. No. 2016-O-22, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
Sec. 10-251. - Disclosure prohibited. 
No person having an administrative duty under this section shall make known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an investigation of records of any person on whom a tax is imposed by this section, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or to permit any return or copy thereof to be seen or examined by any person, except as provided in section 10-250. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.17(17))  
Sec. 10-252. - Failure to file return; estimated tax. 
If any person fails to file a return as required by this section, the city treasurer shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts under section 10-242. Such estimate shall be made for the period for which such person failed to make a return and shall be based upon any information which is in the city treasurer's possession or may come into his/her possession. On the basis of this estimate the city treasurer shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid to the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.17(12))  
Sec. 10-253. - Penalties and interest for failure to pay. 
A forfeiture of 25 percent of the room tax due for the previous year or $5,000.00, whichever is less, of the tax imposed, is hereby established and due and owing in the event that the room tax is not paid within 30 days after the due date of return. In addition to this forfeiture, all unpaid taxes under this section shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the due date of the return until the first day of the month following the month in which the tax is paid or deposited with the city treasurer. An extension of time within which to file a return shall not operate to extend the due date of the return for purposes of interest computation. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.17(13))  
Sec. 10-254. - Penalties for refusal to permit inspection and audit. 
Any person who is subject to the tax imposed by this section who fails to obtain a permit as required in section 10-274, or who fails or refuses to permit the inspection of his/her records by the city treasurer after such inspection has been duly required by the city treasurer, or who fails to file a return as provided in this section, or who violates any other provisions of this section, shall be subject to a forfeiture not to exceed $250.00. Each day, or portion thereof, that such violation continues is hereby deemed to constitute a separate offense. The total forfeiture imposed shall not exceed five percent of the tax imposed by this section. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.17(18))  
Sec. 10-255. - Late filing fees. 
Delinquent tax returns shall be subject to a late filing fee as set forth in the annual budget appendix fee schedule. The tax imposed by this section shall become delinquent if not paid by the due date of the return. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.17(14))  
Secs. 10-256—10-273. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Permits 
 
Sec. 10-274. - Business permit required; application; fee. 
(a)  Every person furnishing rooms or lodging shall file with the city clerk an application for a permit for each place of business. Every application for a permit shall be made upon a form prescribed by the city clerk and shall set forth the name under which the applicant transacts or intends to transact business, the location of his/her place of business, and such other information as the city clerk requires. The application shall be signed by the owner if a sole proprietor and, if not a sole proprietor, by the person authorized to act on behalf of such sellers. At the time of making an application the applicant shall pay to the city clerk a fee as set forth in the annual budget appendix fee schedule. 
(b)  Once issued, such permits need not be renewed, however, permits shall be subject to suspension and revocation for violations of any provisions of this section as provided herein. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.17(5))  
Sec. 10-275. - Determination by council; procedure upon denial. 
The common council shall grant or deny an application for a permit no later than 45 days after application. If the application for a permit is denied, the applicant shall be given written notice of the reasons for denial and shall be given an opportunity to be heard thereon. If the applicant desires a public hearing, he/she shall file a written request therefor with the city clerk, and the council shall hold a public hearing thereon no later than the second council meeting following filing of the request for hearing. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.17(6))  
Sec. 10-276. - Issuance; transfer; display. 
After compliance with section 10-274 by the applicant, and approval by the common council under section 10-275, the city clerk shall grant and issue to each applicant a separate permit for each place of business within the city. Such permit is not assignable and is valid only for the person in whose name it is issued and for the transaction of business at the place designated therein. It shall at all times be conspicuously displayed at the place for which issued. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.17(7); Ord. No. 2016-O-22, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
Sec. 10-277. - Notice of intended suspension or revocation; reissuance after revocation; fees. 
(a)  Whenever any person fails to comply with this section, the city clerk may, upon ten days notification and after affording such person the opportunity to show cause why his/her permit should not be revoked, revoke or suspend any or all of the permits held by such person. The city clerk shall give to such person written notice of the suspension or revocation of any of his/her permits. 
(b)  The city clerk shall not approve a new permit after the revocation of a permit unless he/she is satisfied that the former holder of the permit will comply with the provisions of this section. 
(c)  A fee as set forth in the annual budget appendix fee schedule shall be imposed for the renewal or issuance of a permit which has been previously suspended or revoked. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.17(8); Ord. No. 2016-O-22, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
Secs. 10-278—10-282. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Short-Term Rentals 
 
Sec. 10-283. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this subdivision is to ensure short-term rentals operating within the city are adequate for protecting public health, safety and general welfare, including establishing minimum standards for human occupancy; determining the responsibilities of operators offering these properties for rent; to provide minimum standards necessary for the health and safety of persons occupying or using buildings, structures or premises as well as the surrounding community; and provisions for the administration and enforcement thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2020-O-04 , § 1, 1-28-2020)  
Sec. 10-284. - Short-term rental annual license required; application; fee. 
(a)  Every person who wishes to establish, operate, or maintain, or permit to be established, operated, or maintained upon any property owned, leased or controlled by him/her, a short-term rental within the city shall, on an annual basis, file with the city clerk an application for a license for each short-term rental. 
(b)  Every application for a short-term rental license shall be made upon a form prescribed by the city clerk and shall set forth the following information: name and address of the operator, the location of his/her short-term rental, the maximum proposed occupancy of the short-term rental, a statement that the proposed short-term rental is the primary residence of the operator, and such other information as the city clerk requires. 
(c)  The application shall be signed by the operator. 
(d)  The application shall include proof of a valid and current tourist rooming house license, as required by Wis. Stats. 66.1014(2)(d)2.a, issued by the Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade, and Consumer Protection or an agent thereof. 
(e)  The application shall include proof that the applicant has successfully completed an annual city building inspection department inspection to ensure compliance with Fitchburg Ordinances and Wisconsin Administrative Code ATCP Chapter 72. Said inspection must be conducted by the city building inspection department for each short-term rental location. In the event that the building inspection department identifies violations of Fitchburg Ordinances or Wisconsin Administrative Code ATCP Chapter 72, the applicant shall correct all violations prior to a license being issued. 
(f)  At the time of making an application, the applicant shall pay to the city clerk a fee as set forth in the annual budget appendix fee schedule. 
(g)  Each application shall be accompanied by a signed and notarized affidavit stipulating that the short-term rental is the operator's primary residence. 
(h)  No license shall be issued unless the applicant meets all of the requirements of subsections (a) through (g). 
(i)  The annual short-term rental license shall expire on June 30 of each year unless sooner revoked. 
(j)  No license shall be required for any short-term rental operated for a total of ten or less nights in a calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2020-O-04 , § 1, 1-28-2020)  
Sec. 10-285. - Issuance; transfer; display. 
After the applicant fully complies with section 10-284, the city clerk may either deny the application or grant and issue to applicant a separate license for each applied short-term rental, which shall indicate the maximum occupancy for the short-term rental. Any such granted license is not assignable and is valid only for the person in whose name it is issued, and only for the transaction of business at the place designated therein. The license shall at all times be conspicuously displayed at the place for which it was issued. 
(Ord. No. 2020-O-04 , § 1, 1-28-2020)  
Sec. 10-286. - Procedure upon denial. 
If the application for a license is denied, the applicant shall be given written notice of the reasons for denial and shall be given an opportunity to be heard thereon. If the applicant desires a public hearing, he/she shall file a written request therefor with the city clerk, and the public safety and human services committee shall hold a public hearing thereon no later than the second public safety and human services committee meeting following filing of the request for hearing. Public safety and human services commission will make a recommendation to the council and refer the matter to council for final determination. 
(Ord. No. 2020-O-04 , § 1, 1-28-2020)  
Sec. 10-287. - Failure to obtain license. 
(a)  Unless exempted by section 10-284(j), it shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or maintain, or permit to be established, operated or maintained upon any property owned, leased or controlled by him/her a short-term rental within the city without having first secured a valid and current license for each such short-term rental as provided in this subdivision. 
(b)  Unless exempted by section 10-284(j), it shall be unlawful for any person to list, advertise, or otherwise offer, whether via a lodging marketplace or in any other manner, a short-term rental within the city without having first secured a valid and current license for each such short-term rental as provided in this subdivision. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate, or maintain, or permit to be established, operated, or maintained upon any property owned, leased, or controlled by him or her a short-term rental which exceeds the maximum occupancy listed in the license or allowed under Fitchburg Ordinances or Wisconsin Administrative Code ATCP Chapter 72, whichever is smaller. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to list, advertise, or otherwise offer, whether via a lodging marketplace or in any other manner, a short-term rental which exceeds the maximum occupancy listed in the license or allowed under Fitchburg Ordinances or Wisconsin Administrative Code ATCP Chapter 72, whichever is smaller. 
(e)  For the purpose of enforcing compliance with the provisions of this subdivision, the building inspector or his or her designees may issue citations to the operator for violations of this subdivision in the amount specified in the city fee schedule. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2020-O-04 , § 1, 1-28-2020)  
Sec. 10-288. - Revocation process. 
(a)  The operator may be notified of any noncompliance of this chapter or any City of Fitchburg Ordinances or ATCP Chapter 72 violations by the building inspection department using the contact information provided by the operator on their annual short-term rental license application. The building inspection department may specify a deadline to correct the violation between one and five business days, depending on the violation. 
(b)  Within the time specified in the notice of noncompliance, the operator shall correct the violation to the satisfaction of the building inspection department. 
(c)  If the operator fails to timely correct the violation as required by subsection (b), the building inspection department may notify the city administrator of noncompliance and request permission to proceed with the revocation process. 
(d)  Upon approval from the city administrator, a hearing will be scheduled before the public safety and human services committee, who shall hear the matter and make a recommendation to the common council for final determination. The clerk shall notify the operator at the address provided on the license application at least two weeks prior to the hearing dates. 
(e)  Common council will conduct the final revocation hearing. The operator may be represented by an attorney. All other interested parties may also give testimony to the public safety and human services committee and/or the common council. A written decision of the common council will be made and will be provided to the operator. 
(f)  If the license is revoked, the operator may not apply for a new license for a period of 12 months from the date of the revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2020-O-04 , § 1, 1-28-2020)  
Secs. 10-289—10-302. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PURCHASING AND PUBLIC CONTRACTS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Local government purchasing, Wis. Stats. § 66.0131. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 10-303. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the following terms shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Committee means the finance committee of the common council. 
Council means the common council. 
Department means one of the following 13 city divisions as identified in the annual city budget: 
(1)  Finance; 
(2)  City clerk; 
(3)  Assessor; 
(4)  Building inspection; 
(5)  Zoning/planning; 
(6)  Public works; 
(7)  Senior center; 
(8)  Parks and recreation; 
(9)  Police; 
(10)  Fire; 
(11)  Cable; 
(12)  Administration; 
(13)  Economic development. 
Purchase of goods and services means any transaction between the city and any other party by which the city receives a tangible commodity or property, or a professional or nonprofessional service, except legal services. 
Purchased services means all nonconstruction purchased services including, but not limited to, financial services, consulting services, working bank, computer repair and janitorial services. 
Purchasing agent means the staff person designated by the city finance director to control the purchase of materials, machinery, equipment, services and supplies for the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.08(1))  
Sec. 10-304. - Duties of the purchasing agent. 
Under the supervision of the city finance director, the purchasing agent shall: 
(1)  Supervise, manage and control the purchase of supplies, materials and equipment for various city departments; 
(2)  Advertise for bids for purchases when required by state law or city ordinances or other directives of the city council; 
(3)  Maintain records and submit reports as directed by the city finance director, mayor or council; and 
(4)  Act as liaison with the state department of administration concerning city orders for bulk purchasing. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.08(2))  
Sec. 10-305. - Purchase of common goods and office supplies. 
All city departments shall order common office supplies, including copier paper, paper towels, stationery, etc., through the city purchasing agent. The city purchasing agent shall attempt to obtain discounts on common goods and office supplies through coordinating city orders with those of the state or other governmental agency for bulk purchasing. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.08(3))  
Sec. 10-306. - Purchase of services. 
All existing contracts for purchased services, regardless of degree of satisfaction, shall be reviewed by the finance committee no less frequently than once every three years, and shall be renegotiated or rebid as directed by a majority vote of the finance committee, under the direction of the city administrator and department heads responsible for the oversight of such purchased services. Selection of provider of a purchased service shall not be contingent solely on the lowest proposal received, but shall also consider the provider's qualifications, experience, and level of understanding of the scope of services to be performed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.08(4))  
Sec. 10-307. - General purchasing procedure. 
Purchases of city goods or services authorized by the adopted or amended city budget shall be accomplished as follows: 
(1)  Exceptions. Common goods and office supplies, monthly utility bills, monthly payments for employee benefits, payroll or payroll taxes, insurance, bonds, tax settlements with other taxing authorities, debt service payments, EMS contributions and metro bus payments and where the procedure would conflict with the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 62.15, 66.29, 66.295, other applicable state or federal laws or division 5 of this article. 
(2)  Major repairs or purchases. Repairs to infrastructure which exceed $10,000.00, or repairs which accumulate to and in a period of six months exceed $10,000.00 shall be reported to the finance committee prior to undertaking further repairs. 
(3)  Life cycle estimate. Purchase orders or contracts for materials, supplies or equipment may be awarded on the basis of life cycle cost estimates whenever that action is appropriate. The terms, conditions and evaluation criteria to be applied shall be incorporated into the solicitation of bids or proposals. The life cycle cost formula may include, but is not limited to, the applicable costs of energy efficiency, acquisition and conversion, money, transportation, warehousing and distribution, training, operation and maintenance, and disposition or resale. 
(4)  Intergovernmental or surplus stores purchases without bids. Notwithstanding any statute requiring bids for public purchases, the city may make purchases from another unit of government, including local, state or federal government, without the intervention of bids. This shall include the use of vendors identified through the state, county or other unit of government bid process. 
(5)  Sole source supplier without bids. Notwithstanding any statute requiring bids for public purchases, the city may make purchases from single source suppliers without the intervention of bids upon proof of exclusive product. Such documentation shall accompany purchase order or contract, and may be in memo form. 
(6)  Rejection of bids. The city reserves the right to reject any and all bid proposals so long as such rejections are reasonable and written explanations are provided. 
(7)  Purchase orders or contracts approved by finance director. Monthly utility bills, monthly payments for employee benefits, payroll or payroll taxes, insurance, bonds, tax settlements with other taxing authorities, debt service payments, EMS contributions and metro bus payments shall be considered usual and customary, regardless of amount, and shall be approved by the finance director. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.08(5); Ord. No. 2009-O-27, § 2.08(5)(i), (j), 12-8-2009) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 66.0131.  
Sec. 10-308. - Purchase orders or contracts—For less than $2,500.00. 
Purchase orders for goods or services costing less than $2,500.00 may be signed by the department head and the administrator with commitment toward obtaining the best value for the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.08(5); Ord. No. 2009-O-27, § 2.08(5)(i), (j), 12-8-2009)  
Sec. 10-309. - Same—For $2,500.00 to $25,000.00. 
Purchases or contracts for expenditure of $2,500.00 to $25,000.00 must receive at least three written estimates. The low quote shall be taken unless the department head provides written justification for exemption based on such issues as quality, prior performance, life-cycle cost and etc. All purchase orders in excess of $2,500.00 must be signed by the mayor. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.08(5); Ord. No. 2009-O-27, § 2.08(5)(i), (j), 12-8-2009)  
Sec. 10-310. - Same—Over $25,000.00 but less than $50,000.00. 
(a)  Prior approval required. Purchase orders or draft contracts for capital equipment or projects over $25,000.00 but less than $50,000.00 must go to the finance committee for approval prior to the placing of any purchase order or final preparation of any contract documents for council consideration. A list of items to be presented to the finance committee for approval shall be included with the common council packet, and the finance committee shall report to the common council the action to be taken on those items. 
(b)  Solicitations for purchases of services. Service contracts over $25,000.00 but less than $50,000.00 must be publicly advertised in the official city newspaper and in either a recognized publication or in a Class 1 newspaper. 
(c)  Solicitations for purchases of goods and equipment. All city purchases of goods or equipment involving city expenditures of more than $25,000.00 but less than $50,000.00 shall be authorized only in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  Formal bid specifications shall be prepared by city staff and made available to all bidders through the appropriate department. 
(2)  Notice of availability of bid specifications shall be published in the official city newspaper and in a Class 1 newspaper and subject to a sealed bid opening at city hall with the city clerk present, with determination of low bidder contingent upon analysis of life-cycle costs as appropriate. 
(3)  A copy of the contract proposed to be approved must be provided to the clerk and available for public review at least five days prior to action of the common council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.08(5); Ord. No. 2009-O-27, § 2.08(5)(i), (j), 12-8-2009)  
Sec. 10-311. - Same—For services, goods or equipment over $50,000.00. 
All city purchases of services, goods or equipment involving city expenditures of more than $50,000.00 shall be authorized only in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  Specifications for bids, request for proposals or request for qualifications. Formal specifications or proposals shall be prepared by city staff and made available to all bidders through the purchasing agent. 
(2)  Notice required. Notice of availability of specifications or request for proposals shall be published in the official city newspaper and in a Class 1 newspaper and subject to a sealed bid opening at city hall with the city clerk present, with determination of low bidder contingent upon full analysis of life-cycle costs. 
(3)  Public review period. A copy of the contract proposed to be approved must be provided to the clerk and available for public review at least five days prior to action of the city council. 
(4)  Resolution required. A formal resolution shall be submitted for review and action by the committee and the city council. 
(5)  Performance bond required. Bidders on goods and contracts of $50,000.00 or more must provide a performance bond equal to or in excess of the contract as set forth in the bid specification, or, the city will reserve ten percent of the contract price to be released only upon verification of satisfactory performance. 
(6)  Letters of credit. The city may require a letter of credit equal to ten percent of the contract price for a period of one year following completion of a project. 
(7)  Insurances required. Contractors and any subcontractors shall be required to carry their own worker's compensation coverage and liability insurance coverage of at least $1,000,000.00 per incident. 
(8)  Role of finance committee in reviewing and approving bids. The department head or city administrator shall refer three or more bids or quotes to the committee, with sufficient information to permit the committee to determine the low bidder. The committee shall make a recommendation for the most qualified low bid or quote to the common council in the form of a resolution. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.08(5); Ord. No. 2009-O-27, § 2.08(5)(i), (j), 12-8-2009)  
Sec. 10-312. - Local businesses encouraged to bid. 
The purchasing agent shall maintain an up-to-date list of businesses and concerns in the city and the products and services which they sell, and consult such list when soliciting quotes for items to be purchased. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.08(6))  
Sec. 10-313. - Women and minority-owned businesses to be encouraged to bid. 
The city will actively seek bids from minority- and women-owned and operated business. This policy will be promoted by keeping lists of interested minority- and women-owned businesses which contact the city and by contacting, in advance, appropriate vendors who are listed in the state department of development pamphlets titled "Wisconsin Minority-Owned Business" and "Wisconsin Women-Owned Businesses." 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.08(7))  
Sec. 10-314. - Purchasing of recycled products. 
The city will, to the extent practicable, make purchasing selections based on the extent to which the products contain recovered or recycled material and are recyclable. The recovered or recycled product shall always be preferred, providing that it does not exceed the price of a similar nonrecovered or nonrecycled product or compromise established standards for desired quality. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.08(8))  
Sec. 10-315. - Paper purchases. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Recovered or recycled products to be procured include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Writing, computer and copy paper; 
(2)  Envelopes; 
(3)  Paper toweling and toilet tissue; 
(4)  Shop rags and/or wiping cloths; 
(5)  Motor oil and gear lubricant; 
(6)  Tires; 
(7)  Plastic bags and/or can liners; and 
(8)  Recycling bins. 
(b)  State guidelines applicable. The city shall adhere to state guidelines for paper purchasing, such that the recovered or recycled fiber content, by weight, of all paper purchases is not less than 40 percent. 
(c)  Printing. All purchases of printing, such as newsletters, mailings, and all other purchased printing, shall conform to the specifications listed in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  Notice in bid specification required. All bid specifications shall contain a notice specifying that recycled products are preferred and will receive preference in the bid process. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.08(7))  
Sec. 10-316. - Restrictions on December purchases. 
No purchases shall be made in December of equipment, professional services or nonessential items without written approval of the city administrator. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.08(9))  
Secs. 10-317—10-335. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - EXPENDITURE OF CITY FUNDS 
 
Sec. 10-336. - Financial authority limited; records. 
(a)  Except as provided in this article, no agent of the city shall have any authority to employ labor or to purchase materials, supplies or any other commodities, bind the city or incur any indebtedness for which the city may become liable. 
(b)  Each such employment or purchase order shall be drawn against a specific appropriation, the money for which shall be available in the city treasury and not subject to any prior labor claims or material purchase orders at the time when such employment is negotiated or purchase order drawn. 
(c)  The city treasurer shall keep a record of such employment and purchase orders and shall charge them against the proper appropriation. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.09(3))  
Sec. 10-337. - State law applicable. 
All disbursements from the city treasury in satisfaction or payment of any bills, charges against the budget or other financial claims against the city shall be made pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0607 except as modified or supplemented by this section or other provisions of this Code or state law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.10(1))  
Sec. 10-338. - Issuance of city purchase orders. 
Purchase orders shall be issued and signed by department heads. It is the responsibility of the department head requesting the purchase order to provide all needed information, to ensure that funds have been budgeted to cover the requested expenditure and to designate the account to which the expenditure is to be charged. The department head has the responsibility and authority to refer any item to the city administrator where a question as to price, budget, adequacy, time of purchase, etc., exists. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.10(2))  
Sec. 10-339. - Payment of city funds. 
(a)  Documentation. The following documentation is required: 
(1)  A completed purchase order. 
(2)  Proof that the item or service has been received and is satisfactory. 
(3)  An invoice or other documentation from the vendor as authorized in the accounting procedures manual which has been verified as to quantity and price. 
(b)  Comptroller to review. The city comptroller shall review the documentation in subsection (a) of this section to ensure that all are in proper order and have been submitted. The city comptroller shall have the authority to request additional documentation when needed. 
(c)  Payment authorized and made. Payment will be authorized by Wis. Stats. § 66.0607(1) and made by the treasurer following the satisfactory completion of the procedure in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.10(2))  
Sec. 10-340. - Finance committee review of payments and city financial reports. 
Reports of payments and scheduled payments, except utility payments and employee salary payments, shall be regularly submitted to the common council and committee for their review. The reports shall contain the following information: check or invoice number, vendor, a description. The report of scheduled payments submitted to the committee shall also contain the account numbers. The committee may request additional information if needed to complete its review of the payments. The committee shall make recommendation to the common council based on its review. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.10(3))  
Sec. 10-341. - Common council review and approval. 
A list of payments shall be distributed to the common council members along with any comments or recommendations from the committee. Payments made in any other manner than prescribed in this subsection shall be subject to the special two-thirds vote of the common council and roll call requirements of Wis. Stats. § 66.0607(7). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.10(4))  
Sec. 10-342. - Facsimile signatures authorized. 
The signature of the mayor, clerk, and treasurer affixed to order checks of the city may be facsimile signatures of such officers adopted by them and approved by the common council on motion. The use of such facsimile signatures shall not relieve any of such officials from any liability to which they are otherwise subject, including the unauthorized use thereof. Upon enactment of this section and council approval of facsimile signatures adopted by the mayor, clerk and treasurer, the clerk shall file a certified copy of this section and of the approved facsimile signatures with the public depositories of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.10(5))  
Sec. 10-343. - Vouchers. 
All vouchers or orders against the city treasury shall be signed by the clerk (and mayor when required) attesting that the provisions of this division have been complied with. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.10(6))  
Sec. 10-344. - Tort claims. 
Compliance with the provisions of this division shall not relieve any claimant from compliance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 62.25, 893.80 or 895.46. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.10(7))  
Sec. 10-345. - Payment of regular wages or salaries. 
Payment of regular wages or salaries pursuant to the budget and salary schedule adopted by the common council shall be made by payroll, verified by the finance director and available in time for payment on the regular payday. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.10(8))  
Sec. 10-346. - Investments. 
The provisions of this division shall not apply to disbursements of city funds for purposes of investment under Wis. Stats. § 66.04(2). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.10(9))  
Secs. 10-347—10-365. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ASSETS 
 
Sec. 10-366. - Maintenance of accurate fixed asset reporting. 
(a)  All purchases of individual assets with an estimated useful life of five or more years, and an original value greater than $1,500.00 but less than $10,000.00, shall be listed on the fixed asset inventory maintained by department. Departmental fixed asset inventory list shall be reviewed by the department head and submitted annually in May to the finance director, showing additions and deletions of assets for the period since the last physical inventory. 
(b)  All purchases of assets with an estimated useful life of one or more years, and an original value greater than $10,000.00, shall be listed on the capitalized fixed asset inventory, which shall be maintained by the finance director. Upon physical delivery of an asset as described herein, the department head shall submit to the finance director a completed inventory description, including the make, model, vendor purchased from, estimated useful life, purchase price, and replacement value if significantly different from purchase price. A detailed listing of all additions and deletions of these assets will be completed annually. 
(c)  Physical inventory of assets except as noted in subsections 10-366(d), (e), and (f) shall be done annually in June. Departmental physical inventory shall be completed by a member of the department and a member of the finance department. Discrepancies between reported assets and physical inventory shall be reconciled and reported to the city administrator. 
(d)  Infrastructure assets of land, street lights, streets, sidewalks, bike paths, bridges, play structures affixed in parks, buildings and building improvements, will be listed separately and included as capitalized assets, if the original value exceeds $10,000.00, but will not be physically inventoried annually. A detailed listing of all additions and deletions of these assets will be completed annually. 
(e)  Intangible assets including easements, water rights, timber rights, patents, trademarks, and computer software (either purchased or internally written) will not be physically inventoried. A detailed listing of all additions and deletions of these assets will be completed annually. 
(f)  Utility assets and infrastructure will be recorded in compliance with public service commission rules. A detailed listing of all additions and deletions of these assets, with a useful life greater than five years and an original value of greater than $10,000.00 will be completed annually. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.11(1); Ord. No. 2014-O-08, 3-18-2014)  
Sec. 10-367. - Management and sale of surplus assets. 
(a)  Disposal. Disposal of surplus assets shall be prohibited, except as authorized in this division. 
(b)  Notification and listing of surplus assets. Should a department replace an asset which may still be of use to another city department, or which is anticipated to be sold; such asset should be reported in writing to the finance director as surplus. Notification shall include a description of the asset, including asset number, approximate value, location where the surplus item is to be stored and date the asset is no longer in service. The finance director shall prepare a notice of the surplus asset, and distribute to all departments. 
(c)  Request for transfer of surplus item to active use. Should a surplus asset be of value to a city department, department head should notify the finance director in writing. Notification shall include a description of the asset, including asset number, location where the surplus item is to be used and date the asset is put into service. 
(d)  Trade-in exception. Should an asset be utilized as a trade-in to reduce the cost of a newly purchased replacement item, department head should notify the finance director in writing. Notification shall include a description of the asset, including asset number, trade-in allowance, and date the asset is no longer in service. 
(e)  Obsolescence or items for disposal. Should an asset that has been previously included on either a departmental fixed asset inventory or the capitalized fixed asset inventory be deemed of no value due to obsolescence, damage or disrepair, the department head should notify the finance director in writing of the desire to dispose of such item. Notification shall be through completion of a disposal of fixed asset form available from the finance director. Fixed assets may not be disposed of until approved by the city administrator in writing. 
(f)  Sale of assets. Should an asset be deemed of value, but not of use to the city, the city administrator shall direct that a notice be posted to offer the item to the highest bidder via a sealed bid process. The city retains the right to reject any or all bids. 
(g)  Contents of notice. The notice shall contain a description of the asset, minimum bid if any, and the date, time and location of the bid opening. Copies of the notification of asset sale shall be provided to the mayor and common council. 
(h)  Establishing minimum bid. If the value of the asset is estimated to be less than $5,000.00, the city administrator shall set the minimum bid. If the value of the asset is estimated to be greater than $5,000.00, the finance committee shall set the minimum bid. If the minimum bid is greater than $10,000.00, notice shall also be placed in newspapers, magazines or other media as deemed appropriate to obtain sufficient bid responses. The finance committee must approve the sale of assets with a minimum bid value greater than $10,000.00. 
(i)  Surplus auction exception. If the asset is placed for sale through a bona fide surplus auction, requirements in subsections 10-367(f) (sealed bid), (g) (bid notice) and (h) (minimum bid), may be waived. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.11(2), (3); Ord. No. 2014-O-08, 3-18-2014)  
Sec. 10-368. - Insurance coverage. 
The finance director shall notify the city clerk of assets which should be added to or removed from city insurances. All fixed assets shall be insured for property damage; vehicles, apparatus and contractor's equipment shall also be reported to the general liability insurer. The city clerk shall maintain a central file for warranties and other information related to the servicing under warranty for fixed assets. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.11(4))  
Sec. 10-369. - Repair logs and vehicle records. 
Departments shall maintain a detailed log of in-house and out-sourced repairs and maintenance, including time out of service and costs associated with repairs, to assist in determining the need for equipment replacement. The city clerk shall maintain a central file for each vehicle including certification of insurance coverage, title, and copy of fixed asset inventory card listing. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.11(5))  
Sec. 10-370. - Use of city facilities. 
Policies for the rental or other private use of each city owned facility shall be reviewed and updated as necessary, including any fees or charges established. Such policy shall be approved by the finance committee and common council by resolution, and kept on file with the city clerk. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.11(6))  
Secs. 10-371—10-398. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - AUDITS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Local government audits and reports, Wis. Stats. § 66.0605. 
 
Sec. 10-399. - Annual audit of city accounts. 
The council shall budget for and require an annual detailed audit of financial transactions and accounts by the bureau of municipal audit in the state department of revenue or by a certified public accountant, licensed by the state, with expertise in municipal audits. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.12(1))  
Sec. 10-400. - Contents of audit. 
The audit shall include a separate review of the city's financial records and a statement of opinion on the financial reports together with a management letter detailing improvements that can be made in the financial administration of the city, and the city water utility. An audit contract may be made to include an operational review of one or more aspects of the city, or city water utility operations. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.12(2))  
Sec. 10-401. - Distribution of audit report. 
Copies of the completed audit report shall be transmitted to the mayor and council members within ten days of receipt. Copies will also be placed on file with the city clerk. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 2.12(3))  
Secs. 10-402—10-430. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal public works, contracts, and bids, Wis. Stats. § 66.0901. 
 
Sec. 10-431. - Contracts; how let. 
(a)  Purpose. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.15(1) and (6) and 66.0901, whenever the city lets public works by contract with an estimated construction cost greater than $1,000,000.00, the contract must be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. What constitutes a responsible bidder is a determination that requires the exercise of discretion by the city. This section is intended to ensure that bids are reviewed by the city and its departments, officials or employees under reasonably consistent responsible bidder criteria when exercising its discretion. 
(1)  Definitions. In this section, the following definitions shall apply. 
Contractor means a person, corporation, partnership or any other business entity that performs work on a public works contract as a general contractor, prime contractor or subcontractor at any tier. 
Public works contract means a contract for the construction, alteration, execution, repair, remodeling or improvement of a public work or building, where the contract is required to be bid pursuant to Wis. Stats. § [59.52(29) for counties; 62.15(1) and (6) for cities; 61.54 and 62.15(1) and (6) for villages; 60.47(3) for towns]. 
(2)  Responsible bidder criteria. In order to be a responsible bidder for purposes of being awarded a public works contract, the contractor must meet the following criteria. 
a.  The contractor maintains a permanent place of business. 
b.  The contractor is authorized to do business in the State of Wisconsin. 
c.  The contractor shall participate in a State of Wisconsin approved apprenticeship program, or participates in a State of Wisconsin-certified pre-apprenticeship program in lieu of (or in addition to) registered apprentices, or have a written alternative training program sufficient to ensure that its employees may safely perform the work required by the public works contract. 
d.  The contractor, or agent, partner, employee or officer of the contractor, is not debarred, suspended, proposed for debarment or declared ineligible from contracting with any unit of federal, state or local government. 
e.  The contractor is in compliance with provisions of Section 2000e of Chapter 21, Title 42 of the United States Code and Federal Executive Order No. 11246 as amended by Executive Order No. 11375 (known as the Equal Opportunity Employer provisions). 
f.  The contractor has general liability, workers' compensation, unemployment, and automobile insurance at levels sufficient to protect the city given the size of the public works. 
g.  The contractor has complied with all provisions of Wisconsin prevailing wage law and federal Davis-Bacon related Acts, and all rules and regulations therein, for projects undertaken by the contractor that are covered by these laws, for the past five years. 
h.  The contractor has a written substance abuse prevention program meeting the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 103.503. As required by Wis. Stats. § 103.503, all employees must be subject to drug and alcohol testing before commencing work on the public works project, except that testing of an employee before commencing work on a project is not required if the employee has been participating in a random testing program during the 90 days preceding the date on which the employee commenced work on the public works project. 
i.  The employees who will perform work on the project are properly classified as employees or independent contractors under all applicable state and federal laws. 
j.  The contractor has not been the subject of any investigation, order or judgment from any state or federal agency or court concerning an employment practice, including, but not limited to, classification of employees, unemployment insurance, or discrimination. If the contractor has been the subject of any investigation, order or judgment from any state or federal agency or court concerning an employment practice, the contractor must provide copies of the investigation, order or judgment. The city shall review the investigation, order or judgment and determine whether the facts and circumstances are such that the contractor is not a responsible bidder. 
k.  The contractor's employees who will perform work on the project are: 
1.  Covered under a current workers' compensation policy; and 
2.  Properly classified under such policy. 
l.  The contractor possesses all applicable professional and trade licenses required for performing the public works. 
m.  The contractor has adequate financial resources to complete the public works contract, as well as all other work the bidder is presently under contract to complete. 
n.  The contractor is bondable for the terms of the proposed public works contract. 
o.  The contractor has a record of satisfactorily completing at least five projects of similar size and complexity within the last five years. Criteria which will be considered in determining satisfactory completion of projects may include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Completion of contracts in accordance with drawings and specifications; 
2.  Diligent execution of the work and completed contracts according to the established time schedules unless extensions are granted by the owner; and 
3.  Fulfilled guarantee requirements of the contract documents. 
For projects that are unique and/or utilize new technology, the public works director may accept a list of comparable projects to satisfy this requirement. 
p.  The contractor has, and diligently maintains, a written safety program. 
q.  The contractor was not placed in OSHA's severe violator enforcement program in the previous two years. 
(3)  No restriction on discretion. If information other than what must be disclosed by the contractor in subsection (2) is discovered by the city or the department, official or employee responsible for awarding the public works contract, and such information calls into question the contractor's capacity or competence to faithfully and responsibly comply with the terms of a public works contract, that information shall be considered in determining whether the contractor is a responsible bidder. 
(4)  Affidavit of compliance. The general or prime contractor bidding on a public works project must include in its sealed bid; its own affidavit swearing compliance with the criteria set forth in subsection (2) on the form required by the city. 
Failure to submit the required affidavit, or providing incorrect, false, or misleading information shall automatically disqualify the contractor's bid. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 18.01; Ord. No 2009-O-33, § 1, 12-8-2009; Ord. No. 2020-O-06 , § 1, 1-28-2020)  
Sec. 10-432. - Escalator clauses. 
(a)  Contracts may include escalator clauses providing for additional charges for labor and materials if as a result of general inflation the rates and prices of the same to the contractor increase during performance of the contract. Such escalator provision shall be applicable to all bidders and shall not exceed 15 percent of the amount of the firm bid nor the amount of the increase paid by the contractor. 
(b)  Each bid on a contract which is to include an escalator provision shall be accompanied by a schedule enumerating the estimated rates and prices of items of labor and materials used in arriving at the bid. Only as to such items as are enumerated shall an increased charge be allowed the contractor. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 18.02)  
Sec. 10-433. - Exception as to public emergency. 
The notice and bidding requirements of this division and the preapproval provisions of Wis. Stats. § 281.41 are not mandatory for the repair and reconstruction of public facilities when damage or threatened damage thereto creates an emergency in which the public health or welfare of the city is endangered, as determined by resolution of the board of public works. Whenever the common council determines by majority vote at a regular or special meeting that such emergency no longer exists, this subsection no longer applies. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 18.03)  
Sec. 10-434. - Increased quantity clauses. 
Contracts may include clauses providing for increasing the quantity of construction required in the original contract by an amount not to exceed 15 percent of the original contract price. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 18.04)  
Sec. 10-435. - Plans; contract; bond. 
When the work is required or directed to be let to the lowest responsible bidder, the board of public works shall oversee the preparation of plans and specifications for the same, containing a description of the work, the materials to be used and such other matters as will give an intelligent idea of the work required and file the same with the city clerk for the inspection of bidders, and shall also oversee the preparation of a form of contract and bond with sureties required, and furnish a copy of the same to all persons desiring to bid on the work and shall in other respects follow the procedures of Wis. Stats. §§ 62.15, 66.0901, and 66.0903. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 18.05)  
Sec. 10-436. - Advertisement for bids; bid bonds. 
(a)  After the plans, specifications, and form of contract have been prepared, the board of public works shall advertise for proposals for doing such work by publishing a Class 2 notice under Wis. Stats. ch. 985. 
(b)  No bid shall be received unless accompanied by a certified check or a bid bond equal to at least five percent but not more than ten percent of the bid payable to the city as a guaranty that if the bid is accepted the bidder will execute and file the proper contract and bond within the time limited by the city. 
(c)  If the successful bidder so files the contract and bond, upon the execution of the contract by the city the check shall be returned. In case the successful bidder fails to file such contract and bond, the amount of the check or bid bond shall be forfeited to the city as liquidated damages. 
(d)  The notice published shall inform bidders of this requirement. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 18.06)  
Sec. 10-437. - Sureties justification; cash in lieu of surety. 
The sureties shall justify as to their responsibility and by their several affidavits show that they are worth in the aggregate at least the amount mentioned in the contract in property not by law exempt from execution. A certified check in amount equal to five percent of the bid, and a provision in the contract for the retention by the city of 20 percent of the estimates made from time to time may be accepted in place of sureties. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 18.07)  
Sec. 10-438. - Substantial compliance. 
If any certified check or bid bond is in substantial compliance with the minimum guaranty requirements of this division, the board of public works may, in its discretion, accept such check or bid bond and allow such bidder 30 days to furnish such additional guaranty as may be required by said authority. Substantial compliance hereunder may be found if said check or bond is insufficient by not more than one-fourth of one percent of the bid. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 18.08)  
Sec. 10-439. - Rejection of bids. 
The power to reject any and all bids shall exist unless expressly waived. The board of public works may reject any and all bids, if, in its opinion, any combination has been entered into to prevent free competition. The common council may, if it be of the opinion that any of the bids are fraudulent, collusive, excessive or against the best interests of the city, by resolution adopted by two-thirds of its members, reject any or all of the bids received and order the work done by the city directly under the supervision of the board of public works. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 18.09)  
Sec. 10-440. - Incompetent or unreliable bidders. 
Whenever any bidder shall be, in the judgment of the board of public works, incompetent or otherwise unreliable for the performance of the work on which it bids, the board shall report to the common council a schedule of all the bids for such work, together with a recommendation to accept the bid of the lowest responsible bidder, with reasons; and thereupon the common council may direct the board either to let the work to such competent and reliable bidder or to readvertise the same. Failure to let such contract to the lowest bidder in compliance with this provision shall not invalidate such contract or any special assessment made to pay the liability incurred thereunder. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 18.10)  
Sec. 10-441. - Patented material or process. 
Any public work, whether chargeable in whole or in part to the city, or to any lots or parcels of land therein, may be done by the use of a patented article, materials or process, in whole or in part, or in combination with articles, materials, or processes not patented, when the city shall have obtained from the owner of the patented article, materials or process, before advertising for bids for such work, an agreement to furnish to any contractor desiring to bid upon such work as a whole, the right to use the patented article, materials and processes in the construction of said work, and also to furnish to any contractor the patented article itself upon the payment of what the board of public works shall determine to be a reasonable price therefor, which price shall be publicly stated and furnished upon application to any contractor desiring to bid on said work. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 18.11)  
Sec. 10-442. - Alternative plans and specifications. 
Different plans and specifications requiring the use of different kinds of materials, whether patented or not, may be prepared for any public work under the supervision of the board of public works, thereby bringing one kind of article, material or process in competition with one or more other kinds of articles, materials or processes designed to accomplish the same general purpose; and bids may be received for each such kind of article, material or process; and thereafter, a contract let for one kind of article, material or process; provided, before any contract is let, all the bids received shall be opened and considered before the kind of article or process to be used in such work shall be decided upon by the board, and thereupon the city engineer shall determine which kind of article, material or process shall be used in the work, and the contract shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder for the kind of article, material or process so selected for use in the proposed public work. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 18.12)  
Sec. 10-443. - Guaranty. 
Any contract for doing public work may contain a provision requiring the contractor to keep the work done under such contract in good order or repair for not more than five years after completion. The inclusion in the contract of any such provision shall not invalidate any special assessment or certificate thereof or tax sale certificate based thereon. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 18.13)  
Sec. 10-444. - Estimates; deposit; default; completion. 
(a)  As the work progresses under any contract for the performance of which a surety bond has been furnished, Wis. Stats. § 66.0901 shall apply. 
(b)  All contracts shall contain a provision authorizing the board of public works, in case the work under any contract is defaulted or not completed within the time required, to take charge of or authorize the surety to take charge of the work and finish it at the expense of the contractor and the sureties, and to apply the amounts retained from estimates to the completion of the work. In no case shall the five percent deposit described in this division be returned to a successful bidder until the contract is performed; but it, together with the retained amounts, shall be used in whole or in part to complete the work. 
(c)  Any amount remaining from the deposit or from retained estimates after the completion of the contract shall be paid to the contractor. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 18.14)  
Sec. 10-445. - Street obstruction. 
All contractors doing any work which shall in any manner obstruct the streets or sidewalks shall put up and maintain barriers and lights to prevent accidents, and be liable for all damages caused by failure so to do. All contracts shall contain a provision covering this liability, and also a provision making the contractor liable for all damages caused by the negligent digging up of streets, alleys or public grounds, or which may result from his/her carelessness in the prosecution of such work. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 18.15)  
Sec. 10-446. - Contracts; how executed. 
All contracts shall be signed by the mayor and city administrator unless otherwise provided by resolution or ordinance, and approved as to form by the city attorney. No contract shall be executed on the part of the city until the city administrator shall have countersigned the same and made an endorsement thereon showing that sufficient funds are in the treasury to meet the expense thereof, or that provision has been made to pay the liability that will accrue thereunder. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 18.16)  
Sec. 10-447. - Report to common council of nonbid contracts. 
(a)  Whenever the common council shall have provided that any class of public work or any part thereof may be done directly by the city without submitting the same for bids, and any such public work shall be done in accordance with such ordinance, the board of public works shall keep an accurate account of the cost thereof, including the necessary overhead expense. 
(b)  Upon the completion of such work the board of public works shall make a complete report thereof to the common council, stating in detail the items of cost and the total cost of doing such work, and the city clerk shall publish such report as part of the proceedings of the common council. 
(c)  Any member of the board of public works who fails to comply with the provisions of this section shall be liable to a forfeiture of $50.00 to be recovered as in the case of other penalties. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 18.17)  
Chapter 12 - CITY RECORDS AND PROPERTY  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Custody and delivery of public records and property. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Property and things includes, but not be limited to, the following: documents, records, files, papers, handwritten, typed or printed pages, drafts, notes, informal notations, preliminary computations, points with authorities, and other materials prepared either as records or for the purpose of preserving remembrance or memory of what the author had done to discharge the duties of his/her office or employment, files, maps, surveys, charts, photographs, films, recordings, tapes (including computer tapes), computer printouts, monies, books, and furniture, pertaining to, belonging to, or preserved in his/her office of employment. 
Record means any material on which written, drawn, printed, spoken, visual or electromagnetic information is recorded or preserved, regardless of physical form of characteristics, which has been created or is being kept by said authority. 
(b)  Except as provided under article IV of this chapter, each and every officer and employee of the city is the legal custodian of and shall safely keep and preserve without exception all property and things: 
(1)  Which are received from his/her predecessor or other persons and required by law to be filed, deposited or kept in his/her office; 
(2)  Which are in the lawful possession or control of his/her deputies; or 
(3)  Which possession, or control he/she may be lawfully entitled, as such officers or employees. 
(c)  Upon the expiration of his/her term of office or employment, or whenever his/her office or position of employment becomes vacant, each such officer or employee or on his/her death, his/her legal representative shall deliver to his/her successor all such property and things without exception then in his/her custody, and his/her successor shall receipt to said officer or employee, who shall file said receipt with the city clerk. 
(d)  If a vacancy occurs before such successor is qualified, all such property and things without exception shall be delivered to and be receipted for by the city clerk, on behalf of the successor, to be delivered to such successor upon the latter's receipt. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 19.02; Ord. No. 2016-O-03, 1-26-2016)  
Secs. 12-2—12-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC ACCESS TO RECORDS 
 
Sec. 12-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authority means any of the following having custody of a city record: a local office, elected or appointed official, agency, board, commission, committee, council, department or public body corporate and politic created by constitution, law, ordinance, rule or order; or a formally constituted subunit of any of the foregoing. The term "authorities" include, but is not limited to, the city clerk, who shall also have custody of the records of the city council; the deputy clerk, the treasurer, police chief, fire chief, clerk of municipal court, director of welfare, utility manager, the assessor, the building inspector, the superintendent of highways, the parks commission, the civil service commission, the attorney, the accountant, the engineer, the environmental inspector, the civil defense commission, the cable commission and such other authorities as may be established or created from time to time unless at the time of their establishment or creation some other custodian is expressly designated. 
Record means any material on which written, drawn, printed, spoken, visual or electromagnetic information is recorded or preserved, regardless of physical form or characteristics, which has been created or is being kept by an authority. The term "record" includes, but is not limited to, handwritten, typed or printed pages, maps, charts, photographs, films, recordings, tapes (including computer tapes), and computer printouts. The term "record" does not include drafts, notes, preliminary computations and like materials prepared for the originator's personal use or prepared by the originator in the name of a person for whom the originator is working unless and until such materials are submitted to an authority for its review, consideration or action; materials which are purely the personal property of the custodian and have no relation to his/her office; materials to which access is limited by copyright, patent or bequest; and published materials in the possession of an authority other than a public library which are available for sale, or which are available for Inspection at a public library. 
Requester means any person who requests inspection or copies of a record. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 19.04)  
Sec. 12-22. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  In recognition of the fact that a representative government is dependent upon an informed electorate, it is declared to be the public policy of the city that all persons are entitled to the greatest possible information regarding the affairs of government and the official acts of those officers and employees who represent them. Further, providing persons with such information is declared to be an essential function of a representative government and an integral part of the routine duties of officers and employees whose responsibility it is to provide such information. 
(b)  To that end, this article shall be construed in every instance with a presumption of complete public access, consistent with the conduct of government business. The denial of public access generally is contrary to the public interest, and only in an exceptional case may access be denied. 
(c)  Any matters pertaining to public access to records which are not included in this article is governed by Wis. Stats. §§ 19.31 through 19.39 and other applicable sections of state law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 19.03)  
Sec. 12-23. - Legal custodians; authorities and their designates. 
(a)  An elected or appointed official is the legal custodian of his/her records and the records of his/her office, but the official may designate an employee of his/her staff to act as the legal custodian. 
(b)  The chairperson of a committee, commission or board of elected or appointed officials, or the designee or the chairperson, is the legal custodian of the records of the committee. 
(c)  The co-chairpersons of a joint committee, commission or board of elected or appointed officials, or the designee of the co-chairpersons, are the legal custodians of the records of the joint committee, commission or board. 
(d)  Every authority not specified in this section shall designate in writing one or more positions occupied by an officer or employee of the authority or the unit of government of which it is a part as a legal custodian to fulfill its duties under this article. In the absence of a designation the authority's highest ranking officer and the chief administrative officer, if any, are the legal custodians for the authority. 
(e)  The legal custodian shall be vested by the authority with full legal power to render decisions and carry out the duties of the authority under this article. Each authority shall provide the name of the legal custodian and a description of the nature of his/her duties under this article to all employees of the authority entrusted with records subject to the legal custodian's supervision. 
(f)  The legal custodian of records maintained in a publicly owned or leased building or the authority appointing the legal custodian shall designate one or more deputies to act as legal custodian of such records in his/her absence or as otherwise required to respond to requests as provided in this article. 
(g)  The designation of a legal custodian does not affect the powers and duties of an authority under this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 19.05)  
Sec. 12-24. - Right of inspection. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law, any requester has a right to inspect any record. Substantive common law principles construing the right to inspect, copy or receive copies of records shall remain in effect. The exemptions to the requirement of a governmental body to meet in open session under section Wis. Stats. § 19.85 are indicative of public policy, but may be used as grounds for denying public access to a record only if the authority or legal custodian makes a specific demonstration that there is a need to restrict public access at the time that the request to inspect or copy the record is made. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by law, any requester has a right to inspect a record and to make or receive a copy of a record which appears in written form. If a requester requests a copy of the record, the authority having custody of the record may, at his/her option, permit the requester to photocopy the record or provide the requester with a copy substantially as readable as the original. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by law, any requester has a right to receive from an authority having custody of a record which is in the form of a comprehensible audio tape recording, a copy of the tape recording substantially as audible as the original. The authority may instead provide a transcript of the recording to the requester if he/she requests. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by law, any requester has a right to receive from an authority having custody of a record which is in the form of a videotape recording a copy of the tape recording substantially as good as the original. 
(e)  Except as otherwise provided by law, any requester has a right to inspect any record not specified in this section the form of which does not permit copying. If a requester requests permission to photograph the record, the authority having custody of the record may permit the requester to photograph the record. If a requester requests that a photograph of the record be provided, the authority shall provide a good quality photograph of the record. 
(f)  This section does not apply to a record which has been or will be promptly published with copies offered for sale or distribution. 
(g)  Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, a legal custodian may impose reasonable restrictions on the manner of access to an original record if the record is irreplaceable or easily damaged. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 19.06(1); Ord. No. 2016-O-03, 1-26-2016)  
Sec. 12-25. - Facilities. 
The authority shall provide any person who is authorized to inspect or copy a record with facilities comparable to those used by city employees to inspect, copy, and abstract the record during established business hours. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 19.06(2))  
Sec. 12-26. - Fees. 
(a)  The requester shall be charged for photocopying. The fees charged by custodians for photocopies shall be uniform, shall be set by the city council, and shall not exceed the actual, necessary, and direct cost of reproduction 
(b)  The requester shall be charged the actual, necessary, and direct cost of photographing and photographic processing if the custodian provides a photograph of any record, the form of which does not permit copying. 
(c)  The requester shall be charged the actual, necessary, and direct cost of transcribing any tape recording whenever a transcript has not been and would not ordinarily be prepared by the authority but for the request. 
(d)  The requester shall be charged the actual, necessary and direct, cost of reproducing any film, computer printouts, and audio or video recordings. 
(e)  The requester shall be charged the actual, necessary and direct cost of mailing or shipping. 
(f)  The charge for locating a record shall be established as set forth in the annual budget appendix fee schedule, in which case the actual, necessary, and direct cost of location shall be determined by the authority and charged to the requester. 
(g)  An authority may require prepayment by a requester of any fees imposed under this subsection if the total amount exceeds the amount as set forth in the annual budget appendix fee schedule. 
(h)  Elected and appointed officials of the city shall not be required to pay for copies of records reasonably required for the proper performance of their official duties. 
(i)  An authority may provide copies of a record without charge or at a reduced charge where he/she determines that waiver or reduction of the fee is in the public interest. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 19.06(3))  
Sec. 12-27. - Access procedure. 
(a)  Availability of records. A requester may have access to records during all regular office hours at the location where the records are kept. If a record of any authority is occasionally taken to a location other than the location where records of that authority are regularly kept, the record shall be made available for inspection at the place where it is regularly kept upon one business day's notice. 
(b)  Making a request. A request to inspect or copy a record shall be made to the authority or custodian. A request shall be deemed sufficient if it reasonably describes the requested record or the information requested. However, a request for a record without a reasonable limitation as to subject matter or length of time represented by the record does not constitute a sufficient request. A request may be made orally or in writing. 
(c)  Filling a request. Each custodian, upon request for any record, shall, as soon as practicable and without delay, either fill the request or notify the person making the request of the custodian's determination to deny the request in whole or in part and the reasons therefor. If the custodian determines that a written request is so general as to be unduly time consuming, the party making the request may first be required to itemize his/her request in a manner which would permit reasonable compliance. 
(d)  Denial of a request. If a request is made orally, the custodian may deny it orally unless a demand for a written statement of the reasons for denying the request is made by the requester within five business days of the oral denial. If a written request is denied in whole or in part, a written statement of the reasons for denying the request shall be given to the requester. Every written denial of a request shall inform the requester that where a request is made in writing, the denial is subject to review upon petition for a writ of mandamus in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 19.37(1). 
(e)  Restrictions on inspection. The authority or custodian may require supervision during inspection or may impose other reasonable restrictions on the manner of access to an original record if the record is irreplaceable or easily damaged. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 19.07)  
Secs. 12-28—12-57. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LIMITATIONS ON ACCESS TO RECORDS 
 
Sec. 12-58. - Exempt records. 
The following records shall be exempt from inspection: 
(1)  Records specifically exempted from disclosure by state or federal law or authorized to be exempted from disclosure by state law. 
(2)  Any record relating to investigative information obtained for law enforcement purposes if federal law or regulations require exemption from disclosure or if exemption from disclosure is a condition to receipt of aids by the state. 
(3)  Computer programs, although the material used as input for a computer program or the material produced as a product of the computer program shall be subject to inspection. 
(4)  A record or any portion of a record containing information qualifying as a common law trade secret. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 19.08(1))  
Sec. 12-59. - Potential harm to public interest. 
An authority may deny a request to inspect a record which is not specifically exempt from disclosure, in whole or in part, only if he/she determines that the harm to the public interest resulting from disclosure would outweigh the public interest in full access to the requested record. Inspection may be denied, for example, when the requisite determination has been made and: 
(1)  The records were obtained under official pledges of confidentiality which were necessary and given in order to obtain the information contained in them. 
(2)  The record relates to current deliberations in a quasi-judicial hearing. 
(3)  The record relates to current deliberations concerning employment, dismissal, promotion, demotion, compensation, performance or discipline or any city officer or employee, or the investigation of charges against a city officer or employee, unless such officer or employee consents to disclosure. 
(4)  The record relates to the formulation of current strategy for crime detection or prevention. 
(5)  The record relates to current deliberations or negotiations concerning the purchase of public property, investment of public funds, or other public business whenever competitive or bargaining reasons require nondisclosure. 
(6)  The record contains financial, medical, social or personal histories or disciplinary data of specific persons which, if disclosed, would be likely to have a substantial adverse effect upon the reputation of any person referred to in such history or data. 
(7)  The record contains communications between legal counsel for the city and any officer, agent or employee of the city, wherein advice is rendered concerning strategy with respect to litigation in which the city or any of its officers, agents or employees is or is likely to become involved. 
(8)  The record is subject to any privilege created by Wis. Stats. ch. 905. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 19.08(2); Ord. No. 2016-O-03, 1-26-2016)  
Sec. 12-60. - Mixed records. 
If a record contains a mixture of information that may be made public and of information that may not be made public, the authority shall provide the information that may be made public and delete the information that may not be made public from the record before permitting the record to be inspected. If, in the judgment of the authority, there is no feasible way to separate the exempt material from the nonexempt material without unreasonably jeopardizing nondisclosure of the exempt material, the entire record shall be withheld from disclosure. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 19.08(3))  
Sec. 12-61. - Confidentiality of certain financial records provided to the city assessor. 
(a)  Whenever the assessor, in the performance of the assessor's duties, requests or obtains income and expense information pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 70.47(7)(af) or any successor statute thereto, then, such income and expense information that is provided to the assessor shall be held by the assessor on a confidential basis; except, however, that the information may be revealed to and used by persons in the discharging of duties imposed by law, in the discharge of duties imposed by office (including, but not limited to, use by the assessor in performance of official duties of the assessor's office and use by the board of review in performance of its official duties), or pursuant to order of a court. 
(b)  Income and expense information provided to the assessor under Wis. Stats. § 70.47(7)(af), unless a court determines that it is inaccurate, is pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 70.47(7)(af) not subject to the right of inspection and copying under Wis. Stats. § 19.35(1). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 19.08(4))  
Secs. 12-62—12-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DESTRUCTION OF RECORDS 
 
Secs. 12-81. - Retention schedule. 
Records shall be retained pursuant to the schedule attached as approved by the State of Wisconsin Public Records Board on August 19, 2013. Following expiration of the retention period approved by the public records board, obsolete records may be destroyed. 
CITY OF FITCHBURG RECORDS RETENTION SCHEDULE 
Records Series 	Retention 	Authority 	Notification 
Assessors 
Personal Property 			
 Assessor's Final Report 	CR + 5 		Waived 
 Assessor's Personal Property Summary Worksheet 	CR + 5 		Waived 
 Final Personal Property Assessment Roll 	CR + 15: provided "no assessment roll containing forest crop acreage may be destroyed without prior approval of the secretary of revenue" 	§ 19.21(5)(a) 	Waived 
 Merchants' Professions' Statement of Property 	CR + 5 		Waived 
 Occupational Tax Returns 	CR + 5 		Waived 
 Personal Property Worksheets/Farmers & Personal Property Not Used for the Production of Income 	CR + 5 		Waived 
 Report of Inventory Location (Form 10) 	CR + 5 	§ 71.11(44) 	Waived 
 Request for Exemption of Merchandise in Storage 	CR + 3 		Waived 
 Statement of Merchandise Exempted 	CR + 3 		Waived 
Real Property 	*** 		
 Assessor's Final Report 	CR + 5 		Waived 
 Assessor's Final Report Supplement 	CR + 5 		Waived 
 Certificate of ORAP Valuations, PC-219 	CR + 10 		Waived 
 Final Real Property Assessment Roll 	CR + 15: provided "no assessment roll containing forest crop acreage may be destroyed without prior approval of the secretary of revenue" 	§ 19.21(5)(a) 	Waived 
 Final Statement of Assessment, PA-521C 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Index to Owners 	EVT: EVT = Superseded 		Waived 
 Master Property Record Folders 	EVT + 5: EVT = Life of Structure 	WMRM 	Notify 
 Notice of Increased Assessment, appealed 	EVT + 7: EVT = Final action of board or Completion of appeal 		Waived 
 Notice of Increased Assessment, non-appealed 	CR + 5 	WMRM 	Waived 
 Statement of Assessment, PA-521 	EVT: EVT = Life of Assessment 		Waived 
 Tax Exemption Reports 	CR + 10 		Waived 
 TID Final Reports (Real Estate) 	CR + 5 		Waived 
 TID Final Reports (Personal Property) 	CR + 5 		Waived 
 Wisconsin Real Estate Transfer Returns 	EVT + 5: EVT = Information transferred to the master property record folder 	§ 77.23 	Waived 
Building Inspection 
Building Permits and Inspection 			
 Applications and permits 	Permanent 		Waived 
 Building Plans, commercial and industrial 	EVT + 1: EVT = Building complete 		N/A 
 Building Plans, residential 	EVT: EVT = Occupancy 		Waived 
 Certificates of Occupancy 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Code Compliance Inspection Reports 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Energy Calculation Worksheets 	CR + 3 		Waived 
 Inspection Address File 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Permit Cards, building permits 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Permit Fee Receipts 	EVT + 7: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
 Permit Ledger 	CR + 7 		Waived 
 Permits, signs 	EVT: EVT = Life of Sign 		Waived 
 Property Files 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Quarter Section Maps, copies 	EVT: EVT = Superseded 		Waived 
 State Approved Commercial Building Plans 	CR + 4 		Waived 
 Structure Plans for Municipal Buildings and Bridges 	EVT: EVT = Life of Structure 		Waived 
Clerk 
Ordinances 			
 Ordinances and Resolutions 	EVT: EVT = Superseded 		Waived 
 Ordinances and Resolutions, approved 	EVT: EVT = Superseded 		Notify 
 Ordinances and Resolutions, drafts 	EVT: EVT = Superseded 		Waived 
Elections 			
 Campaign 			
  Election Campaign Financial Reports, EB - 2 	CR + 6 	§ 7.23(1)(d) 	Waived 
  Election Campaign Registration Statements, 
EB - 1 	CR + 6 	§ 7.23(1)(d) 	Waived 
 Election Records and Supplies 			
  Applications for Absentee Ballots, 	FED EVT + 22 months: EVT = Election State, Local, County EVT + 90 days 	§ 7.23(1)(g) & (1)(f) 	Waived 
  Ballots, federal 	EVT + 22 months: EVT = Election 	§ 7.23(1)(f) 	Waived 
  Ballots, state, county, and local 	State, Local, County EVT + 90 Days: EVT = election 	§ 7.23(1)(h) 	Waived 
  Contents of Blank Ballot Box, unused ballots and materials 	FED EVT + 22 months: EVT = Election State, Local, County EVT + 90 days 	§ 7.23(1)(a) 	Waived 
  Election Notices in Cities 	1 year after Local election & 22 Months after Federal 	§ 7.23(1)(g) 	Waived 
  Inspectors Statement of Defective and Challenged Ballots, EB-104 	EVT + 3 months: EVT = Election 	§ 7.23(1)(g) 	Waived 
  Proofs of Publication and Correspondence Relative to Publication, federal 	EVT + 22 months: EVT = Election 	§ 7.23(1)(f) 	Waived 
  Proofs of Publication and Correspondence Relative to Publication, non-federal 	EVT + 1: EVT = election or, if contested, settlement 	§ 7.23(1)(j) 	Waived 
  Sample Ballots, reference 	FED EVT + 22 months: EVT = Election State, Local, County EVT + 90 days 		N/A 
  Statement of the Municipal Board of Canvassers 	10 years after date of election 		Waived 
  Tally Sheets 	FED EVT + 22 months: EVT = Election State, Local, County EVT + 90 days 	§ 7.23(1)(g) 	Waived 
 Nominations 			
  Nomination Papers, EB-160 	EVT + 3 months: EVT = Election 	§ 7.23(1)(g) 	Waived 
 Voter Registration 			
  Active Registration Cards, EB-178 and 179 	EVT: EVT = Currently active 		Waived 
  Cancelled Registration Cards 	EVT + 4: EVT = Cancellation 	§ 7.23(1)(c) 	Waived 
  Oaths, poll workers 	EVT + 2: EVT = End of 2-year term 		Waived 
  Poll Lists, federal 	EVT + 22 months: EVT = Election 	§ 7.23(1)(f) 	Waived 
  Poll Lists, non-federal 	EVT + 3 Months: EVT = First election, spring or general, succeeding the election in which the list was used and destroyed 	§ 7.23(1)(e) 	Waived 
  Voter Serial Number Slips 	FED EVT + 22 months: EVT = Election State, Local, County EVT + 90 days 	§ 7.23(1)(a) 	Waived 
Council Records File and Indexes 			
 Affidavits of Publication 	CR + 3 		Waived 
 Affidavits of Publication for Ordinances 	Permanent 	§§ 61.50(1), 125.04(3)(g) 	N/A 
 Audio Tapes/Audio Files-Granicus 	CR + 1 	§ 19.21(7) 	Waived 
 Correspondence, council, clerk 	CR + 3 		Waived 
 Correspondence, non-council, clerk 	CR + 3 		Waived 
 Council Records File and Indexes 	CR + 7 		Waived 
 Emails 	Minimum of 120 Days ******Records which pertain to a program or function should be filed according to the retention period for that program/function 		Waived 
 Minute Book 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Municipal Code Book, amendment working copies 	CR + 3 		Waived 
 Municipal Code Book, amendments 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Ordinance Book 	Permanent 		Notify 
 Petitions and Complaints, annexations and rezoning 	Permanent 		Notify 
 Petitions and Complaints, General 	CR + 7 		Waived 
 Studies - drafts 	EVT + 8: EVT = Final draft is accepted 		Waived 
 Studies - final draft 	CR + 7 		Notify 
Committees & Commissions 			
 Meeting Notices & Agendas 	C + 1 		Waived 
 Minutes of Meetings 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Audio Tapes/ Audio Files-Granicus 	CR + 1 		Waived 
Insurance 			
 Claims 	EVT + 7 yrs = Resolution of claim 		Waived 
Licenses and Permits 			
 Applications, cat and dog 	CR + 2 	§ 174.07 	Waived 
 Applications, establishments, accepted and rejected 	CR + 4 		Waived 
 Applications, general, accepted and rejected 	CR + 3 	§ 66.055 	Waived 
 Applications, liquor and beer, accepted and rejected 	CR + 4 	§ 66.055 	Waived 
 Applications, occupational, accepted and rejected 	CR + 4 	§ 125.4(l)(3) 	Waived 
 Bartender Certifications 	EVT + 4: EVT = Expiration of license 		Waived 
 Business Licensing, bartender, expired 	EVT + 4: EVT = Expiration of license 		Waived 
 Business Licensing, other 	CR + 4 		Waived 
 License Stubs, general 	CR + 3 	§ 66.055 	Waived 
 License Stubs, liquor and beer 	CR + 4 	§ 66.055 	Waived 
 Monthly Report of Dog Licenses to County Clerk 	CR + 3 	§ 60.755(6) 	Waived 
Miscellaneous 			
 Records General Schedules typically found throughout the municipality 			
  Agreement, maintenance 	Life of Project 		Waived 
  Annual Report 	CR + 3 		Waived 
  Capital Improvement Project (CIP) Files 	EVT + 2: EVT = Life of project 		Waived 
  Fidelity Bond 	EVT + 5: EVT = Bond Expiration 		Waived 
  Fidelity Bond Book 	EVT + 5: EVT = Last bond entered expires 		Waived 
  Legal Opinions 	Permanent 	§ 62.09(12) (c) 	N/A 
  Oath of Office 	EVT + 5: EVT = Term of service had ended 		Waived 
 Municipal Borrowing 			
  Bond Payment Register 	EVT + 7: EVT = Expiration or payment of all outstanding matured bonds/notes/coupons, whichever is later 		Waived 
  Bond Procedure Record 	EVT + 7: EVT = Expiration 		Waived 
  Bond Register 	EVT + 7: EVT = Expiration 		Waived 
  Cancelled Bonds, Coupons, and Promissory Notes 	EVT: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
  Certificates of Destruction 	EVT + 7: EVT = Expiration or payment of all outstanding matured bonds/notes/coupons, whichever is later 		Waived 
  Coupons and Bonds 	EVT + 3: EVT = Maturity 		Waived 
 Real Property Titles 			
  Abstracts and Certificates of Title 	Permanent 		N/A 
  Deeds 	Permanent 		N/A 
  Easements 	Permanent 		N/A 
  Leases 	EVT + 7: EVT = Termination of lease 		N/A 
  Opinions of Title 	Permanent 		N/A 
  Plats 	Permanent 		N/A 
  Title Insurance Policies 	Permanent 		N/A 
  Vacation or Alteration of Lease 	Permanent 		N/A 
Revenue 			
 Board of Review 			
  Form of Objection to Property Assessment and Supporting Document 	EVT + 7: EVT = Final action of board or Completion of appeal 	§ 70.47(8)(f) 	Waived 
  Minute Book 	CR + 7 	§ 70.47(8)(f) 	Notify 
  Notice of Determinations of the Board of Review 	EVT + 7: EVT = Final action of board or Completion of appeal 		Waived 
  Proceedings of the Board of Review on Audio File or as Stenographs 	EVT + 7: EVT = Final action of board or Completion of appeal 	§ 70.47(8)(f) 	Waived 
 Special Assessments 			
  Certified Special Assessment Roll 	EVT + 7: EVT = All assessments are collected 		Waived 
  Report on Special Assessment Project 	CR + 2; provided a copy of the report is on file with the public works project records 		Waived 
  Special Assessment Payment Register 	EVT + 7: EVT = All assessments are collected 		Waived 
  Statement of New Special Assessments, PC-506 	EVT + 5: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
  Waiver of Special Assessment Notice and Hearing, no resolution 	CR + 1 		Waived 
  Waiver of Special Assessment Notice and Hearing, resolution approved 	EVT + 1: EVT = Final resolution approved 		Waived 
 Tax Calculation 			
  Certificates of Apportionment 	EVT + 3: EVT = Audited 	§ 60.756(1) 	Waived 
  Explanation of Property Tax Credit Certification, PC-201A 	EVT + 5: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
  Final Worksheet for Determining Allowable Levy, SL-202 	EVT + 5: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
  General Property Tax Credit Certification, PC-201 	EVT + 5: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
  Personal Property Tax Roll 	CR + 15; postponed or delinquent taxes may be transferred to the county treasurer 		Waived 
  Real Property Tax Roll 	Record is transferred to County Treasurer 		Waived 
  State Shared Aid Payment Notices 	EVT + 6: EVT = Audited 	§§ 79.03, 79.16, 79.20, 70.996, 14.58(10) 	Waived 
  Statement of New Special Assessments, PC-506 	EVT + 5: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
  Statement of Sewer Service Charges, PC-503 and PC-504 	EVT + 5: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
  Statement of Taxes, PA-632A 	Permanent 		N/A 
  Tax Levy Certification of the School District Clerk, PI-1508 	EVT + 3: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
Cemetery Records 
 A Certificate Stubs, upkeep on graves 	Permanent 		N/A 
 B Certificates Stubs, gravesite add-ons 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Building Records, financial 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Burial Log 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Burial Permits 	Permanent 	§ 135.06(1)(a)3 	N/A 
 Deeds, copies, burial 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Deposits to Treasurer's Office, working copies 	CR + 1 		Waived 
 Disinterment, reburial notifications 	EVT + 9: EVT = Notification attempt 	§ 157.112(3m) 	Waived 
 Installment Payment Cards 	EVT + 2: EVT = Payout 		Waived 
 Interment Cards 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Interment Orders 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Lot Owner Cards, burial site filled/occupied 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Lot Owner Cards, pending 	EVT: EVT = Owner's Death 		Waived 
 Mausoleum Inscription Forms 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Memorial Permits, final inscription forms 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Memorial Permits, pending 	EVT: EVT = Superseded 		Waived 
 Perpetual Care Log 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Plat Sheets, burial spaces and mausoleums 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Pre-Need Fund Records 	EVT: EVT = Superseded 		Waived 
 Pre-Need Purchase Cards 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Real Estate Book, disposition and related receipts 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Receipts, accessories 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Receipts, grave sales 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Receipts, interment 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Section Files 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Statement of Accounts, annual 	Permanent 		N/A 
Court Records 
 Audio Tape Recordings of Trials or Juvenile Matters 	EVT: EVT = Expiration of appeal timeframe 	The retention & disposal of all court records is governed by § 757.54 & Chapter SCR72, which are incorporated by reference as presently constituted or hereafter revised 	Waived 
 Citations, municipal ordinance 	EVT + 6: EVT = Case Closed 		Waived 
 Citations, parking tickets 	EVT + 3: EVT = Case Closed 		Waived 
 Citations, traffic 	EVT + 3: EVT = Case Closed 		Waived 
 Civil Court Dockets, suspensions of driving privileges 	EVT + 5: EVT = Restoration of license 		Waived 
 Court Calendars 	CR + 6 months 		Waived 
 Electronic Recordings of Court Proceedings, appealed decisions 	EVT + 7: EVT = Appeal process complete 		Waived 
 Financial Report, monthly 	CR + 3 		Waived 
 Municipal Court Case Files, city attorney case files 	EVT + 6: EVT = Final Judgment 		Waived 
 Municipal Court Correspondence 	CR + 7 		Waived 
 Municipal Court Judgment Docket, record of all money judgments 	EVT + 20: EVT = Final docket entry listed 	SCR 72.01 	Waived 
 Municipal Court Minutes Records 	EVT + 6: EVT = Final Judgment 	SCR 72.01 	Waived 
 Municipal Court Record 	EVT + 5: EVT = Final Judgment 		Waived 
 Statistical Reports 	CR + 3 		Waived 
 Warrant and Commitment Listings 	CR + 7 		Waived 
Finance 
Accounting 			
 Accounts Payable 			
  Purchase Invoices 	EVT + 7: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
  Vouchers 	EVT + 7: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
 Accounts Receivable 			
  Accounts Receivable - invoices 	CR + 3 		Waived 
  Collection Blotters 	EVT + 1: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
  Cash Register Reconciliation & Docs 	CY + 1 		Waived 
 Banking 			
  Bank Credit/Debit Tickets 	EVT + 1: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
  Bank Deposits 	CR + 7 		Waived 
  Bank Statements/Reconciliations 	CR + 7 		Waived 
  Cancelled Order Checks 	FIS + 7 		Waived 
  Cashbook—Electronic 	CR + 15 		Waived 
  Check Register 	FIS + 7 		Waived 
  Duplicate Deposit Tickets 	EVT + 1: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
  Investment 	FIS + 7 		Waived 
  Lists of Outstanding Checks 	CR + 7 		Waived 
 Books of Original Entry 			
  Appropriation Journal 	CR + 15 		Waived 
  Appropriation Journal Voucher 	CR + 15 		Waived 
  General Journal 	CR + 15 		Waived 
  Journal Voucher 	CR + 15 		Waived 
  Receipt Journal 	CR + 15 		Waived 
  Voucher/Order Register 	CR + 15 		Waived 
 Budgets and Audits 			
  Audit Files, back-up 	CY + 3 	§ 77.59(3) 	Waived 
  Audit Reports 	Permanent 		Waived 
  Budget Worksheets 	FIS + 3 		Waived 
  Expenditure Exception Report 	CR + 1 		Waived 
  Final Budget 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Payroll 			
  Annual Report of Federal Income Tax Withheld, W-3 	CR + 5 		Waived 
  Cancelled Payroll Checks 	EVT + 5: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
  Change in Employee Status, ET-WR-40 	CR + 5 		Waived 
  Daily Time and Attendance Printouts 	CR + 2 		Waived 
  Employee Earnings Records 	CR + 5 		Waived 
  Employee Enrollment and Waiver Cards 	EVT + 2: EVT = Superseded or Terminated 		Waived 
  Employee's Wisconsin Withholding Allowance Certificates, WI W-4 	EVT + 5: EVT = Superseded 		Waived 
  Employee's Withholding Allowance Certificates, IRS W-4 	EVT + 5: EVT = Superseded 		Waived 
  Employer's Annual Reconciliation of Wisconsin Income Tax Withheld from Wages, WT-7 	EVT + 5: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
  Federal Deposit Tax Stubs, 501 	EVT + 5: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
  Monthly Memorandum Report, ET-WR-35 	EVT + 5: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
  Payroll Check Register 	EVT + 5: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
  Payroll Change Report 	CR + 5 		Waived 
  Payroll Distribution Record 	EVT + 5: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
  Payroll Worksheets 	CR + 3 		Waived 
  Payroll Voucher 	EVT + 5: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
  Premium Due Notices 	EVT + 5: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
  Quarterly Report of Federal Income Tax Withheld, 941E 	EVT + 5: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
  Quarterly Report, Payroll Summary, ET-WR-19 and 20 	EVT + 5: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
  Report of Wisconsin Income Tax Withheld, WT-6 	EVT + 5: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
  State's Quarterly Report of Wages Paid, HEW OAR-S3 	EVT + 5: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
  Timesheets 	EVT + 2: EVT = Audited 		
  Wage and Tax Statements, WT-9 	EVT + 5: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
  Wage and Tax Statements, W-Z 	EVT + 5: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
 Posted Ledger 			
  General Ledger 	CR + 15 		Waived 
  Financial Reports 	CR + 6 		Waived 
  Trial Balance 	EVT: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
 Purchasing 			
  Inventory of Property 	EVT: EVT = Superseded 		Waived 
  Purchase Requisitions 	EVT + 1: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
  Receiving Report 	CR + 7 		Waived 
  Purchase Orders 	EVT: EVT = Superseded 		Waived 
 Receipts 			
  Receipts, cash (received & issued) 	CR + 4; or Until audited, whichever is earlier 	§ 59.52(4)(a) 
(12) 	Waived 
  Receipts, general 	CR + 1 		Waived 
  Receipts, office supplies 	CR + 1 		Waived 
 Tax Collection 			
  Tax Corrections and Refunds 	CR + 4 		Waived 
  Escrow Account List 	EVT: EVT = Superseded 		Waived 
  Municipal Treasurer's Settlement, PC-501 	EVT + 5: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
  Personal Property Tax Roll 	CR + 15 		Notify 
  Receipt Stub Book 	EVT + 7: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
  Receipts, cities 	EVT + 7: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
  Statement of Taxes Remaining Unpaid 	Retain with tax roll 		Waived 
  Tax Collection Blotters 	EVT: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
  Tax Settlement Receipt, PC-502 	EVT + 5: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
Fire Department 
Administration 			
 Ambulance Reports 	EVT + 7: EVT = Pending Litigation or Audit 	Confidentiality of Patient Health Care Records § 256.15(12)(b) 	Waived 
 Daily Log Books 	CY + 6 		Waived 
 Fire and Ambulance Reports 	CY + 6 		Waived 
 Invoices, ambulance, working copies 	EVT + 1: EVT = Payoff 		Waived 
 Orders and Memos 	CR + 7 		Waived 
 Press Notices for Fire Commission Meeting 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Project Files, non-CIP 	EVT + 2: EVT = Life of Project 		Waived 
 Work Schedules 	CY + 2 		Waived 
Prevention Bureau 			
 Fire Inspection, Daily Records 	CY + 2 		Waived 
 Fire Inspection, fees, working copies 	CY + 2 		Waived 
 Fire Inspection, tax key 	CY + 2 		Waived 
 Fire Inspections, address files 	Permanent 	§ 101.14(2)(c) 
(1) 	N/A 
 Fire Investigation Reports 	Permanent 	§§ 165.55(1), 165.55 
(8:165.55(15)) 	N/A 
 Fire Prevention, inactive properties 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Fire Prevention, juvenile education files 	EVT: EVT = Superseded 		Waived 
 Fire Prevention, juvenile fire education referrals 	Permanent 	§§ 165.55(15), 938.396(2)(j) 	N/A 
 Fire Prevention, tank permit inspections 	Permanent 		N/A 
Human Resources—Personnel 
Contract Negotiations, labor unions 	Permanent 		N/A 
Employee Files, active/inactive/retired 	EVT + 7: EVT = Termination 		Waived 
Employee Files, medical, working copies 	EVT + 30: EVT = Termination 		Waived 
Employment Advertisements 	EVT + 1: EVT = Position filled 		Waived 
Employment Applications 	CR + 1 		Waived 
Employee Files, retired 	EVT + 6: EVT = End of benefits 		Waived 
Employee Leave Requests 	EVT + 2 months: EVT=Request 		Waived 
Employee Medical Files, adverse impact 	EVT + 2: EVT = Settlement or resolution 		Waived 
Employee Medical Files, exposed to hazardous materials 	EVT + 30: EVT = Termination 		Waived 
Employee Medical Files, general 	CY + 2 		Waived 
FMLA Records 	CY + 3 	29 CFR 825.500(c)(4) 	Waived 
Grievances 	Permanent 		N/A 
Human Resources Policies 	EVT: EVT = Superseded 		Waived 
1-9's 	EVT + 1: EVT = Termination or DOH + 3 whichever is longer 		Waived 
Job Applications, non-hires 	EVT + 1: EVT = Application submittal 	29 CFR 1627(3)(b)(3)(l) 	Waived 
Job Descriptions 	EVT + 3: EVT = Superseded 		Waived 
Job Postings and Advertisements 	EVT + 1: EVT = Posting 	29 CFR 1627.3(b)(1)(iii) 	Waived 
Organizational Charts 	EVT: EVT = Superseded 		Waived 
Performance Evaluations 	EVT + 7 EVT=Termination 		Waived 
Personnel, applications/interviews 	CR + 1 		Waived 
Personnel, expenses 	EVT: EVT = Superseded 		Waived 
Personnel, files 	EVT + 7: EVT = Terminated 		Waived 
Personnel, grievances 	EVT + 7: EVT = Case closed 		Waived 
Policy & Procedures Manual 	EVT: EVT = Superseded 		Waived 
Personnel Records 	EVT + 7: EVT = Termination 		Waived 
W2's 	CY + 6 		Waived 
Worker's Compensation 			
 Certified Medical Records 	EVT: EVT = Case Closed 		Waived 
 Injury & Illness Record, OSHA-100, 102 & CA-49 	CY + 5 		Waived 
 Worker's Compensation Claims 	EVT + 30: EVT = Termination 	§ 102.17(4) 	Waived 
 Worker's Compensation Industrial Claims 	EVT + 30: EVT = Case closed 		Waived 
 Worker's Compensation Medical Bills, outsourced 	EVT + 7: EVT = Vendor contract termination 		Waived 
Information Technology 
IT 			
 Computer Applications 	EVT: EVT = Life of System 		Waived 
 Contracts and Agreements, consulting 	EVT + 7: EVT = Life of Contract 	§ 893.43 	Waived 
 Electronic Correspondence/EMAILS 	Minimum of 120 Days ******EMAILS WILL BE RETAINED ACCORDING TO CONTENT OR RECORD SERIES AS LISTED IN THIS SCHEDULE 		Waived 
 Inventory, hardware 	EVT: EVT = Life of Application 		Waived 
 Inventory, software 	EVT: EVT = Life of Application 		Waived 
 Licensing Agreements, hardware 	EVT: EVT = Life of Application 		Waived 
 Licensing Agreements, software 	EVT: EVT = Life of Application 		Waived 
 Project Files 	EVT + 2: EVT = Life of Project 		Waived 
 Project Logs 	EVT + 1: EVT = Life of Project 		Waived 
 Project Logs, department copies 	EVT: EVT = Superseded 		Waived 
 Requests for Proposals 	EVT + 2: EVT = Life of Project 		Waived 
 Software, licenses 	EVT: EVT = Life of System 		Waived 
 Software, manuals 	EVT: EVT = Life of System 		Waived 
 System CPU Hardware Documentation 	EVT: EVT = Life of Application 		Waived 
 System Documentation, voice mail 	EVT + 2: EVT = Life of System 		Waived 
Public Library 
Bylaws 	PERM 		N/A 
Annual Reports-to the Board &/or Municipality 	PERM 		N/A 
Annual Reports-to the State (Division of Libraries, Technology and Community Learning 	PERM 		N/A 
Patron Records 	T + 2 		W 
Annual Reports 	P 		N/A 
Correspondence 	C + 7 		Waived 
Director/Assistant Director's Reports 	CR + 2 		Waived 
Subject Files 	ACT + 5 		Waived 
Meeting Records-Internal Staff 	CR + 2 		Waived 
Procedures 	SUP 		Waived 
Planners/Calendars 	ACT 		Waived 
Donor File-Monetary Donations 	CR + 3 		Waived 
Donor File-Property Donations 	ACT + 2 		Waived 
Grant Files 	FIS + 4 		Waived 
Patron Incident and Disciplinary Files 	ACT + 5 	CONFIDENTIAL 	Waived 
Compliments/Complaints/Suggestions 	ACT + 1 		Waived 
Request for Reconsideration of Library Materials 	ACT + 6 		Waived 
Strategic Planning-Development Documentation 	SUP 		Waived 
Strategic Planning-Final Approved Plan 	PERM 		N/A 
Mobile Collection Schedule 	SUP 		Waived 
Staff Work Schedules 	ACT + 1 		Waived 
Volunteer/Community Service Files 	ACT 	CONFIDENTIAL 	Waived 
User Accounts 	ACT 		Waived 
Confidentiality Form 	ACT 		Waived 
Logon ID Request Acknowledged by User 	EVT + 8 		Waived 
Order Records 	CR + 4 		Waived 
Bibliographic Records 	ACT 		Waived 
Item Level Record 	ACT 		Waived 
Authority Files 	ACT 		Waived 
Patron Registration and Application Forms 	ACT 	CONFIDENTIAL 	Waived 
Patron Database 	ACT 	CONFIDENTIAL 	Waived 
Overdue Notices 	ACT 	CONFIDENTIAL 	Waived 
Library Use Reports 	CR + 1 		Waived 
Online Union Catalogs 	ACT 		Waived 
Interlibrary Loan Records 	ACT 	CONFIDENTIAL 	Waived 
ILL Requests by Member Libraries-non-ILS 	ACT + 0/1 	CONFIDENTIAL 	Waived 
ILL Requests from Non-Member Libraries 	ACT + 0/1 	CONFIDENTIAL 	Waived 
Log of ILL Transactions 	CR + 1 		Waived 
Monthly ILL Transactions-Borrowing Statistics 	CR + 1 		Waived 
Monthly Statistics on Items Lent by Member Libraries 	CR + 5 		Waived 
Interlibrary Loan Reference Codes 	ACT 		Waived 
ILL Periodical Title Requests 	FIS + 5 		Waived 
Internet, Equipment or Room Use Agreements 	ACT 	CONFIDENTIAL 	Waived 
Computer Use Schedules 	EVT 	CONFIDENTIAL 	Waived 
Reference Statistics 	ACT 		Waived 
Reference Requests & Responses 	ACT 	CONFIDENTIAL 	Waived 
Publicity Design, and Production Requests 	CR + 1 		Waived 
Publicity and Programming Files 	CR + 3 		Waived 
Photographs 	ACT 		Waived 
Contest Entry Forms 	ACT + 30 days 		Waived 
Exhibit Files 	EVT + 3 		Waived 
Library Publicity and Historical Files 	PERM 		N/A 
Library Newsletters 	CR + 3 		Waived 
Press Releases 	ACT 		Waived 
Archival—Donor Files 	PERM 		N/A 
Archival—Accession/Deaccession Records 	PERM 		N/A 
Archival—Processing Files 	PERM 		N/A 
Archival—Finding Aids 	ACT 		Waived 
Plan of Service 	PERM 		N/A 
System Meeting Records 	PERM 		N/A 
Membership Lists 	ACT 		Waived 
16 mm Film & Video Collection Records 	ACT 		Waived 
Rotating Collection Inventories 	ACT 		Waived 
Film/Video Circulation Summary 	CR + 5 		Waived 
Document Delivery Service Forms 	ACT 		Waived 
Delivery and Mobile Collections Schedule 	SUP 		Waived 
Training and Workshop Records 	ACT + 5 		Waived 
Workshop Calendars and Flyers 	SUP 		Waived 
Registration Forms 	ACT 		Waived 
Workshop Statistics 	CR + 3 		Waived 
Parks, Recreation & Urban Forestry 
Grant Files 	EVT + 3: EVT = Final Disbursement of Grant Funds 		Waived 
Master Reservation Book 	CR + 2 		Waived 
Park Acquisition Files 	Permanent 		N/A 
Program Files 	CR + 2 		Waived 
Publications 	EVT: EVT = Superseded 		Waived 
Reservation Requests, no receipt 	CR + 1 month 		Waived 
Reservation Requests, receipt 	EVT + 7: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
Forestry 	*** 		
 Projects and Surveys 	EVT: EVT = Superseded 		Waived 
 Tree Pests and Diseases 	EVT: EVT = Superseded 		Waived 
 Tree Planting 	CR + 6 		Waived 
 Tree Removal and Repair Records 	CR + 6 		Waived 
Operations and Maintenance 	*** 		
 Confined Space Files 	CR + 6 		Waived 
 Equipment Records, maintenance and repairs 	EVT: EVT = Life of Asset 		Waived 
 Equipment Specifications 	EVT: EVT = Life of Asset 		Waived 
 Fence Specifications 	EVT: EVT = Life of Asset 		Waived 
 Fertilizing Record 			
 Supervisor's Daily Report of Work Completed 	CR + 2 		Waived 
Planning 	*** 		
 Aerial Photographs 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Equipment and Maintenance 	CR + 6 		Waived 
 Master Park Plan 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Passes 	CY 		Waived 
 Pool 	*** 		
 Program Files 	CR + 2 		Waived 
Project Records 			
 As-Built Tracings 	EVT: EVT = Life of Project 		Waived 
 Blueprints 	EVT: EVT = As-built tracings complete 		Waived 
 Master Project Files 	EVT + 20: EVT = Project completed 		Notify 
Zoning/Planning 
Planning 			
 Aerial Maps, quarter section 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Census Data 	CR + 10 		Waived 
 Community Development Block Grant Files 	EVT + 2: EVT = Life of Grant 		Waived 
 Comprehensive Master Plan 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Conditional Use Grants 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Extraterritorial Files 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Housing Rehabilitation Program Files 	EVT + 6: EVT = Loan payoff 		Waived 
 Landmark Files 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Neighborhood Plans 	CR + 7 		Waived 
 Plan Commission Files 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Project Files, non-CIP 	EVT + 2: EVT = Life of Project 		Waived 
 Renderings and Site Plans 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Rental Rehabilitation Files 	EVT + 6: EVT = Life of project 		Waived 
 Slides 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Zoning Appeals Files 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Working papers of the Plan Commission 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Working papers of the Zoning Board Appeals 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Certified Survey Maps, originals 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Certified Survey Maps, unapproved, working copies 	EVT: EVT = Approval 		Notify 
 Plats, original 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Preliminary Subdivision Plats 	EVT: EVT = Final plat generated 		Waived 
Police 
Accident Reports 	EVT + 10: EVT = Case Closed 		Waived 
Arrest Records 	EVT + 6: EVT = Adjudication Date 		Waived 
Bicycle Registrations 	CR + 3 		Waived 
Block Parent Forms 	CR + 3 		Waived 
Complaints by Citizens 	EVT + 5: EVT = Case Closed 		Waived 
Daily Observation Reports 	EVT + 5: EVT = Termination 		Waived 
Dangerous Driving Notification Form 	CR + 1 		Waived 
Dispatch Records, computer-aided dispatch 	CR + 5 		Waived 
Dispatch Tapes 	CR + 3 months 		Waived 
Evidence Cards 	EVT + 10: EVT = Case Closed 		Waived 
False Alarm Reports 	EVT + 3: EVT = Case Closed 		Waived 
Fingerprint Cards 	Permanent 		N/A 
Incarceration Files 	EVT + 5: EVT = Adjudication Date 		Waived 
Incident Reports 	EVT + 10: EVT = Case Closed 		Waived 
Insurance Requests 	EVT + 3: EVT = Adjudication Date 		Waived 
Inventories, property 	CR + 7 		Waived 
Inventory, police department 	FIS + 4 		Waived 
Invoices 	FIS + 4 		Waived 
Missing Persons Report, closed 	EVT + 5: EVT = Case Closed 		Waived 
Mug Shots 	EVT + 8: EVT = Case Closed 		Waived 
Open Records Request 	EVT + 3: EVT = Grant or denial of request 	§§ 19.31—19.37 	Waived 
Orders and Memos 	CY + 5 		Waived 
Pawn Shop Cards 	CR + 4 		Waived 
Photographs 	EVT + 6: EVT = Adjudication Date 		Waived 
Press Notices for Police Commission Meeting 	CR + 5 		Waived 
Project Files, non-CIP 	EVT + 2: EVT = Life of project 		Waived 
Radar Logs 	CR + 3 		Waived 
Receipts, municipal court 	FIS + 4 		Waived 
Record Checks 	EVT + 1: EVT = Date of Request 		Waived 
Squad Car Video Recordings 	CR + 120 Days 	§§ 893.90, 893.82 	Waived 
Training Records 	CR + 3 		Waived 
Warrant Letters 	EVT + 1: EVT = Warrant Closed 		Waived 
Work Schedules 	EVT + 1: EVT = Life of contract 		Waived 
Public Works 
Administration 			
 House Number and Address Change File 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Permits 	CR + 3 		Waived 
 Petitions for Street and Sewer Systems 	CR + 2 		Waived 
 Special Assessment Calculations 	CR + 2 		Waived 
 State Highway Aids Program Record 	EVT + 7: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
 Street Vacations and Dedications, copies 	EVT: EVT = Active reference life 		Waived 
 TV Sewer Inspection Records 	EVT: EVT = Superseded 		Waived 
Contracts 			
 Bids, successful 	EVT + 7: EVT = Life of Project 		Waived 
 Bids, unsuccessful 	EVT + 2: EVT = Date of Notice 		Waived 
 Bid Tabulations 	EVT + 7: EVT=Completion of Project 		Waived 
 Certified Check 	EVT: Contract signed 		Waived 
 Contract 	EVT + 7: EVT = Life of Project 		Waived 
 Notice to Contractors, successful bids 	EVT + 7: EVT = Life of Project 		Waived 
 Notice to Contractors, unsuccessful bids 	EVT + 2: EVT = Date of Notice 		Waived 
 Performance Bond 	EVT + 7: EVT = Life of Project 		Waived 
 Specifications, working papers 	EVT: EVT = Superseded 		Waived 
Engineering 			
 Aerial Photographs 	EVT: EVT = Superseded 		Waived 
 Benchmark Books 	Permanent 		N/A 
 City Maps 	Permanent 		N/A 
Design Manual and Guides 	CR + 7 		Waived 
 Excavation Plans of Private Utilities 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Field Notes 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Final Subdivision Plats 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Index to Maps 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Profile and Grade Books 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Section Corner Monument Logs 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Water, Storm, and Sewer Main Maps 	Permanent 		N/A 
 Sewer Calls 	CR + 9 		Waived 
 Sign Orders, open and closed 	CR + 9 		Waived 
 Traffic Signal Controllers 	EVT: EVT = Life of Asset 		Waived 
 Vehicle Files 	EVT: EVT = Life of Asset 		Waived 
Streets and Highways 			
 Administration 	*** 		
 Complaint Ledger 	CR + 2 		Waived 
 Monthly Reports 	CR + 3 		Waived 
 Purchasing Records 	EVT + 7: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
 Equipment and Supplies Control 	*** 		
 Fuel Usage Reports 	EVT + 2: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
 Heavy Equipment and Vehicle Inventory Ledger 	EVT: EVT = Life of asset or Ledger is superseded 		Waived 
 Stock Control Records 	EVT + 2: EVT = Audited 		Waived 
 Vehicle Expense Report 	EVT: EVT = Life of Vehicle 		Waived 
 Vehicle Maintenance Histories 	EVT: EVT = Life of Vehicle 		Waived 
 Street and Sidewalk Maintenance and Repair Records 	CR + 25 		Waived 
 Street Operations File 	EVT + 2: EVT = Superseded 		Waived 
 Tree Planting, Inspection, Trimming, and Removal 	CR + 25 		Waived 
Utilities (Sewer, Water, etc.) 
Meter reading records 	CR + 6 yrs 		Waived 
Customer ledgers, bill summaries, trial 	CR + 50 		Waived 
 Balances, account index 			
Collection reports, summaries, bill stubs 	CR + 3 		
 Bill copies, customer account adjustments 			
 High bill complaints 			
Uncollectible acct & customer credit records 	CR + 3 		Waived 
Revenue summaries 	CR + 6 		Waived 
Customer applications, contracts, deposit 	CR + 6 		Waived 
 Records, interest receipts 			
Water stubs 	FIS + 2 yrs 		Waived 
Receipts of current billings 	Fis + 6 yrs 		Waived 
Maps showing location of utility plant 	E + until map is superseded 		Waived 
All other utility records 	CR + 6 		Waived 
Water quality lab tests 	E + 5 (if information has been transferred to a permanent test site location file) 		Waived 
All records retention controlled by the PSC 			
 
Legend: 
CR: Creation date 
EVT: Event 
FIS: Fiscal Year 
J: Job hire date 
P: Permanent 
T: Termination 
ACT: Active 
SUP: Suspended 
SHSW: State Historical Society of Wisconsin 
WMRM: Wisconsin Municipal Records Manual 
§: State Statute 
SCR: Supreme Court Rule 
PSC: Public Service Commission 
NR: Natural Resources 
W: Notification requirement waived 
N: Notification required 
N/A: Not applicable and applies to any record designated for permanent retention with the original custodian 
****** Due to the increasing use of electronic media, the majority of records will be saved in this format - 12-87 City Code of Ordinances ****** 
(Ord. No. 2016-O-03, 1-26-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-O-03, adopted January 26, 2016, amended the Code by repealing former §§ 12-81—12-83. Former §§ 12-81—12-83 pertained to financial records, utility records, and obsolete records, respectively, and derived from the Compiled Ordinances of 2009, §§ 19.09(1)—(3). Ord. No. 2016-O-03 also added provisions designated as a new § 12-81 at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 12-82, 12-83. - Reserved.  
Sec. 12-84. - Historical records. 
Under Wis. Stats. § 19.21(4)(a) local governments must notify the State Historical Society of Wisconsin (SHSW) 60 days prior to destroying records. The SHSW has waived the required 60-day notice for any record designated "waived" (notification requirement waived) in the city's record retention schedule. The SHSW must be notified 60 days prior to destruction of any record designated with "Notify" (notification required). The term "N/A" indicates not applicable and applies to any record designated for permanent retention with the original custodian. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 19.09(4); Ord. No. 2016-O-03, 1-26-2016)  
Sec. 12-85. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-O-03, adopted January 26, 2016, amended the Code by repealing former § 12-85. Former § 12-85 pertained to tape recordings and derived from the Compiled Ordinances of 2009, § 19.09(5).  
Sec. 12-86. - Police department records. 
City officers may destroy police department records as described in the "City Police Department Records Retention Schedule" dated July 9, 1998, as revised May 20, 2006. The police department will follow their records retention policy and procedure for the destruction of records. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 19.09(6))  
Sec. 12-87. - Preservation on microfilm. 
Any authority or custodian may, subject to the approval of the city council, keep and preserve public records in its possession by means of microfilm or other photographic reproduction method. Such records shall meet the standards for photographic reproduction set forth in state law and shall be considered original records for all purposes. Such records shall be preserved along with other files of the department or division and shall be open to public inspection and copying according to the provisions of state law and this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 19.10)  
Chapter 14 - CODE OF ETHICS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for public officials and employees, Wis. Stats. § 19.41 et seq.; codes of ethics for local government officials, employees and candidates, Wis. Stats. § 19.59. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Anything of value means any money or property, favor, service, payment, advance, forbearance, loan, or promise of future employment, but does not include compensation and expenses paid by the city, fees honorariums and expenses which are permitted and reported under Wis. Stats. § 19.56, political contributions which are reported under Wis. Stats. ch. 11, or hospitality extended for a purpose unrelated to city business by a person other than an organization. 
Associated , when used with reference to an organization, includes any organization in which a person or a member of his/her immediate family is a director, officer or trustee, or owns or controls, directly or indirectly, and severally or in the aggregate, at least ten percent of the outstanding equity. 
Candidate for public office means any person who files nomination papers and a declaration under Wis. Stats. ch. 8 for the purpose of appearing on the ballot for election as a city public official or any person nominated for the purpose of appearing on the ballot for election as a city public official through the write in process and who files a declaration under Wis. Stats. ch. 8. 
City public office means all officers of the city established pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 62 who are elected by the voters or appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the common council. 
City public official means any person holding a city public office. 
Gift means the payment or receipt of anything of value without valuable consideration. 
Immediate family means a person's spouse and a person's relative by marriage, lineal descent or adoption who receives, directly or indirectly, more than one-half of his/her support from such person or from whom such person receives, directly or indirectly, more than one-half of his/her support. 
Income has the meaning given under the U.S. Internal Revenue Code, 26 USC 1 et seq. 
Ministerial action means an action that a person performs in a given state of facts in a prescribed manner in obedience to the mandate of legal authority, without regard to the exercise of the person's own judgment as to the propriety of the action being taken. 
Nominee means any person who is nominated by the mayor for appointment to a city public office and whose nomination requires the confirmation of the city council. 
Organization means any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, firm, enterprise, franchise, association, trust, self employed individual or other legal entity which engages in profit making activities. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 23.08) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, Wis. Stats. § 19.42.  
Sec. 14-2. - Enforcement. 
Any person having concerns or complaints related to this ethics chapter can bring them to the common council for remedy. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 23.07)  
Sec. 14-3. - Policy. 
(a)  It is declared that high ethical standards among city public officials and city employees are essential to the conduct of free government. The common council believes that a code of ethics for the guidance of city public officials and city employees will help them avoid conflicts between their personal interests and their public responsibilities, will improve standards of public service and will promote and strengthen the faith and confidence of the people of this city in their city public officials and city employees. 
(b)  In recognition of these goals, there is hereby established a code of ethics for all city officials and employees, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, including members of boards, committees and commissions. The purpose of this chapter is to establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials and employees by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interests of the city. The provisions and purposes of this chapter and such rules and regulations as may be established are hereby declared to be in the best interest of the city. 
(c)  It is the intent of the common council that the rights of individuals affected shall be protected to the fullest extent possible. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 23.01)  
Sec. 14-4. - Responsibility of public office. 
Public officials and employees are agents of public purpose and hold office for the benefit of the public. They are bound to uphold the state and federal constitutions and to carry out impartially the laws of the nation, state, and municipality and thus to foster respect for all government. They are bound to discharge faithfully the duties of their office regardless of personal considerations, recognizing that the public interest must be their primary concern. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 23.02)  
Sec. 14-5. - Standards of conduct. 
(a)  This chapter does not prevent any city public official from accepting other employment or following any pursuit which in no way interferes with the faithful discharge of his/her duties to the city. The common council recognizes that: 
(1)  In a representative democracy, the representatives are drawn from society, and therefore, cannot and should not be without personal and economic interests in the decisions and policies of government; 
(2)  Citizens who serve as city public officials retain their rights as citizens to interests of a personal or economic nature; that standards of ethical conduct for city public officials need to distinguish between those minor and inconsequential conflicts that are unavoidable in a free society, and those conflicts which are substantial and material; and 
(3)  City public officials need to engage in employment, professional, personal or business activities, other than official duties, in order to support themselves or their families and to maintain a continuity of professional or business activity, or may need to maintain investments, which activities or investments do not conflict with specific provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Appointed officials and employees should adhere to the rules of work and performance established as the standard for their positions by the appropriate authority. Officials and employees should not exceed their authority or breach the law or ask others to do so, and they should work in full cooperation with other public officials and employees unless prohibited from doing so by law or by officially recognized confidentiality of their work. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 23.03)  
Sec. 14-6. - Fair and equal treatment; use of public property. 
(a)  Interest in appointments. Canvassing the members of the common council in order to obtain preferential consideration in connection with any appointment to the municipal civil service shall disqualify the candidate for appointment. 
(b)  Use of public property. No official or employee shall request or permit the use of city-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal convenience or profit, except when such services are available to the public generally and except where otherwise authorized by action of the common council. 
(c)  Obligations to citizens. No official or employee shall grant any special consideration, treatment, or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is available to every other citizen. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 23.04)  
Secs. 14-7—14-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CONFLICTS OF INTEREST 
 
Sec. 14-31. - Incompatible activities generally. 
No official or employee, whether paid or unpaid, shall engage in any business or transaction or shall have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties in the public interest. Personal as distinguished from financial interests include an interest arising from blood or marriage relationships or close business or political association. Specific conflicts of interest are enumerated in this article for the guidance of officials and employees. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 23.05(1))  
Sec. 14-32. - Incompatible employment. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, no official or employee shall engage in or accept private employment or render service for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties or would tend to impair independence of judgment or action in the performance of official duties. 
(b)  The city attorney, municipal court judge, or any other legally qualified city official or employee may engage in the private or public practice of law during the period in which they hold their respective offices. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 23.05(1)(A))  
Sec. 14-33. - Disclosure of confidential information. 
No official or employee shall, without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the city, nor shall such information be used to advance the financial or other private interest of the official, employee or others. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 23.05(1)(B))  
Sec. 14-34. - Gifts and favors. 
(a)  No official or employee shall accept any gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person which to his/her knowledge is interested directly or indirectly in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the city. 
(b)  No city public official or employee may use a public position or office to obtain financial gain or anything of substantial value for the private benefit of himself/herself or his/her immediate family or for an organization with which he/she has a financial interest. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 23.05(1)(C))  
Sec. 14-35. - Representing private interests before city bodies. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, no official or employee whose salary is paid in whole or in part by the city shall appear on behalf of private interests before any agency, board, authority, commission, or other official body of the city. He/she shall not represent private interests in any action or proceeding against the interest of the city in any litigation to which the city is a party. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed as prohibiting the appearance of officials or employees when subpoenaed as witnesses by parties involved in litigation which also may involve the city. 
(c)  An alderperson may appear before city agencies on behalf of constituents in the course of his/her duties as a representative of the electorate or in the performance of public or civic obligations. However, no alderperson or other official or employee shall accept a retainer or compensation that is contingent upon a specific action or decision by a city agent. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 23.05(1)(D))  
Sec. 14-36. - Contracts with the city. 
(a)  No city public official or employee, member of his/her immediate family, nor any organization with which the city public official and employee or a member of his/her immediate family owns or controls at least ten percent of the outstanding equity, voting rights, or outstanding indebtedness may enter into any contract or lease involving a payment or payments of more than $3,000.00 within a 12-month period, in whole or in part derived from city funds unless the city public official or employee has first made written disclosure of the nature and extent of such relationship or interest to the board of ethics and to the department acting for the city in regard to such contract or lease. Said public official or employee shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in the transaction or the making of such contract or sale. 
(b)  Any contract or lease entered into in violation of this section may be voided by the city in an action commenced within three years of the date on which the board of ethics, or the department or officer acting for the city in regard to the allocation of city funds from which such payment is derived, knew or should have known that a violation of this subsection had occurred. 
(c)  This section does not affect the application of section Wis. Stats. § 946.13. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 23.05(1)(E)) 
State Law reference— Private interest in public contract prohibited, Wis. Stats. § 946.13.  
Sec. 14-37. - Disclosure of interest in legislation. 
(a)  An alderperson who has a financial or other private interest in any legislation shall disclose on the record to the common council or the board of ethics the nature and extent of such interest. This provision shall not apply if the alderperson disqualifies himself/herself from voting. 
(b)  An alderperson shall disqualify himself/herself from voting if the matter under consideration involves his/her personal or financial interest to the extent that such interest may conflict with his/her official duties or would impair independence of judgment. 
(c)  Any other public official or employee who has a financial or other private interest in legislation, and who participates in discussion with or gives an official opinion to the council, shall disclose on the records of the common council and the board of ethics the nature and extent of such interest. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, §§ 23.05(1)(F), 23.06)  
Sec. 14-38. - Event attendance. 
The common council declares that it is in the public interest for city employees and city public officials to attend the following events: ribbon cuttings, grand openings, seminars, workshops, conferences, and Fitchburg Business Appreciation luncheons. As such, notwithstanding section 14-34, city employees and city public officials may attend such events and may accept food and beverages incidentally served at such events along with small items such as cups and t-shirts of nominal value. Additionally, city employees and city public officials may accept food, beverage, and other items of nominal value incidental to events that are deemed to be in the public interest by the mayor and the city administrator or as expressly authorized by the common council. 
(Ord. No. 2017-027, § 1, 12-12-2017)  
Secs. 14-39—14-62. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - POLITICAL ACTIVITY 
 
Sec. 14-63. - Civil service and nonelected employees. 
(a)  No person employed with the city shall during the hours when on duty engage in any form of political activity calculated to favor or improve the chances of any political party or any person or candidate seeking or attempting to hold political office, nor engage in any political activity when not on duty to such an extent that efficiency during working hours will be impaired or will result in being tardy or absent from work. 
(b)  No person in the civil service, or nominee or person seeking admission thereto, shall be employed, promoted, demoted, or discharged, or in any way favored or discriminated against, because of political opinion or affiliation or because of age, race, color, religious belief, handicap, marital status, sex, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, or arrest or conviction record. 
(c)  No person holding a civil service position shall directly or indirectly solicit or receive subscriptions or contributions of money for any candidate for city office or a campaign committee for such candidate or actively campaign for candidates for city office. However, the prohibition against the receipt of contributions shall not apply to any such employee who holds an office in a political organization and receives money in the course of performing duties in said office. This exemption does not authorize the solicitation or receipt of political contributions during hours the employee is on duty. 
(d)  No person holding a civil service position shall use an official title or job designation to favor or improve the chances of any political candidate or any person seeking or attempting to hold political office. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 23.05(2)(A))  
Sec. 14-64. - Police officers and firefighters. 
Police officers and firefighters shall observe strictly the applicable rules of the police and fire departments relating to political activity, providing such rules pertain only to hours on duty. No person holding a position in the police or fire service shall use an official title or a job designation in the form of any political activity calculated to favor or improve the chances of any political candidate or any person seeking or attempting to hold political office. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 23.05(2)(B))  
Sec. 14-65. - Promise of reward of civil service appointment prohibited. 
No official or employee, whether elected or appointed, shall promise a civil service appointment to any municipal position as a reward for any political activity. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 23.05(2)(C))  
Chapter 16 - PERSONNEL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-O-18, §§ 1, 2, adopted September 25, 2011, amended the Code by, in effect, repealing former ch. 16, §§ 16-1—16-15, 16-34-16-40, and 16-69—16-77, and added a new ch. 16. Former ch. 16 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Compiled Ordinances of 2009, §§ 16.01—16.21. 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Application. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all employees of the city hired on or before June 29, 2011 who are not elected or appointed to their position for a fixed term of office, are not members of any collective bargaining unit, are not contract employees, are not volunteer firefighters, and are not temporary or seasonal employees. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-18, § 2, 9-25-2011)  
Sec. 16-2. - Disciplinary action. 
(a)  Cause required. No employee, hired on or before June 29, 2011, shall be suspended without pay, discharged, or demoted without cause. 
(b)  Right to discipline. The common council, administrator, and each department head shall, subject to the provisions of this section, is allowed full freedom with respect to disciplinary action, it being the intent and spirit of this chapter to provide a fair and just approach to municipal employment but in no sense to handicap or curtail responsible administrative officers in securing efficient service. Accordingly, all employees shall be subject to reprimand, suspension without pay, discharge, or demotion for misconduct, incompetency, inefficiency, or failure to perform duties or to observe the rules and regulations of their department, or of the common council. In all such cases, except reprimand, the employee shall have the right to appeal. 
(c)  Statement of reasons. Prior to, or concurrent with, the taking of any disciplinary action against an employee who has completed probation, the common council, administrator or department head, as appropriate, shall provide the employee with a written statement of the reasons for such action, a copy of which shall be filed with human resources. No hearing on such disciplinary action shall be held unless requested by the employee within seven calendar days after the effective date of the suspension, discharge, or demotion. 
(d)  Appeal. Any employee who has completed probation and is suspended, discharged, or demoted may appeal to the administrator by filing a written notice of appeal with human resources within seven calendar days after the effective date of such disciplinary action. The notice shall identify the employee, shall specify the action appealed, and shall contain the employee's response to the reasons given for the disciplinary action. Human resources shall forward a copy of the notice together with a copy of the written statement of the reasons for the disciplinary action to the administrator for his/her review. The administrator shall meet with the employee within ten working days of receiving the appeal and shall respond, in writing, to the employee within five working days of the hearing. If dissatisfied with the administrator's decision, the employee may appeal that decision to the civil service commission within seven calendar days after the date of the administrator's decision in the same manner as described in this subsection. 
(e)  Hearing. The commission shall set a date for a hearing, which shall not be less than ten nor more than 21 calendar days, following the filing of the notice of appeal. At the hearing, the proponent of the disciplinary action may be represented by the city attorney and shall present his/her testimony and evidence first. The employee, who may be represented by counsel, shall then have the opportunity to be heard in person and to present witnesses and testimony on his/her behalf. Both the proponent of the disciplinary action and the employee shall have the right to cross examine adverse witnesses and to compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoenas which shall be issued by the commission chairperson upon request. 
(f)  Prerogatives of the commission. If the commission determines that the disciplinary action was taken without cause, the employee, if he/she has been suspended, discharged, or demoted shall be immediately reinstated and all lost pay restored. If the commission determines that the disciplinary action was taken with cause, the discipline shall be upheld. 
(g)  Findings/decision required. The findings, determinations, and decision of the civil service commission shall be in writing and shall be filed with Human Resources within ten calendar days of the hearing. The commission shall forward a copy thereof to the proponent of the disciplinary action and to the employee by certified mail with return receipt requested. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-18, § 1, 9-25-2011)  
Sec. 16-3. - Layoffs and reemployment. 
(a)  Order of layoff. When the common council determines a layoff is necessary, because of need for economy, lack of work or funds, or for other causes to reduce the number of employees, the city administrator will determine the classifications in which the reduction will take place. Seasonal and temporary employees, if any, within the classifications shall be laid off first, subject to program restrictions. Thereafter employees in the classifications shall be laid off in the order of the shortest length of service with the city, provided the remaining employees are qualified to perform the work. 
(b)  Reemployment preference. The name of any employee laid off for any reason set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall be left on an eligible reemployment list for a period of one year after the date of layoff. If any vacancy occurs, or if the number of employees in the department is increased within said period, persons on such list, if then competent, shall be eligible to be appointed in preference to any qualified persons who apply for such position in the inverse order of their layoff. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-18, § 1, 9-25-2011)  
Sec. 16-4. - Civil service commission. 
The personnel committee shall serve as the civil service commission as defined in section 6-265 of the Fitchburg Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-18, § 1, 9-25-2011)  
Chapter 18 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal courts generally, Wis. Stats. § 755.001 et seq.; municipal court procedure, Wis. Stats. § 800.001 et seq.; procedure in forfeiture actions, Wis. Stats. § 23.50; authority for municipal citations for certain ordinance violations, Wis. Stats. § 66.0113; form of citation in municipal court, Wis. Stats. § 800.02; contempt of court generally, Wis. Stats. § 785.01 et seq.; municipal court contempt procedure, Wis. Stats. § 800.12; application by municipal court for remedial or punitive sanctions, Wis. Stats. § 785.06; arrests, bails, and penalties generally, Wis. Stats. § 345.11 et seq.; sentencing of juveniles, Wis. Stats. § 345.18; sentencing in traffic forfeiture actions, Wis. Stats. § 345.20l; deposits, Wis. Stats. § 345.26. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Created. 
There is created and established, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 755.01 in and for the city, a municipal court which shall be designated as the "Municipal Court for the City of Fitchburg." 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.01(1))  
Sec. 18-2. - Term and election of judge. 
The term and election of the municipal judge shall be as set forth in article III of chapter 8. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.01(2))  
Sec. 18-3. - Oath and bond of judge. 
The judge shall, after election or appointment to fill a vacancy, take and file the official oath as prescribed in Wis. Stats. § 757.02(1) and at the same time execute and file an official bond in an amount to be fixed by the common council. No judge may act as such until his/her oath and bond have been filed as required by Wis. Stats. § 19.01(4)(c) and the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 755.03(2) have been complied with. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.01(3))  
Sec. 18-4. - Salary and fees. 
(a)  The annual city meeting shall fix a salary for the judge, which shall be in lieu of fees and costs. The salary may be increased by the annual city meeting before the start of the second or a subsequent year of service of the term of the judge, but shall not be decreased during a term. The salary shall be paid in equal biweekly installments, but the judge shall not be paid a salary for any time during the term during which the judge has not executed his/her official bond or official oath, as required by Wis. Stats. § 755.03 and filed under Wis. Stats. § 19.01(4)(c). 
(b)  Fees and taxable costs shall be paid into the city treasury as the common council may direct. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.01(4))  
Sec. 18-5. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  The municipal court shall have exclusive jurisdiction over any action in which the city seeks to impose forfeitures for violations of city ordinances, unless the action is transferred under Wis. Stats. § 800.04 or 800.05 to a court of record. If equitable relief is demanded the municipal court shall not have jurisdiction and the action shall be brought in a court of record. 
(b)  The municipal judge may issue civil warrants to enforce matters which are under the jurisdiction of the municipal court and may issue inspection warrants under Wis. Stats. § 66.0119. 
(c)  The territorial jurisdiction of the municipal judge shall be countywide. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.01(5))  
Sec. 18-6. - Sessions of court. 
The municipal court shall be open and in session at such times as may be determined by the municipal judge. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.01(6))  
Sec. 18-7. - Location of office, court. 
The municipal judge shall keep his/her office and hold court at the Fitchburg City Hall, 5520 Lacy Road, Fitchburg, Wisconsin. The judge may issue process or perform ministerial functions at any place in the county. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.01(7))  
Sec. 18-8. - Employees. 
The municipal judge shall, in writing, appoint such clerks and deputy clerks as are authorized by the common council. Their salaries shall be fixed by the common council. The clerks shall, before entering upon the duties of their offices, take the oath provided by Wis. Stats. § 19.01 and give a bond if required by the common council. The cost of the bond shall be paid by the city. Oaths and bonds of the clerks shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.01(8))  
Sec. 18-9. - Illness; absence or vacancy. 
(a)  If the municipal judge is to be temporarily absent or is sick or disabled, the municipal judge may by written order, filed in the court and with the chief judge of the judicial administrative district for approval, designate another municipal judge of the county to perform his/her duties for a single period not to exceed 30 days or the municipal judge may deliver the docket and all papers relating to any pending action to the county circuit court and the circuit court may try the action and enter judgment as though the action was begun before that court. 
(b)  If the municipal judge becomes incompetent or is unable or fails to act or in the event of a vacancy, Wis. Stats. § 751.03(5) shall apply. The parties and their attorneys shall be notified of the transfer to another municipal judge or to circuit court prior to trial. The municipal judge designated or the circuit judge to whom the case is transferred, may, while in possession of the docket, issue execution upon or give a certified transcript of any unsatisfied judgment appearing therein. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.01(9))  
Sec. 18-10. - Municipal court docket and transcript entries. 
(a)  The municipal judge shall keep a docket in which he/she shall enter, in actions to which they relate: 
(1)  The title of every action commenced before the municipal judge, including the name and address of the defendant; 
(2)  The process issued, date and place where it issued, when returnable and the return of the officer; 
(3)  A brief statement of the charges, including the nature and time of the offense and the section of law violated; 
(4)  Every adjournment, stating at whose request and to what time; 
(5)  The date and time trial was held; 
(6)  The names of witnesses sworn, stating at whose request; 
(7)  The judgment rendered by the municipal judge, including the penalties imposed, the date and time of rendering judgment and the costs assessed in the action; 
(8)  The record of contempt convictions under article VII of this chapter; 
(9)  The amount of bail and names and addresses of sureties, if any; 
(10)  The time of ordering any stay of execution; 
(11)  The time of issuing execution and the name of the officer to whom delivered; 
(12)  The return of every execution and when made and every renewal of an execution, with the date thereof; 
(13)  The date and reason of removal of the action to another court; 
(14)  The date of giving transcript of judgment; 
(15)  The date of an appeal made from judgment; and 
(16)  All motions made in the action, the decision thereon and all other proceedings in the action which the municipal judge may think useful. 
(b)  Failure of the municipal judge to keep a docket properly shall not affect the jurisdiction of the municipal court or render the judgment void. 
(c)  The transcript of judgment shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and location of the court. 
(2)  The title of action. 
(3)  The name, address and vocation of defendant. 
(4)  The date of judgment. 
(5)  The amount of judgment, costs and fees. 
(6)  The certification that it is a true copy of the judgment. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.01(10))  
Sec. 18-11. - Recording in municipal court. 
Every proceeding in which testimony is taken under oath in the municipal court shall be recorded by electronic means for purposes of appeal. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.01(11))  
Sec. 18-12. - Dispositions and sanctions for juveniles which may be imposed by the municipal court. 
(a)  If the municipal court finds that a juvenile violated an ordinance, the court may impose any of the dispositions listed in Wis. Stats. §§ 938.343 and 938.344 in accordance with the provisions of those statutes. 
(b)  If the municipal court finds by a preponderance of the evidence that a juvenile has violated a dispositional order authorized by Wis. Stats. §§ 938.343 and 938.344 the court may impose any of the sanctions listed in Wis. Stats. § 938.355(6)(d) in accordance with the provisions of that statute. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.01(12))  
Secs. 18-13—18-42. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 18-43. - Use of citations, etc. 
The ordinances of the city may be enforced through the issuance of citations, complaints, summons, warrants, and by arrest. Citations, complaints, summons, and warrants shall be in the form prescribed in this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.02(1))  
Sec. 18-44. - Citation form. 
(a)  The citation shall be issued and signed by a law enforcement officer, by a peace officer, or by any other city official authorized to issue citations with respect to ordinances which are directly related to their official responsibilities, or endorsed by a municipal attorney, or if applicable, signed by a conservation warden and shall contain substantially the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and date of birth of the defendant. 
(2)  The name and department of the issuing officer. 
(3)  The violation alleged, the time and place of occurrence, a statement that the defendant committed the violation, the ordinance, resolution or by law violated and a designation of the violation in language which can be readily understood. 
(4)  A date, time and place for the court appearance, and a notice to appear. 
(5)  Provisions for amount of deposit and stipulation in lieu of a court appearance, if applicable. 
(6)  Notice that the defendant may make a deposit and thereby obtain release if an arrest has been made. 
(7)  Notice that the defendant may, by mail prior to the court appearance, enter a plea of not guilty and may, within ten days after entry of the plea, request a jury trial. 
(8)  Notice that if the defendant makes a deposit and fails to appear in court at the time fixed in the citation, the defendant is deemed to have tendered a plea of no contest and submits to a forfeiture, penalty assessment imposed by Wis. Stats. § 757.05, jail assessment imposed by Wis. Stats. § 302.46(1), plus costs, including the fee prescribed in Wis. Stats. § 814.65(1), not to exceed the amount of the deposit. The notice shall also state that the court may decide to summon the defendant rather than accept the deposit and plea. 
(9)  Notice that if the defendant does not make a deposit and fails to appear in court at the time fixed in the citation, the court may issue a summons or a warrant for the defendant's arrest or may enter a default judgment against the defendant. 
(10)  Any other pertinent information. 
(b)  Except for parking violations, in traffic regulation actions in municipal court, the uniform citation and complaint form specified in Wis. Stats. § 345.11 shall be used in lieu of the citation form specified in subsection (a) of this section. In actions for violations of local ordinances enacted in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 30.77 the citation form specified in Wis. Stats. § 23.54 shall be used in lieu of the citation form specified in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.02(2))  
Sec. 18-45. - Complaint form. 
The complaint shall be signed by a complainant and shall contain substantially the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and date of birth of the defendant. 
(2)  The department permit or license number of the defendant, is applicable. 
(3)  The name and department of the issuing officer. 
(4)  The title of the cause, specifying the name of the court and county in which the action is brought and the names and addresses of the parties to the action. 
(5)  A plain and concise statement of the violation identifying the event or occurrence from which the violation arose and showing that the plaintiff is entitled to relief, the ordinance, resolution or bylaw upon which the cause of action is based and a demand for forfeiture, the amount of which shall not exceed the maximum set by the statute involved, the penalty assessment and such other relief that is sought by the plaintiff. 
(6)  Notice that the defendant may by mail prior to the court appearance enter a plea of not guilty and may within ten days after entry of the plea request a jury trial. 
(7)  If the action is against a business corporation or a nonstock corporation, the complaint shall state the corporate existence and whether the corporation is a domestic or foreign corporation. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.02(3))  
Sec. 18-46. - Summons form. 
The summons shall be signed by the municipal judge and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The title of the cause, specifying the name of the court and county in which the action is brought and the names of all parties to the action. 
(2)  A direction summoning and requiring the defendant to appear in a specified court on a particular date, not less than ten days following service of the summons, to answer the accompanying citation or complaint. 
(3)  A notice that in case of failure to appear, judgment may be rendered against the defendant according to the demand of the citation or complaint, or the court may issue a warrant for the defendant's arrest. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.02(4))  
Sec. 18-47. - Warrant form. 
The warrant shall: 
(1)  Be in the name of the state; 
(2)  Be directed to all law enforcement officers in the state; 
(3)  Be signed by the municipal judge who authorizes its issuance; and 
(4)  Contain or have attached hereto the following information: 
a.  The name of the defendant. 
b.  The offense alleged. 
c.  A copy of the citation or complaint. 
d.  A finding of probable cause that the defendant committed the offense. 
e.  A command to arrest the defendant and bring him/her before the municipal judge or other municipal judge or judge of the county. 
f.  The date of issuance. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.02(5))  
Sec. 18-48. - Authority to arrest without a warrant. 
A person may be arrested without a warrant for the violation of a municipal ordinance if the arresting officer has reasonable grounds to believe that the person is violating or has violated the ordinance. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.02(6))  
Secs. 18-49—18-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CITATIONS ISSUED BY CITY OFFICIALS 
 
Sec. 18-70. - Who may issue. 
In addition to any law enforcement officer, the following officials are authorized to issue citations in connection with the enforcement of the ordinances set forth in section 70-309: the fire chief, deputy fire chiefs and fire inspectors; the building inspector and deputy building inspectors; the zoning administrator/city planner; the water superintendent; the superintendent of highways; the animal control officer and the city engineer/director of public works; and the code enforcement officer. Any such official may, with the approval of the common council, delegate the authority to issue citations to employees who are under the official's supervision and control. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.03(1))  
Sec. 18-71. - Schedule applicable; manner of making deposits. 
(a)  The forfeiture/bond/deposit schedule set forth in section 70-309 and is established for use in connection with citations issued pursuant to this section and article IV of this chapter. 
(b)  Deposits shall be made in cash, by money order, or by certified check to the clerk of municipal court who shall provide a receipt therefor. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.03(2))  
Sec. 18-72. - Violator's options; procedure on default. 
(a)  The person named as the alleged violator in a citation issued pursuant to this article may appear in municipal court at the time specified in the citation or may mail or deliver personally a cash deposit in the amount, within the time and to the court, clerk of court or other official specified in the citation. If a person makes a cash deposit, the person may nevertheless appear in court at the time specified in the citation, provided that the cash deposit may be retained for application against any forfeiture, penalty assessment under Wis. Stats. § 757.05, jail assessment and costs which may be imposed. 
(b)  If a person appears in court in response to a citation issued pursuant to this article the citation may be used as the initial pleading, unless the court directs that a formal complaint be made, and such appearance confers personal jurisdiction over the person. The person may plead guilty, no contest or not guilty. If the person pleads guilty or no contest, the court shall accept the plea, enter a judgment of guilty and impose forfeiture and the penalty assessment imposed by Wis. Stats. § 757.05. A plea of not guilty shall put all matters in the case at issue, and the matter shall be set for trial. 
(c)  If the alleged violator makes a cash deposit and fails to appear in court, the citation may serve as the initial pleading and the violator shall be deemed to have tendered a plea of no contest and submitted to forfeiture and the penalty assessment imposed by Wis. Stats. § 757.05 not exceeding the amount of the deposit. The court may either accept the plea of no contest and enter judgment accordingly or reject the plea. If the court accepts the plea of no contest, the defendant may move within ten days after the date set for the appearance to withdraw the plea of no contest, open the judgment and enter a plea of not guilty if the defendant shows to the satisfaction of the court that the failure to appear was due to mistake, inadvertence, surprise or excusable neglect. If the plea of no contest is accepted and not subsequently changed to a plea of not guilty, no costs or fees may be taxed against the violator, but a penalty assessment shall be assessed. If the court rejects the plea of no contest or if the alleged violator does not make a cash deposit and fails to appear in court at the time specified in the citation, an action for collection of the forfeiture and penalty assessment may be commenced under Wis. Stats. § 66.0114. The citation may be used as the complaint in the action for the collection of the forfeiture and penalty assessment. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.03(3))  
Sec. 18-73. - Relationship to other laws. 
The issuance of a citation under this article shall not preclude the proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the same or any other matter. The proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the same or any other matter shall not preclude the issuance of a citation under this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.03(4))  
Secs. 18-74—18-104. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MUNICIPAL COURT PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 18-105. - Commencement of action. 
(a)  Personal jurisdiction in municipal ordinance violation cases and cases involving a violation of a resolution or bylaw if the resolution or bylaw is authorized by statute shall be obtained over a defendant when the defendant: 
(1)  Is served with a summons and complaint or citation and such documents are filed with the court; 
(2)  Is arrested and brought before a court; or 
(3)  Voluntarily appears before a municipal judge. 
(b)  Service under subsection (a)(1) of this section shall be as provided in Wis. Stats. § 968.04(3)(b)2 or by personal service by a city employee. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.04(1))  
Sec. 18-106. - Stipulation of no contest prior to the initial appearance. 
(a)  If a person is issued a citation in a case specified in section 18-44, the person may make a stipulation of no contest and deposit as follows: 
(1)  In traffic regulation cases, as provided in Wis. Stats. § 345.27. 
(2)  In boating violations, as provided in Wis. Stats. § 23.67. 
(3)  In other violations, the person may make such a stipulation and deposit only if the common council has approved the deposit schedule under subsection (c) of this section. The person may make the stipulation of no contest and deposit to the municipal court at any time prior to the initial appearance. 
(b)  The person who has made a stipulation and deposit under subsection (a) of this section may appear in court. In such case, the court shall allow the person to withdraw his/her plea of no contest. The person need not appear in court. 
(c)  The amount of the deposit shall be set by the municipal judge, but shall not be effective until approved by the common council. The amount shall not exceed the maximum penalty for the offense, including any penalty assessment that would be applicable under Wis. Stats. § 757.05 and any jail assessment that would be applicable under Wis. Stats. § 302.46(1), plus court costs, including the fee prescribed in Wis. Stats. § 814.65(1). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.04(2))  
Sec. 18-107. - Pleading by mail. 
If a summons is served or citation is issued for a violation of any municipal ordinance, the defendant may enter a plea of not guilty based on such summons or citation by letter to the municipal judge at the address indicated on the summons or citation. The letter shall include the defendant's return address and may include a request for trial during normal daytime business hours. Upon receipt of the letter, the judge shall reply by mail to the defendant's address setting forth the place for trial and the time for the trial which shall be during normal business hours if requested by the defendant. The date of the trial shall be at least ten days from the mailing by the judge. This section shall not preclude the setting of the trial at any time convenient to all parties concerned. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.04(3))  
Sec. 18-108. - Initial appearance; pleas; trial. 
(a)  When a defendant appears or is brought before the municipal court, the judge shall read the charge to the defendant as stated in the warrant, complaint or citation, and shall explain the range of penalties which may be imposed. 
(b)  The court shall inform the defendant that he/she may plead guilty, not guilty or no contest or may request a continuance; of the effect of a plea of no contest; and of the right to a jury trial. 
(c)  The defendant shall plead to the charges and the municipal judge shall enter the plea in the court docket. If the defendant refuses to plead, the municipal judge shall enter a plea of not guilty. 
(d)  If the defendant pleads guilty or no contest, the court shall convict the defendant of the offense charged and render judgment. 
(e)  If the defendant charged with violation of Wis. Stats. § 346.63(1) or (5) pleads not guilty and within ten days after entry of the plea requests a jury trial and pays the required fees, the municipal judge shall promptly transmit all papers and fees in the cause to the clerk of circuit court for a jury trial under Wis. Stats. § 345.43. The plea of not guilty and request for jury trial may be made by mail. In cases not governed by Wis. Stats. §§ 345.20 to 345.53, the amount of deposit set out in the citation shall accompany the mailed request. Upon receipt of the request, the circuit court will set a time for trial. Any deposit made personally or by mail is forfeited upon nonappearance at the time set for trial. The required fee for a jury is as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 814.61(4). 
(f)  If the defendant agrees to immediate trial by the court, and the prosecutor is prepared for trial, the case may be tried immediately. If trial is not held immediately, the municipal judge shall then set a date for trial or advise the defendant that he/she will later be notified of the date set for trial. 
(g)  If the court accepts a plea of no contest or judgment is entered against a defendant by default, the defendant may move within six months after the date set for the appearance to withdraw the plea of no contest, reopen the judgment and enter a plea of not guilty upon a showing to the satisfaction of the court that the failure to appear was due to mistake, inadvertence, surprise or excusable neglect. If on reopening the defendant is found not guilty, the court shall in traffic cases under Wis. Stats. §§ 345.20 to 345.53 immediately notify the department of transportation to delete the record of conviction based on the original proceeding and shall order the defendant's deposit returned. In this subsection, the term "default judgment" means only a judgment where there has been a plea of no contest and a forfeiture of a deposit. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.04(4))  
Sec. 18-109. - Forfeiture/bond/deposit. 
(a)  The municipal judge may release a defendant without a deposit. 
(b)  If the municipal judge determines that the defendant should not be released under subsection (a) of this section and the defendant is charged with a traffic or boating violation, the municipal judge shall release the defendant on a deposit as bail in the amount established by the uniform deposit schedule under Wis. Stats. § 345.26(2)(a) or under Wis. Stats. § 23.66. For other violations, the municipal judge shall establish a forfeiture/bond/ deposit as bail in an amount not to exceed the maximum penalty for the offense, including any penalty assessment which would be applicable under Wis. Stats. § 757.05 or on failure of the defendant to make a forfeiture/bond/deposit as bail under this section, he/she shall be committed to jail pending trial while the default continues. 
(c)  If the defendant has made a deposit under this section and does not appear, he/she is deemed to have tendered a plea of no contest and submits to forfeiture and a penalty assessment imposed by Wis. Stats. § 757.05 plus costs, not exceeding the amount of the deposit. The court may either accept the plea of no contest and enter judgment accordingly, or reject the plea and issue a summons. If the defendant fails to appear in response to the summons, the court shall issue a warrant under Wis. Stats. § 968.09. If the defendant has made a deposit but does appear, the court shall allow the defendant to withdraw the plea of no contest. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.04(5))  
Sec. 18-110. - Procedure at trial. 
(a)  Order of proof. In a trial before the municipal court, the city shall provide a prosecutor who is an attorney authorized or licensed to practice law in this state. The city shall first offer evidence in support of the citation or complaint. The defendant may offer evidence after the city has rested. If the city and the defendant have offered evidence upon the citation or complaint, the parties may then respectively offer rebuttal testimony only, unless the court permits them to offer evidence upon their original case. Both parties shall have the opportunity to question all witnesses. 
(b)  Oath or affirmation. 
(1)  Before testifying in the municipal court, every witness shall be required to declare that he/she will testify truthfully, by oath or affirmation administered in a form calculated to awaken his/her conscience and impress the witness with the duty to testify truthfully. 
(2)  The oath may be administered by the municipal judge or his/her designee substantially in the following form: "Do you solemnly swear that the testimony you shall give in this matter shall be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, so help you God." 
(3)  Every person who declares that he/she has conscientious scruples against taking the oath, or swearing in the usual form, shall make a solemn declaration or affirmation, which may be in the following form: "Do you solemnly, sincerely and truly declare and affirm that the testimony you shall give in this matter shall be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth; and this you do under the pains and penalties of perjury." 
(4)  The assent to the oath or affirmation by the person making it may be manifested by the uplifted hand. 
(c)  Standard of proof. The standard of proof for conviction of any person charged with violation of any municipal ordinance, bylaw or resolution specified in Wis. Stats. § 800.02 shall be evidence that is clear, satisfactory and convincing. 
(d)  Rules of evidence. The municipal court shall be bound by the rules of evidence specified in Wis. Stats. chs. 901 to 911. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.04(6))  
Sec. 18-111. - Judgment. 
(a)  Judgment on determination of guilt. If the municipal court finds a defendant guilty it may render judgment by ordering payment of forfeiture and the penalty assessment imposed by Wis. Stats. § 757.05 plus costs of prosecution and by imprisonment in default of such payment. Any person committed under this section may be accorded privileges under Wis. Stats. § 303.08. The court may defer payment of any judgment for not more than 60 days. At the time the judgment is rendered, the court shall inform the defendant of the date by which payment of the forfeiture, penalty assessment and costs must be made, and of the possible consequences of failure to make the payment in timely fashion. 
(b)  Judgment on plea of guilty or no contest or on failure to appear. 
(1)  If the defendant pleads guilty or no contest, the court shall convict the defendant of the offense charged and render judgment. 
(2)  If the person arrested and released fails to appear personally or by an attorney at the time fixed for hearing of the case, the defendant may be deemed to have entered a plea of no contest and the money deposited, if any, or such portion thereof as the court determines to be an adequate penalty, plus the penalty assessment and costs, may be declared forfeited by the court or may be ordered applied upon the payment of any penalty which may be imposed, together with the penalty assessment and costs. In either event, any remaining money shall be refunded to the person who made the deposit. 
(3)  This subsection shall not apply to violations of parking ordinances. Bail given for appearance to answer a charge under any such ordinance may be forfeited as determined by the common council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.04(7))  
Sec. 18-112. - Failure to pay forfeiture. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section persons who fail to pay forfeitures, penalty assessments and costs shall be committed to a jail or a house of correction in the county in which the cause of action arose for not more than 90 days and shall be kept at the expense of the municipality. Any person committed under this section may be accorded privileges under Wis. Stats. § 303.08. 
(b)  If a child fails to pay any forfeiture imposed by the court, the court shall not impose a jail sentence but may suspend his/her hunting, trapping or fishing license or may suspend his/her operating privilege, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(4) for not less than 30, nor more than 90 days. If the court suspends a license under this subsection, it shall immediately take possession of the suspended license and forward it to the department which issued the license, together with the notice of suspension clearly stating that the suspension is for failure to pay a forfeiture imposed by the court. If the forfeiture is paid during the first 30 days after the license is suspended, the suspension shall be reduced to the minimum period of 30 days. If it is paid thereafter, the court shall immediately notify the department, which shall thereupon return the license to the person. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.04(8))  
Sec. 18-113. - Discovery in municipal court. 
Neither party is entitled to pretrial discovery, except that if the defendant moves within seven days after the initial appearance in person or by an attorney and shows cause therefor, the court may order that the defendant be allowed to inspect documents, including lists of names of witnesses, and to test under Wis. Stats. § 804.09 under such conditions as the court prescribes, any devices used by the plaintiff to determine whether a violation has been committed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.04(9))  
Sec. 18-114. - Substitution of municipal judge. 
(a)  In cases specified in Wis. Stats. § 800.02, a person charged with a violation may file a written request for a substitution of a new judge for the municipal judge assigned to the trial of that case. The written request shall be filed not later than seven days after the initial appearance in person or by an attorney. The municipal judge against whom a request has been filed may set initial bail and accept a plea of not guilty. 
(b)  Except a provided in subsection (d) of this section, no person may file more than one such written request in any one action. 
(c)  In municipal court, upon receipt of the written request, the case shall be transferred as provided in Wis. Stats. § 751.03(2). Upon transfer, the municipal judge shall transmit to the appropriate court all the papers in the action and the action shall proceed as if it had been commenced in that court. 
(d)  If upon an appeal from a judgment or order or upon a writ of error the appellate court orders a new trial or reverses or modifies the judgment or order in a manner such that further proceedings in the municipal court are necessary, the person charged with a violation may file a request under subsection (a) of this section within 20 days after the entry of the judgment or decision of the appellate court whether or not another request was filed to the time the appeal or writ of error was taken. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.04(10))  
Secs. 18-115—18-141. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - APPEAL FROM MUNICIPAL COURT DECISION 
 
Sec. 18-142. - Notice of appeal. 
Appeals from judgments of the municipal court may be taken by either party to the circuit court of the county where the offense occurred. The appellant shall appeal by giving the municipal judge written notice of appeal within 20 days after judgment. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.05(1))  
Sec. 18-143. - Defendant appeal bond. 
On appeal by the defendant, the defendant shall execute a bond to the city with or without surety, approved by the municipal judge that if the judgment is affirmed in whole or in part the defendant shall pay the judgment and all costs awarded on appeal. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.05(2))  
Sec. 18-144. - Stay of municipal court judgment. 
On meeting the requirements for appeal, execution on the judgment of the municipal court shall be stayed until the final disposition of the appeal. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.05(3))  
Sec. 18-145. - Transcript; recording. 
On appeals from judgments of the municipal court, a transcript shall be prepared of the record proceedings in the municipal court. The transcript prepared from the electronic recording shall be certified by the municipal judge and paid for under section 18-184. The tape of the electronic recording shall be retained by the municipal court during the pendency of the appeal and be available to the reviewing court upon its order. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.05(4))  
Sec. 18-146. - Review on record. 
The appeal in circuit court from a judgment of the municipal court shall be a review of the transcript prepared under section 18-145 and the tape of the proceeding if so ordered by the court unless the court in the interest of justice orders or any party requests a trial de novo to the circuit court without a jury. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.05(5))  
Sec. 18-147. - Disposition of appeal. 
The disposition of the appeal shall be certified to the municipal court by the reviewing court within 30 days of the judgment of the reviewing court. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.05(6))  
Secs. 18-148—18-177. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - MUNICIPAL COURT FEES AND COSTS 
 
Sec. 18-178. - Court costs. 
Court costs are the maximum allowed by Wis. Stats. § 814.65 on each separate matter that comes before the municipal judge, whether it is on default of appearance or a plea of guilty or no contest or on issuance of a warrant or summons or the action is tried as a contested matter. The municipal treasurer shall pay monthly to the state treasurer the amount as required by Wis. Stats. § 814.65. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.06(1))  
Sec. 18-179. - Witness and interpreter's fees. 
The fees of witnesses and interpreters shall be paid as specified in Wis. Stats. § 814.67. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.06(2))  
Sec. 18-180. - Fees paid to municipality. 
All fees and costs collectible by the municipal judge shall be paid to the municipality which brought the matter before the municipal judge. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.06(3))  
Sec. 18-181. - Forfeitures, fees, penalty assessments and costs turned over to the municipality. 
All forfeitures, fees, penalty assessments and costs paid to the municipal court under a judgment before the municipal judge shall be paid to the municipal treasurer within seven days after receipt of the money by the municipal judge or other court personnel. At the time of the payment, the municipal judge shall report to the municipal treasurer the title of the action, the offense for which forfeiture was imposed and the total amount of the forfeiture, fees, penalty assessments and costs, if any. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.06(4))  
Sec. 18-182. - Attorney fees. 
The municipal court shall not impose and collect attorney fees. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.06(5))  
Sec. 18-183. - Taxation of fees and costs. 
Other than fees specified in section 18-178, no fees or costs are taxable by the city to a party before the municipal court unless it is directly chargeable to the city as a disbursement, such as service of process costs. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.06(6))  
Sec. 18-184. - Costs and fees on appeal. 
On appeal from municipal court, the filing fees as designated in Wis. Stats. § 59.42(3) and the suit tax as designated in Wis. Stats. § 814.61(8) are applicable. The appellant shall also pay a fee as set forth in the fee schedule for the transcript prepared under section 18-145. Costs shall be as provided in Wis. Stats. § 814.08. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.06(7))  
Secs. 18-185—18-206. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - CONTEMPT OF COURT 
 
Sec. 18-207. - Definitions. 
The term "contempt of court," as used in this article, means the intentional: 
(1)  Misconduct in the presence of the court which interferes with a court proceeding or with the administration of justice, or which impairs the respect due the court; 
(2)  Disobedience, resistance or obstruction of the authority, process or order of the court; 
(3)  Refusal as a witness to appear, be sworn or answer a question; or 
(4)  Refusal to produce a record, document or other object. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.07(1))  
Sec. 18-208. - Imposition of sanctions authorized. 
The municipal judge may impose, in accordance with the procedures under Wis. Stats. § 785.03, a forfeiture for contempt of court in an amount not to exceed $50.00 or, upon nonpayment of the forfeitures and the penalty assessment under Wis. Stats. § 757.05, a jail sentence not to exceed seven days. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.07(2))  
Sec. 18-209. - Relationship to statutes. 
This article is intended to facilitate the implementation of Wis. Stats. chs. 755, 800, and Wis. Stats. §§ 938.17, 938.344, and 66.0113, within the city. To the extent necessary to accomplish this, such statutes and any amendments thereto are adopted by reference. In the event that any provision of this article is inconsistent or conflicts with such statutes or any of them, the statute and not this article shall control and be applied. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 7.08)  
TITLE II LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT  
Chapter 22 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The city's prior zoning ordinance was adopted March 24, 1987, to be effective April 7, 1987. That original ordinance was supplemented periodically until October 12, 2010, when the entire ordinance was revised, readopted and used as the base ordinance for this zoning chapter. 
State Law reference— City planning and zoning, board of appeals, Wis. Stats. § 62.23; community and other living arrangements, Wis. Stats. § 60.63; platting lands and recording and vacating plats generally, Wis. Stats. § 236.01 et seq.; local subdivision regulation, Wis. Stats. § 236.45; comprehensive municipal planning, Wis. Stats. § 66.1001; zoning of wetlands and shorelands, Wis. Stats. § 62.231; floodplain zoning, Wis. Stats. § 87.30; navigable waters protection law, Wis. Stats. § 281.31; farmland preservation, Wis. Stats. § 91.01 et seq.; fences generally, Wis. Stats. § 90.01 et seq.; regional planning programs, Wis. Stats. § 60.82; housing authorities, Wis. Stats. § 66.1201 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Areas to which this chapter applies. 
(a)  This chapter applies to all lands located within the city and to such lands that may be added to the city subsequent to the effective date of this chapter. 
(b)  Application of this chapter to lands newly added to the city by annexation shall be governed by applicable state law. 
(c)  (This section will be reserved for use in the event the city decides to apply this chapter to extraterritorial areas.) 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.04, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-2. - Comprehensive plan adopted. 
The city has adopted as though fully set forth in this chapter that certain document entitled "City of Fitchburg Comprehensive Plan" dated March 24, 2009, and as amended. A copy of the adopted plan is available in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.05, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-3. - Compliance. 
(a)  The use of any land; the size, shape and placement of lots; the use, occupancy, size and location of structures and equipment and all other matters dealt with in this chapter shall comply with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. It shall be unlawful for a use, structure or occupancy to occur in noncompliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(b)  Any actions, decisions or interpretations under this article shall be consistent with the city comprehensive plan (as originally approve and as amended) adopted pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.1001. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.11, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-4. - Pre-existing substandard parcels. 
(a)  Lots or parcels used or proposed to be placed in a use allowable under this chapter that are deficient in minimum lot area or minimum lot width may be allowable for such use if the parcel was of record with the register of deeds on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived in its current size or shape and if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  If one or more adjoining parcels are owned by the same party and if joinder of parcels or movement of parcel boundaries is determined to be feasible, the substandard parcel shall be required to be made more conforming by combination with the adjoining parcel or movement of parcel boundaries. 
(2)  If the deficiency is lack of required frontage on a public street, an existing substandard parcel may nevertheless be approved if it has either 20 feet of frontage on a public street or (for residential parcels) effective and workable easement access to a public street. 
(3)  An existing substandard parcel that is zoned residential may be allowed as a site for a residential dwelling structure not to exceed two units if it has 6,000 square feet of lot area and at least 60 feet of lot width at the building line along with an effective and workable easement access to a public street. If such a parcel is 6,000 square feet or more in area but less than standard dimensions, the area of such lot may not be reduced. 
(b)  These allowances apply only to pre-existing substandard parcels and do not establish policy or precedent favoring the creation of new substandard lot configurations. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.13, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-5. - Pre-existing nonconforming uses and developments. 
(a)  The lawful established and operational use of a structure or premises existing on the effective date of this chapter or the effective date of an amendment to this chapter may be continued although such use does not conform with the provisions of the chapter or the amendment, except as hereinafter specified. 
(b)  Use nonconformity. The total structural repairs or alterations of a lawfully established nonconforming building, premises, structure or fixture shall not during its life exceed 50 percent of the assessed value of the building, premises, structure or fixture unless permanently changed to a conforming use. 
(c)  Dimensional nonconformity. If a nonconforming use or the use (conforming or nonconforming) of a structure that is nonconforming as to dimensional requirements is discontinued for a period of 12 months, any future use of the building or premises shall conform to the chapter. 
(d)  A building or structure that is nonconforming as to dimensional standards may be repaired, altered or expanded provided that such work does not increase the dimensional nonconformity of the building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.14, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-6. - General provisions and exceptions. 
(a)  Heights for institutional facilities such as, but not limited to government structures, churches, utility structures, and schools, may exceed the height of the district in which it is located, but not otherwise provided for, as long as such height is approved by the plan commission on a conditional use basis. In addition to the standards and conditions identified in section 22-640, the plan commission may also place conditions relative to the structure's use or occupancy above the maximum height of the district in which the structure is located. 
(b)  Setbacks for an underground basement parking structure in a business or industrial district may be reduced to be within two feet from the property line on a conditional use basis, provided that any part of the garage that is exposed above grade shall meet the required district setbacks and any aboveground buildings meet the required district setbacks. 
(c)  Roof overhangs of up to two feet shall not be subject to the setback requirements. 
(d)  Community gardens shall be allowed in all zoning districts subject to the following: 
(1)  Gardens shall be limited to the cultivation of fruits, vegetables, herbs, plants and flowers. 
(2)  Gardens shall be run by a nonprofit entity, community group, or neighborhood group acting as a garden coordinator. The garden shall be served by a water supply sufficient to support the cultivation practices on the site. A small storage shed, 100 square feet or less, shall be permitted, but it shall meet the front setback for the respective district, shall be at least four feet from a side or rear lot line and shall not be greater than 15 feet in height. 
(3)  Greenhouses and/or hoophouses associated with a community garden require a conditional use permit (except within the R-D Rural Development and A-X/A-T Agricultural Districts where they are permitted) and those structures shall follow the dimensional standards of the zoning district. 
(e)  Wind turbines. Wind turbines may be erected and maintained in any zoning district subject to the following standards: 
(1)  No turbine shall be permitted within an environmental corridor or wetland, and any turbine in the A-X zoning district shall be subject to article V, section 22-482(4)(b) herein. 
(2)  A wind turbine of 35 feet of total height or less shall be a permitted use in any district, except for the park and recreation zoning district. 
(3)  Any wind turbine in the park and recreation district shall require a conditional use permit. 
(4)  A wind turbine over 35 feet in height may be considered for conditional use application only if it is proposed to be on a lot that is one acre or larger in size. 
(5)  Wind turbines that are over 60 feet in height and that meet all technical standards of this chapter may, nevertheless, be rejected for conditional use approval by the plan commission upon a finding that the height is wholly out of proportion with prevailing heights of structures and objects within the neighborhood and would consequently be seriously disruptive of neighborhood aesthetic character or fails to meet any of the criteria set forth in section 22-640(c). 
(6)  Setbacks shall be pursuant to Public Service Commission (PSC) regulations enacted pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 196.378. 
(7)  Standards for conditional use review. 
a.  Plan commission staff shall identify all applicable federal or state construction codes. 
b.  All applicable utility regulations shall be satisfied as to interconnection and operation of interconnected systems. 
c.  The proposed installation shall be controlled by fences or other anticlimbing devices. 
d.  Conditions shall be placed requiring removal when use of wind tower has ceased. 
(8)  Application requirements. Applications for conditional use approval shall include or be accompanied by a plot plan. 
(9)  Soil test data may be required by the plan commission staff if such data is necessary to judge the adequacy of design. 
(f)  The minimum open space requirements within the business and industrial zoning districts shall only apply to lands platted or zoned after October 12, 2010. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.15, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2011-O-05, § 1, 4-26-2011; Ord. No. 2015-O-01, § 1, 2-24-2015)  
Sec. 22-7. - Standard zoning districts. 
This chapter identifies zoning districts containing use identifications and dimensional-intensity standards. Lands placed in one of these districts shall be eligible for development according to the rules for that district. The location and boundaries of the zoning districts are hereby established as shown on the map entitled "Zoning District Maps of the City of Fitchburg," together with all information shown thereon and all amendments thereto shall be as much a part of this article as if fully set forth and described herein. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.20, 10-12-2010)  
Secs. 22-8—22-32. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-33. - Residential objectives. 
Development objectives for the residential portion of the Fitchburg community shall be as follows: 
(1)  For presently developed areas, to preserve existing community values of quiet, privacy, safety, natural beauty, attractive landscape features and open space; to promote property improvement and upkeep; and to allow structures, parcels and yard areas to be adapted to new variations in residential and related usages reflecting changing conditions, without detracting from the residential character of neighborhoods. 
(2)  For developing areas, to encourage production of new housing patterns that will be functional, attractive, adaptable and capable of holding their value. It is also an objective to allow for new types, formats, and mixtures of housing to reflect changing consumer preferences, economics, and technologies. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.21, 10-12-2010)  
Secs. 22-34—22-54. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - R-L LOW DENSITY DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 22-55. - Permitted uses. 
For the R-L Low Density District, permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Residential occupancy of a single-family detached dwelling unit structure. 
(2)  Limited vocational activities. Residential occupancy also includes limited vocational (household occupations) activities. Permits are not required prior to engaging in such activities, but the following standards apply: 
a.  The activity must be clearly secondary and incidental to residential use. 
b.  The activity must not significantly alter the residential character of the dwelling unit, dwelling structure or the parcel. 
c.  The activity must not unreasonably interfere with residential occupancy of other parcels in the neighborhood. 
d.  The activity must not create environmental, safety or health hazards such as noise, light, odors, vibrations, electrical emissions, or other fire or safety hazards that are noticeably out of character with those produced by normal residential occupancy. 
e.  Traffic generated by the vocational activity may not exceed that which is customary to residential occupancies in the neighborhood. 
f.  Signage for the vocational activity will be governed by the sign ordinance. 
g.  The parcel and structure must contain adequate area to accommodate the vocational activity without interfering with residential occupancy of other parcels in the neighborhood. 
h.  Garage sales as a type of vocational activity are allowable in all residential districts provided that not more than two are held on a single premises per year and that each such sale shall not exceed four days in duration. 
i.  Day care is allowable as a vocational activity on a residential premises. Conditional use approval will be required, however, if Wis. Stats. § 66.1017 apply. (See section 22-220.) 
(3)  Group homes with capacity to accommodate eight or fewer individuals are a permitted occupancy in the R-L district. 
(4)  Residential accessory developments and occupancies, pursuant to section 22-56. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.22, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-56. - Accessory occupancies; special standards. 
For the R-L Low Density District, accessory occupancies, special standards are as follows: 
(1)  Gardens and landscape features (walks, steps, railing, terraces, trellises, birdfeeders/baths, swing sets, sandboxes, compost storage, sprinkler systems, landscape lighting, clothes lines, etc.). 
a.  Retaining walls shall be setback at least one foot from the property line. 
b.  Solid walls that extend three feet or more above the ground for three or more feet of their length can be no closer than two feet to any lot line. 
(2)  Window wells. 
a.  Small window wells no greater than 18 inches from the foundation and no more than three feet along the foundation are exempt from these standards. 
b.  A window well may encroach up to a maximum of three feet into the required rear yard and may encroach up to a maximum of two feet into a required side yard. 
c.  Not more than one window well shall be permitted to encroach into each of the rear or side yards. 
(3)  Driveways cannot be closer than two feet to a side or rear lot line unless such driveway is jointly used by the adjoining landowners pursuant to an express recorded easement or other recorded document evidencing the same. Driveways must be hard surfaced. 
(4)  Parking spaces that are in locations other than in a driveway cannot be directly in front of a dwelling structure on the front side of the lot, or between the side of the house and the street on a corner lot, or in the front setback except in the driveway. A driveway is an actively used private way and shall not be more than two lanes in width in any part of the lot except for the direct path from the garage or primary parking space to the street. Parking spaces shall not be closer than two feet from the side or rear lot lines. 
(5)  Patios/decks at ground level or at a floor level shall be no more than four feet above ground level at any point under the deck (decks at greater height are considered part of the structure and may not intrude into setback areas). For detached gazebos or screen enclosures, maximum lot coverage rules apply. There shall be a ten-foot minimum separation measured in from any side (or the side yard setback of the subject property's zoning district, whichever is lesser) or rear lot line to the edge or side of the facility unless the applicant has obtained a signed and notarized affidavit of consent to run with the land from the owner(s) of record of the neighboring properties identifying a closer distance, and has recorded this against both parcels in the register of deeds office and with the city zoning administrator. 
(6)  Detached garages/carports and storage buildings greater than 400 square feet in floor area shall comply with setback standards. They must not be taller than the principal structure, and in no case more than 15 feet in height. Maximum lot coverage rules apply. Such accessory structure(s) shall not be forward of the front face of the principal structure. 
(7)  Storage buildings/sheds/enclosures/pet houses/runs must obey front setbacks and cannot be less than four feet from a side or rear lot line. They cannot be taller than the principal structure and in no case more than 15 feet in height. They cannot exceed 400 square feet in floor area for each such structure. Maximum lot coverage rules apply. Such accessory structure(s) shall not be forward of the front face of the principal structure. 
(8)  Hard surface sport and play areas and swimming pools. There shall be a ten-foot minimum distance from side or rear lot line (measured from water edge or edge of sport or play area) unless the applicant has obtained a signed and notarized affidavit of consent to run with the land from the owners of record of the neighboring properties identifying a closer distance, and has recorded this against both parcels in the register of deeds office and with the city zoning administrator. Pools must be fenced. 
(9)  Air conditioning equipment, heat pumps, antenna. Height limits for the district apply. Such equipment shall not be located forward the front faces of the principal structure and shall be located at least four feet from side and rear property lines. Any object that has potential for safety, or attractive nuisance problems must, at the discretion of the zoning administrator, be security fenced. Noise levels may not exceed 65 db at the lot line. 
(10)  Fences. 
a.  Fences must be kept in good repair. Decorative sides must face outward. Supporting members or braces shall be on the inside and smooth or flat faces on the outside. If two faces are used, each face shall be of the same type and finish. Chainlink fence is permitted. Fences may not have chicken wire, woven wire, barbed wire, razor wire, electric wire, hazardous wire edges or similar materials. 
b.  Perimeter fences are those located within five feet of the lot line. These cannot exceed six feet in height and cannot be forward of the front face of the house, except as provided below. 
c.  Fences, perimeter or otherwise, in front yards shall be decorative only; at least 50 percent of their bulk must be air space and they must be not more than four feet in height. 
(11)  Earth station dish antennas. 
a.  Dish antennas shall be built and anchored to withstand winds of not less than 80 miles per hour. No dish antennas shall be erected in any yard except a rear yard, nor shall more than one dish antenna be permitted on a lot or parcel. 
b.  Dish antennas over one meter in diameter and satellite devices that are not designed to receive video programming shall be located and screened to minimize their visual impact on surrounding residential properties. They shall also be shielded or filtered to prevent the emission or reflection of electro-magnetic radiation that would cause any harmful interference with the radio and/or television broadcasting or reception on adjacent properties. 
(12)  Dogs and cats. 
(13)  Domesticated animals, other than dogs and cats, with a maximum weight of generally less than 30 pounds. 
(14)  Limited animal husbandry: 
a.  Not exceeding 25 percent of one animal unit per acre or a pro-rated portion of an acre. 
b.  Bees. The keeping of honey bees (apis Mellitera) in the yards of single family residences or duplexes located in the R-L, R-LM or R-M district shall be allowed, provided the use complies with the following: 
1.  Number and size of beehives. 
A.  No hive shall exceed 20 cubic feet in volume. 
B.  Up to a maximum of six hives allowed on lots up to two acres. Lots of two to five acres shall be allowed up to eight hives. There shall be no limit on the number of hives kept on a lot or parcel of five acres or more in area. 
C.  The beekeeping use shall be accessory to the primary residential use and not be a commercial operation. 
2.  Location and setbacks. 
A.  Hives shall be located only on lots with single- or two-family residential as the primary use. 
B.  Hives shall not be located in the front yard of any lot, with the hive entrance(s) to face away from the nearest property line. 
C.  A hive shall be at least three feet from a property line, 25 feet from a public sidewalk or public path, and 25 feet from a principal building on an abutting property. 
D.  If a property line is located within 25 feet of a hive, a six-foot tall flyway barrier, comprised of a wall, fence or dense vegetation, or combination thereof, shall be positioned to transect both legs of a triangle extending from an apex at the hive to each end point of the part of the property line to be shielded. 
3.  Management practices. 
A.  Beekeepers shall utilize best practices to avoid creating nuisances, including monitoring bees on a regular basis for the health of the hive, and undertaking beekeeping activities at times when they will not interfere with neighbors' activities and enjoyment of their property. 
B.  A sufficient supply of on-site water shall be provided for all hives. 
C.  Any hive that is abandoned or its use discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive months shall be removed from the premises by the property owner. Hives shall not be modified for any use other than beekeeping. 
D.  All honey bees shall be kept in hives with removable combs, which shall be kept in good repair and usable condition. 
4.  Permit required. 
A.  No person shall acquire, keep, or stock honey bees in the city without being a beekeeper and obtaining a valid permit issued by the zoning administrator, or his/her designee. A permit shall be valid unless revoked pursuant to subsection 4.D. Submission of a completed application shall be accompanied with a fee as identified in the city fee schedule. Applicant shall attest that all requirements of subsections 1—3 are met. 
B.  Any person(s) proposing to keep bees shall notify all property owners and residents on or adjacent to the property on which the hives will be kept, prior to beginning any beekeeping activity. 
C.  Permit is not transferrable. A permit provides permission for honey beekeeping at the address listed in the permit application and only for the permit holder. The permit shall not be transferred to any other person or location. The beekeeper must also notify the planning and zoning department when beekeeping is no longer being conducted on the property, in which case the hive(s) shall be removed from the site. 
D.  Permit revocation. A permit shall be subject to revocation upon failure to comply with any provisions of this section, or if the city determines that continued operation and maintenance of the hive constitutes a reasonable threat to the general health or safety or others. Once a permit is revoked, a permit shall not be reissued. 
5.  Definitions. 
A.  Beekeeper means a person who owns or has charge of one or more colonies of bees, or is requesting to own or take charge of one or more colonies of bees, and has demonstrated to the zoning administrator that he or she is qualified (via education, training, mentor) to act as a beekeeper. 
B.  Colony means an aggregate of honey bees in a hive consisting principally of workers, but having, when perfect, one queen and at times many drones, including the brood. 
C.  Flyway barrier means an obstacle designed to cause bees to fly upward after exiting the hive and directing them away from neighboring and adjoining areas inhabited by humans. 
D.  Hive means the shelter/structure housing a colony of bees including the combs, honey, and pollen. 
E.  Honey bee means all life stages of the common domestic honey bee, apis Mellifera species. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2017-O-07, § 1, 9-26-2017)  
Sec. 22-57. - Conditional uses. 
For the R-L Low Density District, conditional uses are as follows: 
(1)  Dependency living arrangements which allow a dwelling structure to have two complete dwelling units (that is, two units individually contained, each having its own bathroom, kitchen, sleeping and other areas), where one of the two units is not larger than 750 square feet in floor area. One of the two dwelling units, within this structure shall be owner occupied, except for periods of bona fide temporary absences, while the other dwelling unit shall be occupied by either the care provider or the dependent person. There shall not be separate direct entrances for each dwelling unit on the front of the building, unless this prohibits handicapped access. There shall also be at least one interior doorway connecting the two dwelling units. 
(2)  Family day care as defined under section 22-220. 
(3)  Schools. 
(4)  Churches. 
(5)  Recreational facilities. 
(6)  Rest homes and nursing homes. 
(7)  Private clubs. 
(8)  Utility and governmental facilities. 
(9)  Group homes with capacity to accommodate nine or more individuals. 
(10)  Residential-all district conditional uses under division 8 of this article. 
(11)  Bed and breakfast establishments. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.23, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-58. - Dimensional standards. 
For the R-L Low Density District, dimensional standards are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: 10,000 square feet (one acre, unsewered). 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 80 feet. 
(3)  Minimum front setback: 30 feet, except that an open air front porch (with only railings and support posts) or stoop may protrude to within 25 feet of the front lot line. 
(4)  Minimum side setback: Ten feet (can be reduced to five feet if adjacent parcel has a setback that provides a minimum of 15 feet from the adjoining property line, provided there remains a minimum of 20 feet of building separation. The adjoining setback must be committed be deed restriction). 
(5)  Minimum street side setback (corner lot): 25 feet. 
(6)  Minimum rear setback: 35 feet, except that the rear setback may be reduced to as low as 25 feet on a conditional use basis to allow screen porches, and three or four season rooms which are primarily glass or windows. 
(7)  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet or three stories, whichever is less. 
(8)  Maximum lot area coverage and buildings: 35 percent. 
(9)  A single-family dwelling structure with accessory apartment is required to meet the same dimensional standards as a single-family dwelling structure without accessory apartment. A parkland dedication fee shall be assessed for each accessory unit. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.24, 10-12-2010)  
Secs. 22-59—22-89. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - R-LM LOW TO MEDIUM DENSITY DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 22-90. - Permitted uses. 
For the R-LM Low to Medium Density District, permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Residential occupancy of a single-family detached dwelling unit structure. 
(2)  Limited vocational activities (same as section 22-55(b)). 
(3)  Group homes (same as section 22-55(c)). 
(4)  Residential accessory developments (same as section 22-56). 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.25, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-91. - Conditional uses. 
For the R-LM Low to Medium Density District, conditional uses are as follows: 
(1)  Dependency living arrangements. 
(2)  Family day care and group homes with nine or more individuals (see division 8 of this article). 
(3)  Schools, churches, recreational facilities. 
(4)  Rest homes and nursing homes. 
(5)  Private clubs. 
(6)  Utility and governmental facilities. 
(7)  Bed and breakfast establishments. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.26, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-92. - Dimensional standards. 
For the R-LM Low to Medium Density District, dimensional standards are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: 7,200 square feet. No unsewered lots shall be allowed. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 60 feet. 
(3)  Minimum front setback: 30 feet, except that an open front porch or stoop may protrude to within 25 feet of the front lot line. 
(4)  Minimum side setback: Eight feet (can be reduced to five feet if the adjacent parcel has a setback that provides a minimum of 11 feet from the adjoining property line, provided there remains a minimum of 16 of building separation. The adjoining parcel must be committed by deed restriction). 
(5)  Minimum street side setback (corner lot): 25 feet. 
(6)  Minimum rear setback: 25 feet. 
(7)  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet or three stories. 
(8)  Maximum lot area coverage and building: 35 percent. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.27, 10-12-2010)  
Secs. 22-93—22-112. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - R-M MEDIUM DENSITY DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 22-113. - Permitted uses. 
For the R-M Medium Density District, permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Residential occupancy of a two-family attached dwelling unit structure. 
(2)  Limited vocational activities. The standards and procedures of section 22-55(b) apply in the R-L district. 
(3)  Group homes with capacity to accommodate eight or fewer individuals. 
(4)  The standards and procedures of section 22-55(d) apply in the R-M district, except that the following standards are modified to accommodate zero lot line (see subsection (5) of this section): 
a.  Drives may be located up to the lot line or joint, provided a joint drive application is approved; 
b.  Patios and decks have a zero setback for the zero lot line side setback. 
(5)  Residential occupancy of zero-lot line single-family attached dwelling units of a zero-lot line lot subject to: 
a.  A maintenance agreement shall be entered into by the owners of both zero-lot line parcels to ensure equal and reasonable maintenance and repair schedules are conducted for both single-family attached residential units. 
b.  An eight-foot maintenance easement, four-feet on each side of the zero-lot line side property line, to allow for normal maintenance of each single-family attached residential unit shall be recorded with the register of deeds office and a recorded copy provided to the zoning administrator. 
c.  The dwelling wall abutting the zero lot line shall be a one hour fire wall. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.28, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-114. - Conditional uses. 
For the R-M Medium Density District, conditional uses are as follows: 
(1)  R-L conditional uses. 
(2)  Residential occupancy of single-family detached dwelling unit structures. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.29, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-115. - Dimensional standards. 
For the R-M Medium Density District, dimensional standards are as follows: 
(1)  Parcels having single-family detached dwelling unit structures: 
a.  Minimum lot area: 7,200 square feet (one acre, unsewered). 
b.  Minimum lot width: 60 feet. 
c.  Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet, except that an open front porch or stoop may protrude to within 25 fee of the front lot line. 
d.  Remaining standards are the same as those for the R-LM district. 
(2)  Parcels having a two-family attached dwelling unit structure: 
a.  Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet (one acre, unsewered). 
b.  Minimum lot width: 80 feet. 
c.  Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet, except that an open front porch or stoop may protrude to within 25 feet of the front lot line. 
d.  Remaining standards shall be the same as those for single-family detached dwelling unit structures. 
(3)  Zero-lot line lots having single-family attached dwelling structures: 
a.  Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet (one acre, unsewered). 
b.  Minimum lot width: 40 feet. 
c.  Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet, except that an open front porch or stoop may protrude to within 25 feet of the front lot line. 
d.  Minimum zero-lot line side yard (shared) setback: Zero feet. A two foot eave protrusion shall be permitted across the zero lot line into the adjoining lot. 
e.  Remaining standards shall be the same as those for single-family detached dwelling unit structures. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.30, 10-12-2010)  
Secs. 22-116—22-143. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - R-H HIGH DENSITY DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 22-144. - Permitted uses. 
For the R-H High Density District, permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  R-L permitted uses, except single-family detached dwelling units. 
(2)  R-M permitted uses, except two-family detached dwelling units. 
(3)  Residential occupancy of dwelling unit structures having three to eight dwelling units. 
(4)  Group homes with capacity to accommodate 15 or fewer individuals. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.31, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-145. - Conditional uses. 
For the R-H High Density District, conditional uses are as follows: 
(1)  R-L conditional uses. 
(2)  Group homes having capacity to accommodate 16 or more individuals. 
(3)  Two-family detached dwelling units. 
(4)  Offices located within buildings that have three or more dwelling units, provided that the total area devoted to exclusive office usage including offices used for building or project management purposes, does not exceed 3,000 square feet in any building, and provided that only incidental retail sales are conducted within such offices. 
(5)  Funeral homes, provided no crematory is operated on site. 
(6)  Residential occupancy of dwelling structures having greater than eight dwelling units. 
(7)  Cooperative housing. Every two bedrooms shall count as one dwelling unit for parking purposes. For density purposes, every bedroom shall equate to an efficiency unit under section 22-146(2)b. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.32, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-146. - Dimensional standards. 
For the R-H High Density District, dimensional standards are as follows: 
(1)  Not more than two multiple family dwelling unit structures per lot unless a greater number is approved by conditional use. 
(2)  Lot area requirements. 
a.  Two family dwelling unit structures: 10,000 square feet. 
b.  Each dwelling unit type shall provide the following minimum lot areas: 
Efficiency 	2,000 square feet 
1 bedroom 	2,200 square feet 
2 bedrooms 	2,400 square feet 
3 bedrooms 	2,700 square feet 
4 bedrooms or more 	3,100 square feet 
 
Exceptions: 
If more than half of the dwelling units in a building are efficiency units, those in excess of half shall be counted as one bedroom units. 
500 square feet of lot area per structured parking space shall be deducted from the minimum lot area for any building that provides structured parking on-site, either within the building or in a detached underground parking structure. 
c.  No R-H zoned lot created after October 12, 2010, shall exceed 90,000 square feet in area. 
(3)  Minimum lot width: 80 feet. 
(4)  Minimum front setback: 30 feet, except that an open front porch or stoop may protrude to within 25 feet of the front lot line. 
(5)  Minimum side setback: Ten feet (20 feet if the parcel abuts an R-L zoned parcel). 
(6)  Minimum street side setback: 25 feet. 
(7)  Minimum rear setback: 25 feet. 
(8)  Maximum building height: 45 feet or three stories; whichever is less unless a conditional use is approved for additional stories up to six or 75 feet whichever is less. 
(9)  Maximum lot area coverage: 35 percent. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.33, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2012-O-03, 4-24-2012)  
Secs. 22-147—22-175. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - R-HA DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 22-176. - Purpose. 
(a)  The R-HA district is applied to limited areas within the city that developed or were committed as to usage under pre-1986 R-4 zoning standards to levels of intensity or within dimensional standards that would not be allowed for new construction under the R-H district herein. 
(b)  Within this R-HA district, the rules of the former R-4 district in effect as of April 7, 1987, apply to govern development in the case of vacant-but-committed parcels or to govern continued occupancy and/or rebuilding in the case of damage or destruction of the existing structures. Map designations shall indicate whether former R-4 zoning would so apply. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.35, 10-12-2010)  
Secs. 22-177—22-205. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - R-R RURAL DENSITY DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 22-206. - Permitted uses. 
For the R-R Rural Density District, permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Residential occupancy of one single-family detached dwelling unit structure. 
(2)  All uses permitted in the R-L district, except that, in section 22-56, driveways related to subsection (3) of this section do not have to be hard surfaced; parking spaces related to subsection (4) of this section can be anywhere on the property; structures related to subsections (6) and (7) of this section may be located in front of the principal structure and are allowed to be up to 35 feet in height; fence regulations related to subsection (10) of this section do not apply; and subsection (13) of this section only applies to R-R lots less than two acres. 
(3)  Agricultural uses. The number of livestock kept on a zoning lot in the R-R district shall not exceed one animal unit for each full acre and the lot must be at least two acres in size. Any structure housing livestock shall be at least 100 feet from a residential zoning district, other than the R-R district. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.36, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2012-O-03, 4-24-2012)  
Sec. 22-207. - Conditional uses. 
For the R-R Rural Density District, conditional uses are as follows: 
(1)  All uses conditional in the R-L district. 
(2)  Parking of one truck or road tractor or school bus or semi-tractor and its trailer in excess of 4.0 tons gross vehicle weight. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.37, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-208. - Dimensional standards. 
For the R-R Rural Density District, dimensional standards are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: one acre. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 150 feet. 
(3)  Minimum front setback: 40 feet. 
(4)  Minimum side setback: ten feet. 
(5)  Minimum street side setback: 30 feet. 
(6)  Minimum rear setback: 50 feet. 
(7)  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet or three stories, whichever is less. 
(8)  Maximum lot area coverage and buildings: ten percent. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.38, 10-12-2010)  
Secs. 22-209—22-216. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - CONDITIONAL USES APPLICABLE TO ALL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 22-217. - Planned residential cluster by conditional use. 
(a)  The plan commission is authorized to vary minimum lot area and setback standards to allow clustering within a project without increasing the number of dwelling units over the entire project site. 
(b)  The plan commission may reject a project under this section without prejudice and with a recommendation that the project be pursued under the SmartCode or PD district provisions of the Municipal Code of Ordinances if the commission concludes that public benefits will result from planning the project and possibly any nearby sites conjunctively. 
(c)  Perimeter setbacks cannot be varied to be less than 25 feet on any street side of a parcel; eight feet on any rear yard; any combination of side yard distance for a total of 13 feet, providing for 13 feet of separation between principal buildable areas. 
(d)  The plan commission may, under this section, approve maximum lot coverages above the standard 35 percent to a maximum of 40 percent. 
(e)  Urban agriculture or community gardens may be established as a component of a planned residential cluster and approved as part of the conditional use permit. 
(f)  Application to single-family lotted subdivisions shall only occur where: 
(1)  The conditional use application accompanies the initial rezoning; 
(2)  It is anticipated by a comprehensive development plan; 
(3)  The plan commission determines that strong planning and design principles are utilized to promote a unified cluster housing project; and 
(4)  Strong deed restrictions have been developed to promote quality housing and design. 
(g)  In addition, applications submitted after October 12, 2010, shall abide by the following standards: 
(1)  The proposed cluster shall not be part of an existing subdivision or shall not contain any portion of an existing subdivision plat. 
(2)  Parcel size of all contiguous lands owned or controlled by a developer shall be less than ten acres. 
(3)  All public improvements shall be installed in not more than two phases. 
(4)  The remaining land area that would have otherwise been developed but for clustering, shall be restricted to open space, active recreation, or urban agriculture. 
(5)  This section shall not be used to create lots that would otherwise have been allowed by their size under R-LM or R-L zoning, or to simply decrease building setbacks. 
(6)  A standard subdivision drawing showing how the land would otherwise have been developed at minimum lot sizes of the current residential zoning district is required to be submitted in order to allow a comparison and evaluation with the planned residential cluster proposal. 
(7)  Planned residential cluster proposal shall provide plans and documents in written and graphic form to fully describe the project and its benefits. Draft deed restrictions, easements, and condominium documents shall be submitted with the application. 
(h)  The plan commission shall not, under this procedure, approve variations in standard municipal services or waivers to any park requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.39(2), 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-218. - Urban agriculture. 
Urban agriculture may be allowed as a conditional use, provided that the following is reviewed and approved as part of the conditional use: 
(1)  Animal husbandry, where during the conditional use process, the allowed animal units shall be set, but in no case shall the animal units exceed 50 percent of one animal unit per acre, or pro-rated portion of an acre. 
(2)  One roadside stand for each urban agriculture site for sales of products produced and processed on the site may also be allowed by the conditional use permit. 
(3)  Processing of products grown or raised on the site. 
(4)  A management plan is provided as part of the conditional use application in order to mitigate noise, odor, and waste disposal, spreading of manure, application of fertilizers and pesticides, use of mechanized equipment, and other nuisance activities that may be identified. 
(5)  Greenhouses and/or hoophouses, which may be allowed as part of the operation, shall following the dimensional standards of the zoning district. 
(6)  Any compost operations shall be shown on a site plan, and described in the management plan, and are subject to approval by the conditional use. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.39(2), 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-219. - Group homes. 
Group homes that fall within the meaning of community living arrangements are as defined in Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(I) or subsequent relevant changes and that are identified as conditional uses in particular districts of this chapter shall be governed in conditional use review by standards of Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(I)9, and the procedures of Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(I) shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.39(3), 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-220. - Family day care. 
A conditional use permit is required for any situation where the number of persons receiving custodial care exceeds the number set forth by Wis. Stats. § 66.1017. In such situations the plan commission shall examine applicable licensing standards and shall apply these to proposed operations. In the absence of such standards, the commission may impose conditions intended to accomplish safety of the facility and reasonable compatibility with the neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.39(4), 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-221. - Schools. 
Public or private schools are as defined by state statutes. The plan commission shall have review powers over appropriateness of location, site planning, architectural design, grading, lighting and other impact factors. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.39(5), 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-222. - Church. 
A church is a place of worship, associated meetings and educational facilities, associated office and storage and garage facilities and homes on the same site for persons engaged in religious functions, all integrally involved in the affairs of a church, congregation or religious society recognized under Wis. Stats. ch. 187. The plan commission shall have review powers over appropriateness of location, site planning, architectural design, grading, lighting and other impact factors. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.39(6), 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-223. - Recreational facilities. 
(a)  The following uses may be considered for conditional use approval in any residential district: nature preserves and passive recreation areas, outdoor parks and open space, pedestrian and bike trails (non-motor equipment only except for maintenance and service vehicles), active outdoor recreation play fields including spectator seating, swimming pools, tennis and racquetball and related court facilities, indoor or outdoor, exercise and fitness facilities, archery ranges, golf courses and associated facilities (driving range, pitch and putt, mini-golf) and similar usages and facilities. Additionally, one lodging or boarding unit associated with the facility may be allowed as part of the conditional use (as used here lodging or boarding unit means a room or group of rooms used for daily or weekly use, with no one person or family occupying the unit for more than 90 consecutive days). Recreational facilities (without boarding or lodging) to serve a single dwelling unit do not require conditional use approval. 
(b)  Conditional use approval requirements extend to the use as appropriate for the site and area, appropriateness of site design, approval of all structures, equipment, facilities and approval of a use program statement describing what activities will take place, duration, extent, hours, controls, noise generation, lighting supervision, parking, collateral operations (food and beverage, concessions, etc.). Approvals will be specific as to the range of allowable activities. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.39(7), 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2013-O-18, § 1, 9-24-2013)  
Sec. 22-224. - Utility and governmental facilities. 
(a)  Conditional use approval shall be required for utility and governmental facilities that involve any of the following, individually or in combination: 
(1)  Installation or removal or significant modification of major utility facilities including any wireless facilities. Major means primary system facilities (interceptors, mains, pumping stations, principal pipelines, substations, new structures, housing equipment and the like). 
(2)  Acquisition, development or significant modification or removal of municipal facilities, municipal buildings or structures, yards or sites for storage, transfer, waste management, installation or modification of roads. 
(3)  Utility and governmental agencies are encouraged to submit system plans to the city for review and comment, including periodic update submissions, so that individual facility reviews can occur in a planning framework. 
(4)  In submitting either system plans or facility plans, applicants shall identify the necessity of the facility. Where the city is legally entitled to require full conditional use review and approval, the full conditional use review procedure shall occur. 
(b)  Visible utility and governmental facilities shall be sited, designed and screened so as to be reasonably compatible with the appearance of the surrounding areas. 
(c)  The zoning administrator shall be responsible for determining what specific facilities are subject to this section. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.39(8), 10-12-2010)  
Secs. 22-225—22-236. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BUSINESS DISTRICTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— SIC numbers are listed in parentheses and incorporated by reference. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 22-237—22-245. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - B-P PROFESSIONAL OFFICE DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 22-246. - Purpose. 
The purpose and objectives of the business district is to provide commercial areas that will provide services to the public in an attractive, safe and convenient manner. The B-P district is established for areas having predominantly office uses, typically generating low traffic volumes and traffic turnover. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.40, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-247. - Permitted uses. 
For the B-P Professional Office District, permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Office activities. 
a.  Professions including health services, office or clinic basis. (801—804) 
b.  Finance, real estate, insurance. (60—67, except for convenience cash business) 
c.  Government offices. (91—96) 
d.  Business offices. (89) 
e.  Business services, including convenience printing, excluding services to buildings. (73, except 734) 
f.  Educational services, provided all activities are enclosed within buildings. (82) 
g.  Legal services. (81) 
h.  Business and Professional Associations. (861—862) 
i.  Medical and dental laboratories. (807, 808, 809) 
(2)  Computer services. (737) 
(3)  Existing residential units. 
(4)  Studios, art studios, interior decorating studio, photographic studio, music studio, dance studio and art institutes. 
(5)  Retail sales and services provided by vending machines or by personnel when such retail area is within a building, so constructed and maintained that all access is from a lobby, hall or court and not directly from the out-of-doors; it is the intent that such sales and services are provided for the convenience of the patrons and occupants of the building. 
(6)  Beauty shops and barbershops. (723, 724) 
(7)  An establishment may devote up to 30 percent of its floor space to processing, fabrication, or assembling of a manufacturing nature and incidental to the principal use. 
(8)  The ground floor of each principal structure must be devoted principally to an allowable use, permitted or conditional, other than residential. The principal use of ground floor areas may not be parking or storage. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.41, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2015-O-02, § 1, 1-27-2015)  
Sec. 22-248. - Conditional uses. 
For the B-P Professional Office District, conditional uses are as follows: 
(1)  Theatres for performing arts. 
(2)  Labor unions and similar labor organizations; civic, social and fraternal associations; political organizations; religious organizations; membership organizations, not elsewhere classified. (863, 864, 865, 866, 869) 
(3)  Nursing homes; rest homes. (805) 
(4)  Residential. Residential units may be located on the second or third floor. The lot area must provide 5,000 square feet of area for each residential unit. 
(5)  Agricultural production. (01-02) 
(6)  Class I restaurants. 
(7)  Educational services, with activities outside building. (82) 
(8)  Health clubs. 
(9)  Liquor stores. (5921) 
(10)  Day care. 
(11)  Hotels and motels. (701) 
(12)  Wireless communication facilities. 
(13)  Funeral homes. (7261) 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.42, 10-12-2010; Ch. Ord. No. 2018-O-21, § 1, 6-12-2018)  
Sec. 22-249. - Dimensional standards. 
Dimensional standards set forth below shall be applied on a permitted use basis. These intensity and dimensional standards may be reduced by the plan commission in the course of design review upon findings that reductions will provide adequate site area and layout to accommodate the uses contemplated on the site and that negative impacts upon neighboring properties will be avoided. Where deemed appropriate by the plan commission, property owners may be required to obtain permanent, binding consents from abutting property owners with such consents running with the land filed with the register of deeds. 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 8,000 square feet, one acre unsewered. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 60 feet. 
(3)  Minimum front setback: 20 feet. 
(4)  Minimum side setback: ten feet. 
(5)  Side street setback: 15 feet. 
(6)  Rear setback: ten feet. 
(7)  Maximum building height: The lesser of 42 feet or three stories. Height over three stories or 42 feet is subject to conditional use approval. 
(8)  Minimum open space: 25 percent. 
(9)  Design review is required for all parking lots. Use of a parcel or portion of a parcel for parking lot purposes associated with a business establishment on a different parcel is allowable with design review approval. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.43, 10-12-2010)  
Secs. 22-250—22-276. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - B-G GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 22-277. - Purpose. 
The B-G General Business District is established for areas having general business and office uses, mostly at small or medium scale compatible with the suburban setting. In order to ensure this small or medium scale, the total gross building footprint of a single improved structure on a parcel shall not exceed 70,000 square feet nor shall the total gross building footprints of all improved structures on a parcel exceed a total of 150,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.44, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-278. - Permitted uses. 
For the B-G General Business District, permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Office activities. 
a.  Professions including health services, office or clinic basis. (801—804) 
b.  Finance, real estate, insurance. (60—67, except for convenience cash business) 
c.  Government offices. (91—96) 
d.  Business offices. 
e.  Business services including convenience printing, excluding services to buildings. (73 except 734) 
f.  Educational services, provided all activities are enclosed within buildings. (82) 
(2)  Commercial activities. 
a.  Variety stores; hardware stores. (525, 53) 
b.  Food stores. (54) 
c.  Auto accessory stores (completely enclosed). (553) 
d.  Apparel and accessory stores. (56) 
e.  Furniture; home furnishings and equipment. (57) 
f.  Drugstores. (591) 
g.  Liquor stores. (592) 
h.  Miscellaneous shopping goods. (594) 
i.  Miscellaneous retail stores. (59, except 598 and secondhand business) 
j.  Coin operated laundry and dry cleaning. (7215) 
k.  Dry cleaning, retail, not including diaper service, linen service, towel service, industrial laundry, carpet and upholstery cleaning. (7211, 7212, 7216, 7219) 
l.  Printing and publishing; photographic studio. (27, 722) 
m.  Other personal services. (723, 724, 725) 
n.  Business services. (73) 
o.  Watch, clock and jewelry manufacture and repair. (763) 
p.  Electrical, electronic, radio, television and related repairs. (762) 
q.  Social services. (83) 
r.  Dance, fitness and health centers. 
s.  Museums. (84) 
t.  Miscellaneous services. (89) 
u.  Mass transit depots and facilities. (41) 
v.  Outdoor sales/display. The following types of outdoor sales/display are allowable in the B-G district either as a principal use or as an accessory use: 
1.  Impermanent or short-term seasonal outdoor storage or display of sales merchandise. 
2.  Outdoor sales with sales occurring from open displays, vehicles or tents; farmers markets, flea markets, outdoor sales of artwork, crafts, or food. 
3.  Permits are required from the city zoning administrator. The decisions of the administrator on applications for permits shall be based upon the following criteria: 
(i)  The outdoor lighting system, if any, for the sales operation shall be designed so that no direct source of light is visible from the public right-of-way and so that no direct beam of light shall be cast upon adjacent lands. 
(ii)  If a public address system is used, the volume of sound transmitted shall not be over 65 db at the property line. 
(iii)  Fencing may be required by the zoning administrator as needed, upon determination of the administrator and/or the police department, for safety or security reasons. 
(iv)  Conditions may be placed upon the approved permit pertaining to traffic flow and parking, after consultation with the police department. 
(v)  Conditions may be placed upon the approved application to achieve consistency with regulations under city ordinances governing peddlers. 
(vi)  Hours of operation and duration of sales/displays shall be specified in the approved permit. 
(vii)  No permit shall be approved unless the application is made by or cosponsored by a merchant of related merchandise whose retail business currently occupies a building on or near the same premises. 
w.  Light manufacturing, assembly and warehousing accessory to a permitted or conditional use which shall not exceed more than 30 percent of the total uses by floor space. 
(3)  The ground floor of each principal structure must be devoted principally to an allowable use, permitted or conditional, other than residential. The principal use of ground floor areas may not be parking or storage. 
(4)  Existing residential dwelling units. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.45, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2012-O-03, 4-24-2012; Ord. No. 2015-O-02, §§ 2, 3, 1-27-2015)  
Sec. 22-279. - Conditional uses. 
For the B-G General Business District, conditional uses are as follows: 
(1)  Amusement and recreation services. (79) 
(2)  Agricultural production. (01-02) 
(3)  Residential. Residential units located above the sidewalk level floor. 
(4)  Restaurants all classes. 
(5)  Gas stations class I and II or with a convenience store. 
(6)  Drinking places. (5813) 
(7)  Outdoor/display. Permanent or long-term seasonal outdoor storage or display of sales merchandise. 
(8)  Medical, dental laboratories and health care services. (807, 808 and 809) 
(9)  Hotels and motels. (701) 
(10)  Wireless communication facilities. 
(11)  Light manufacturing, assembly and warehousing, accessory and incidental to a permitted or conditional use, which may exceed 30 percent but no more than 45 percent of the total use by floor space. 
(12)  Light manufacturing, assembly, and warehousing associated with a licensed alcohol manufacturing establishment which produces, processes, or ferments beers, wines, or distilled spirits in conjunction with a restaurant, tasting room, or retail sales. 
(13)  Convenience cash business or secondhand business. In addition to the standards of section 22-640(c) the following standards shall also be applied by the plan commission: 
a.  Distance to any other cash convenience business; 
b.  Distance to an existing residential zoning district or residential use; 
c.  Distance to a school. 
In its review of the application the plan commission shall avoid concentrations of these uses within in any one locale, or to be detrimental to a neighborhood. Any distance of less than 1,000 feet shall be presumed to be detrimental. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.46, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2015-O-02, § 4, 1-27-2015; Ord. No. 2019-O-10, § 1, 4-23-2019)  
Sec. 22-280. - Dimensional standards. 
Dimensional standards for the B-G district shall be the same as the B-P district. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.47, 10-12-2010)  
Secs. 22-281—22-308. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - B-H HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 22-309. - Purpose. 
Lands placed within these districts take the form of clustered or strip commercial areas, land extensive development patterns of retail, service, warehouse, light industrial uses, most of which are highway-oriented. While serving these functional purposes, these areas also serve as gateways to the Fitchburg community. Design review will seek to create as much attractiveness as is economically feasible and consistent with the functioning of the businesses. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.48, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-310. - Permitted uses. 
For the B-H Highway Business District, permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Ambulance service. 
(2)  Animal hospital and kennel. (074-075) 
(3)  Car and truck wash. (754) 
(4)  Gas station (classes I, II and III); minor automobile repair, associated with a gas station. (554) 
(5)  Diaper service, linen service, towel service, industrial laundry, carpet and upholstery cleaning. (721) 
(6)  Car and truck sales and rental of vehicles (551, 552; 751). 
(7)  Cabinet shop, plumbing shop, upholstery shop, electrical shop, etc. (76) 
(8)  Farm machinery sales and service. (5083, 7699) 
(9)  Food locker. (4222) 
(10)  Building and lumber supplies and services. (52) 
(11)  Motel. (701) 
(12)  Printing and publishing. (27) 
(13)  Funeral homes. (726) 
(14)  Wholesale facilities and services. (50, 51) 
(15)  Municipal buildings and services. (91, 92) 
(16)  Gas sales associated with a convenience store. 
(17)  Adult entertainment establishments, as defined in section 62-19, Fitchburg Ordinances, provided there is a buffer of 1,320 feet, beginning from the property line of the adult entertainment establishment, between any other adult entertainment establishment, or any day care center that is licensed for eight or more children, any school, park, or place of worship. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.49, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-311. - Conditional uses. 
For the B-H Highway Business District, conditional uses are as follows: 
(1)  Contractor's offices, shops and yards. (15, 16, 17) 
(2)  Truck terminal. (42) 
(3)  Bus or train depot. (40, 41) 
(4)  Transportation services. (47) 
(5)  Postal services. (43) 
(6)  Department and discount stores. (53) 
(7)  Light industrial uses (see I-G district, section 22-396 and 22-397(d)). 
(8)  Auto, truck and heavy equipment repair. (753) 
(9)  Auto supply. (553) 
(10)  Boat and recreational equipment. (555—557) 
(11)  Services to buildings. (734) 
(12)  Greenhouses, nurseries and landscaping sales and services. (018, 078) 
(13)  Amusement and recreation services. (79) and motion picture theatres (783), including retail sales of sporting goods practiced in association with the recreational services. 
(14)  Agricultural production. (01-02) 
(15)  Restaurants, all classes, drinking places. (58) 
(16)  Grocery stores. (541) 
(17)  Wireless communication facilities. 
(18)  Residence for a caretaker of an on-site business operation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.50, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-312. - Dimensional standards. 
Dimensional standards for the B-H Highway Business District set forth below shall be applied on a permitted use basis. These intensity and dimensional standards may be reduced by the plan commission in the course of design review upon findings that reductions will provide adequate site area and layout to accommodate the uses contemplated on the site and that negative impacts upon neighboring properties will be avoided. Where deemed appropriate by the plan commission, property owners may be required to obtain permanent, binding consents from abutting property owners with such consents running with the land. 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 8,000 square feet, one acre unsewered. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 60 feet. 
(3)  Minimum front setback: 25 feet. 
(4)  Minimum side setback: ten feet. 
(5)  Side street setback: 20 feet. 
(6)  Rear setback: 20 feet. 
(7)  Maximum building height: The lesser of the 42 feet or three stories. Height over three stories or 42 feet is subject to conditional use approval. 
(8)  Minimum open space: 15 percent. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.51, 10-12-2010)  
Secs. 22-313—22-342. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - RD RURAL DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 22-343. - Purpose. 
(a)  As of October 12, 2010, no property shall be rezoned to the RD district. 
(b)  The purpose of the rural development is to accommodate certain commercial uses that have developed in rural areas, including those commercial uses that support agricultural production and provide a holding zone for areas that are intended for future urban development. These areas will be zoned in accordance with the use designation appearing in the comprehensive plan when logical extension of utilities and facilities can be provided. This will discourage haphazard and premature development from occurring at the fringes of the city's urban service area. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.52, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-344. - Permitted uses. 
For the RD Rural Development District, permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Agricultural uses. (01-02) 
(2)  All uses permitted in the R-L district. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.53, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-345. - Conditional uses. 
For the RD Rural Development District, conditional uses are as follows: 
(1)  All uses conditional in the R-L district. 
(2)  Horticultural specialties. (018) 
(3)  Commercial animal operation. (075) 
(4)  Veterinary services. (074) 
(5)  Landscape services and sales. (078) 
(6)  Fish hatcheries. (092) 
(7)  Repair, sales and service of farm machinery and equipment. (5083, 7699) 
(8)  Sales distribution, mixing, blending and storage of feeds, seeds and fertilizer. (2048, 287, 5191) 
(9)  Manufacture of dairy products. (202) 
(10)  Storage of construction equipment necessary for the operation of a general mechanical or landscape contracting business (limit of 12 items of construction equipment stored on lot). 
(11)  School bus storage, parking, maintenance and repair of buses stored on lot. (4151) 
(12)  Parking of one truck or road tractor or semi-tractor and its trailer in excess of 4.0 tons gross vehicle weight. 
(13)  Mineral extraction operations, including washing, crushing, quarrying borrow pits, or other processing or removal of mineral resources, the erection of buildings and the installation of necessary machinery used in said extraction or processing, and the preparation of hot blacktop mix and ready-mixed concrete. 
a.  An application for a permit shall be submitted by the owner and shall include an adequate description of the operation; a plan of the site showing the proposed and existing roads and drives, the sources, quantity and disposition of water to be used, if any; estimated dates for completion of the extraction and commencement and completion dates for the reclamation; a reclamation plan and such other information as may be necessary to determine the nature of the operation and the effect on the surrounding area. 
b.  The reclamation plan shall contain adequate provision that all final slopes around the area be flatter than a three to one horizontal slope in a sand, gravel or borrow pit operation, or in a safe angle of repose in a quarrying operation; excavations below the grade of the nearest abutting public street or highway shall be setback from the street or highway a distance not less than that required for buildings and structures under this article; excavations made to a water producing depth shall not be closer than three feet measured from the water table, all final slopes shall be covered with topsoil from the original site and seeded to prevent erosion; the plan shall require that after completion of the anticipated operation that the area shall be cleared of all debris and be left in a workmanlike condition, subject to the approval of the city. 
c.  Application for a conditional use permit for a mineral extraction operation, or for a hot blacktop mix or ready-mixed concrete plant, shall be submitted to the plan commission for public hearing and approval. The conditional use permit shall be for a period of time as stated in the application or as modified by the plan commission. Modification of the application or reclamation plan may be permitted or additional conditions may be required upon application. The plan commission shall consider the effect of the proposed operation and the proposed reclamation upon existing and future conditions, including streets, neighboring land development, land use drainage, water supply, water pollution, air pollution, soil erosion, natural beauty and land value of the locality. The plan commission may approve, approve conditionally or reject the application and reclamation plan. 
(14)  Wireless communication, radio, television transmitting towers, microwave towers, community antenna television including the buildings or structures necessary for their operation but not including buildings for offices or studios. The parcel of land shall be of a size large enough to ensure that if a tower shall fall, it will not fall on adjacent property or on the right-of-way of a public road. 
(15)  Dumping grounds, sanitary landfill sites, demolition material disposal sites and incinerator sites shall also comply with Wis. Stats. § 60.72 and shall meet the minimum standards as adopted by the state department of natural resources pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 144.43 and 144.44. 
(16)  Golf courses. (7992) 
(17)  Junk and salvage yards and solid waste recycling centers. (4953) 
(18)  Landing strips or landing fields. (4582) 
(19)  Food stores maximum 5,000 square feet. (54) 
(20)  Farm supplies. (5191) 
(21)  Welding shops. (7692) 
(22)  Public warehousing. (422, except 4226) 
(23)  Used merchandising stores. (5931) 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.54, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2015-O-27, § 1, 10-27-2015)  
Sec. 22-346. - Dimensional standards. 
For the RD Rural Development District, dimensional standards are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: five acres (may be reduced to a minimum of one acre on a conditional use basis). 
(2)  Minimum lot width (measured at end of easement for "flag lots"): 150 feet. 
(3)  Minimum front setback: 40 feet. 
(4)  Minimum side setback: ten feet. 
(5)  Minimum street side setback: 30 feet. 
(6)  Minimum rear setback: 50 feet. 
(7)  Maximum height of structures: 45 feet, except that there is no height limitation for agricultural related buildings or agricultural businesses. Other structures may be allowed to exceed 45 feet on a conditional use basis. 
(8)  Minimum open space: 40 percent. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.55, 10-12-2010)  
Secs. 22-347—22-356. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - CONDITIONAL USES APPLICABLE TO ALL BUSINESS DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 22-357. - Design review. 
Uses identified as conditional uses in the B-P, B-H and RD districts receive normal design review as do permitted uses in these districts. Conditional uses receive additional review on the question of whether the use proposed is appropriate to the site, at the time that it is proposed for development and in the manner proposed. In conducting this review, the plan commission shall give specific attention to the scale of proposed operations in relation to the scale of prevailing or expected nearby uses, the likelihood of problems arising through hours of operation, peaking of usages, stability of the operation, service demands upon the city, impacts on the neighborhood, roads or service systems. Approvals may be conditioned, as necessary, to ensure that the public interest will be served. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.59, 10-12-2010)  
Secs. 22-358—22-367. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 22-368—22-393. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - I-G GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 22-394. - Purpose. 
(a)  This district accommodates areas that are predominantly industrial in character. Industrial includes light manufacturing, transportation and wholesaling operations, and a limited number of retail and service establishments. 
(b)  In Fitchburg, there are several high quality industrial areas having transportation and other services that are appropriate to industrial usage. These areas should be reserved for industrial and related uses, with retail establishments locating in the several business districts of the community. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.60, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-395. - Allowable uses. 
A use or operation within this district may have several segments or components. Some of these segments may be classified as permitted use segments and others as conditional use segments. Where this is the case, conditional use approval shall be required and shall extend only to the portion of the operation that requires conditional use approval. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.61, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-396. - Permitted uses. 
For the I-G General Industrial District, permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  State-classified manufacturing operations, as defined. (21—39) 
(2)  Other uses of an industrial or product processing nature including manufacturing, production, assembling, disassembling, cleaning, servicing, freezing or the like, provided that conditional use approval is required for heavy manufacturing operations as set forth in this section. (7218, 7397, 76) 
(3)  Manufacture of food products, food processing for shipment off site. (20) 
(4)  Warehousing or distribution operations, not including predominantly retail sales to customers on site. (50, 51) 
(5)  Wholesaling sales to retail buyers only. Non-store retailers. (596) 
(6)  Trucking operations, including truck terminals, transfer facilities, vehicle maintenance, cleaning and repair as a component of trucking operations. (42) 
(7)  Postal services. (43) 
(8)  Printing, publishing, bookbinding, blueprinting, duplicating. (27) 
(9)  Offices of construction firms, shops, storage areas, display rooms. (15—17) 
(10)  Public works operation offices, shops, storage areas, display rooms. (91) 
(11)  Lumber and building material yards selling on a wholesale basis or selling predominantly to building contractors with most deliveries made by the yard to off-site destinations. (521) 
(12)  Laboratories, research, development and testing and manufacturing and fabrication in conjunction with such research and development and operations. (7391-7392) 
(13)  Telecommunications facilities. (48) 
(14)  Landscape and horticultural services. (078) 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.62, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2012-O-03, 4-24-2012)  
Sec. 22-397. - Conditional uses. 
For the I-G General Industrial District, conditional uses are as follows: 
(1)  Heavy manufacturing operations that are likely to generate substantial noise, smoke, dust, heat, cold, humidity fumes, particulate matter, electrical disturbance, radiation emission, glare, night illumination, vibrations, smells, risk of spills, fires or explosions. Conditional use approval is required for operations that generate or are likely to generate one or more of these effects regularly to an extent that is or will be distinctly present and noticeable beyond the property boundary. 
(2)  Waste material storage, processing, treatment or disposal, as a principal use. (4953) 
(3)  Sales, retail or wholesale, and servicing of farm equipment and construction equipment, not including sales of automobiles or trucks. (5083, 7699) 
(4)  Retail sales or services that exclusively or predominantly serve businesses and employees of the industrial area and are a minor part (less than 25 percent) of the total parcel usage by area, volume or similar measures. 
(5)  Agricultural production. (01-02) 
(6)  Business services such as commercial art and photography, computer and data processing, photo-finishing and equipment rental and leasing. (733, 737, 7374, 7395) 
(7)  Amusement and recreation services. (79) 
(8)  Wireless communication facilities. (02-O-35) 
(9)  Residence for a caretaker of an on-site business operation. 
(10)  Social services. (83) 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.63, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2017-O-01, § 1, 2-28-2017)  
Sec. 22-398. - Dimensional standards. 
For the I-G General Industrial District, dimensional standards are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
(3)  Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet. 
(4)  Minimum side yard setback: ten feet. 
(5)  Minimum side street setback: 20 feet. 
(6)  Minimum rear setback: 15 feet. 
(7)  Maximum building height: 42 feet on a permitted use basis; above 42 feet on a conditional use basis. 
(8)  Maximum lot area coverage: 70 percent. 
(9)  Minimum open space: ten percent. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.64, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2012-O-09, § 1, 6-26-2012)  
Secs. 22-399—22-424. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - I-S SPECIALIZED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 22-425. - Purpose. 
The I-S Specialized Industrial District is established to provide an aesthetically attractive working environment exclusively for and conducive to the development and protection of offices, research and development institutions, and certain specialized manufacturing establishments, all of a non-nuisance type. The essential purpose of this district is to achieve development which is practical, feasible and economical and an asset to the owners, neighbors and the community and to promote and maintain desirable economic development activities in a parklike setting. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.65, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-426. - General regulations. 
(a)  No use shall be so conducted as to cause the harmful discharge of any waste materials into or upon the ground, into or within any sanitary or storm sewer system, into or within any water system or water, or into the atmosphere. All uses shall be conducted in such a manner so as to preclude any nuisance, hazard, or commonly recognized offensive conditions or characteristics, including creation or emission of dust, gas, smoke, noise, fumes, odors, vibrations, particulate matter, chemical compounds, electrical disturbance, humidity, heat, cold, glare, or night illumination. Prior to issuance of a zoning certificate or occupancy certificate, the zoning administrator may require evidence that adequate controls, measures, or devices have been provided to ensure and protect the public interest, health, comfort, convenience, safety, and general welfare from such nuisance, hazard, or offensive condition. 
(b)  All business, servicing or processing, except off-street parking and off-street loading, and outside storage areas as regulated hereinafter, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
(c)  Parking of trucks as an accessory use, when used in the conduct of a permitted business listed hereinafter, shall be limited to vehicles of not over four tons gross vehicle weight when located within 150 feet of a residence district boundary line. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.66, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-427. - Permitted uses. 
For the I-S Specialized Industrial District, permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Any production, or processing, cleaning, servicing, testing or repair of materials, goods or products, limited to the following uses, products, components, or circumstances: 
a.  Electronic and electrical products and instruments, such as transistors, semiconductors, small computers, scanners, monitors and compact communication devices. 
b.  High technology products related to the fields of physics, oceanography, astrophysics, metallurgy, chemistry and biology. 
c.  Laser technology, radiology, X-ray and ultrasound products, manufacturing and assembly. 
d.  Medical and dental supplies. 
e.  Optical, fiber optical and photographic products and equipment. 
f.  Orthopedic and medical appliances, such as artificial limbs, brace supports and stretchers. 
g.  Products related to process design, process simulation, software development, and safety engineering. 
h.  Scientific and precision instruments and components, including robotics. 
i.  Small-scale products (finished weight not exceeding 50 pounds) related to energy and environmental or to telecommunications and satellite applications. 
j.  Small-scale products (finished weight not exceeding 50 pounds) related to the resource industries of agriculture and food production, forestry, petrochemicals and mining. 
k.  Specific products not listed above but similar in intent and character and which may be defined as being produced or assembled manually or by a light industrial process by virtue of the use of only light machinery; being conducted entirely within enclosed substantially constructed buildings; in which the open area around such buildings is not used for storage of raw, materials or manufactured products, or for any industrial purpose other than loading and unloading operations; and which are not noxious or offensive by reason of emission of smoke, dust, fumes, odors, noise, or vibrations beyond the confines of the building. 
(2)  Laboratories, research, development and testing, including testing facilities and equipment, and manufacturing and fabrication of products in conjunction with such research or development. 
(3)  Offices, business and professional, including banks and financial institutions. (Except for convenience cash business) 
(4)  Pilot plants or other facilities for the testing of manufacturing, processing or fabrication methods, or for the testing of products or materials. 
(5)  Telecommunication centers. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.67, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2015-O-02, § 5, 1-27-2015)  
Sec. 22-428. - Conditional uses. 
For the I-S Specialized Industrial District, conditional uses are as follows: 
(1)  Parking facilities, open and accessory, for the storage of private passenger automobiles only, when located elsewhere than on the same zoning lot as the principal use served. 
(2)  Public utility and public service uses as follows: 
a.  Bus stations, bus terminals, bus turnarounds (off-street), bus garages and bus lots. (41) 
b.  Electric power production and substations. (491) 
c.  Natural gas transmission and distribution. (492) 
d.  Radio and television towers. (483) 
e.  Railroad passenger stations and rights-of-way. (40) 
f.  Telephone exchanges, microwave relay towers, telephone transmission equipment buildings and service yards and telephone booths (outside). 
(3)  Any production, or processing, cleaning, servicing, testing or repair of materials, goods or products, limited to the following uses, products, components, or circumstances: 
a.  Cameras and other photographic equipment. 
b.  Ceramic products, such as pottery, figurines and small glazed tiles. 
c.  Cosmetics and toiletries, drugs, perfumes, and perfumed soaps. 
d.  Drugs and pharmaceutical products. 
e.  Electrical appliances, such as lighting fixtures, irons, fans and toasters. 
f.  Electrical equipment assembly, such as home radio and television receivers and home movie equipment, but not including electrical machinery. 
g.  Electrical supplies, manufacturing and assembly, such as wire and cable assembly, switches, lamps, insulation and dry cell batteries. 
h.  Products from the following previously prepared materials: bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastic, precious and semiprecious stones, rubber, shell, wood (but not including a planing mill) and yarn. 
i.  Products related to material research and development in such areas as prepared glass, ceramics, carbon fiber, metals, textiles, polymers, plastics, chemical foams and inorganic chemicals such as liquid crystals, and synthetic fuels. 
j.  Products (finished weight exceeding 50 pounds) related to energy and environmental or to telecommunications and satellite applications. 
k.  Products (finished weight exceeding 50 pounds) related to the resource industries of agriculture and food production, forestry, petro-chemicals and mining. 
(4)  Conference centers and hotel facilities. 
(5)  Agricultural production. (01-02) 
(6)  Retail sales or services that exclusively or predominantly serve businesses and employees of the industrial area and are a minor part (less than 25 percent) of the total parcel usages by area, volume or similar measures. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.68, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-429. - Dimensional standards. 
For the I-S Specialized Industrial District, dimensional standards are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
(3)  Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet. 
(4)  Minimum side yard setback: ten feet. 
(5)  Minimum side street setback: 15 feet. 
(6)  Minimum rear setback: 30 feet. 
(7)  Maximum building height: 42 feet permitted; above 42 feet on a conditional use basis. 
(8)  Maximum lot area coverage: 65 percent. 
(9)  Minimum open space: 30 percent. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.69, 10-12-2010)  
Secs. 22-430—22-456. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 22-457—22-480. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - A-X EXCLUSIVE AGRICULTURE DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 22-481. - Purpose; intent. 
(a)  The purposes of the A-X Exclusive Agriculture District are to: 
(1)  Preserve productive agricultural land for food and fiber production; 
(2)  Preserve productive farms by preventing land use conflicts between incompatible uses and controlling public service costs; 
(3)  Maintain a viable agricultural base to support agricultural processing and service industries; 
(4)  Prevent conflicts between incompatible uses; 
(5)  Reduce costs for providing services to scattered nonfarm uses; 
(6)  Pace and shape urban growth; 
(7)  Implement the provisions of the county agricultural plan; and 
(8)  Comply with the provisions of the Farmland Preservation Law to permit eligible landowners to receive tax credits under Wis. Stats. § 71.09(11). 
(b)  This district is generally intended to apply to lands in productive farm operations including: lands historically exhibiting good crop yields or capable of such yields; lands which have been demonstrated to be productive for dairying, livestock raising and grazing; other lands which are integral parts of such farm operations; land used for the production of specialty crops such as mint, sod, fruits and vegetables; and lands which are capable of productive use through economically feasible improvements such as irrigation. 
(c)  The plan commission may consider a rezone out of A-X Exclusive Agriculture District after holding a public hearing pursuant to Wis. Stats., § 91.48, if all of the following apply: 
(1)  The political subdivision finds all of the following, after public hearing: 
a.  The rezoned land is better suited for a use not allowed in the farmland preservation zoning district. 
b.  The rezoning is consistent with any applicable comprehensive plan. 
c.  The rezoning is substantially consistent with the county's certified farmland preservation plan. 
d.  The rezoning will not substantially impair or limit current or future agricultural use of surrounding parcels of land that are zoned for or legally restricted to agricultural use. 
(2)  The city shall, by March 1 of each year, provide a rezone report and map to DATP and Dane County identifying the number of acres rezoned out of A-X. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.70, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2012-O-03, 4-24-2012; Ord. No. 2015-O-01, § 2, 2-24-2015)  
Sec. 22-482. - Permitted uses. 
For the A-X Exclusive Agriculture District, permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Agricultural uses, provided that a facility used to keep cattle, swine, poultry, sheep or goats will have less than 500 animal units. 
(2)  New farm residence that is the only residence on the farm and is occupied by an individual who earns more than 50 percent of his or her gross income on the farm, subject to the provisions of chapter 24, land division. For more than one farm residence, see section 22-483(1). 
(3)  Existing farm residence. 
(4)  The following agricultural accessory uses provided they meet the definition of Wis. Stats. § 91.01(1)(a)(b)or(d) 
a.  Roadside stands for the sale of agricultural products produced primarily from that farm operation. 
b.  Wind tower or manure digester to serve a single farm. 
c.  Agricultural entertainment activities anticipated to have an attendance of less than 500 persons at any one time during the day. 
d.  Limited vocational activities (refer to section 22-55(2)). 
(5)  Undeveloped natural resource and open space areas. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.71, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2012-O-03, 4-24-2012; Ord. No. 2015-O-01, § 3, 2-24-2015)  
Sec. 22-483. - Conditional uses. 
In addition to the conditional use requirements in section 22-640, no conditional use in the A-X District shall be approved by the plan commission unless the commission shall also find: 
1.  The use and its locations in the farmland preservation zoning district are consistent with the purposes of the farmland preservation zoning district. 
2.  The use and its location in the farmland preservation zoning district are reasonable and appropriate, considering alternative locations, or are specifically approved under state or federal law. 
3.  The use is reasonably designed to minimize the conversion of land, at and around the site of the use, from agricultural use or open space use. 
4.  The use does not substantially impair or limit the current or future agricultural use of surrounding parcels of land that are zoned for or legally restricted to agricultural use. 
5.  Construction damage to land remaining in agricultural use is minimized and repaired, to the extent feasible. 
The department of agriculture, trade and consumer protection may promulgate rules imposing additional limits on the conditional uses that may be allowed in a farmland preservation zoning district in order for a farmland preservation zoning ordinance to comply with Wis. Stats. § 91.42. 
For the A-X Exclusive Agriculture District, conditional uses are as follows: 
(1)  A second or subsequent single-family farm residence to be occupied by either a parent or child of the farm operator or an individual who earns more than 50 percent of his or her gross income on the farm. 
(2)  Governmental, institutional, or religious use. 
(3)  Transportation, communications, pipeline, electric transmission, utility including wind energy, and drainage use. 
(4)  Conversion of existing single-family farm residence to a two-family farm residence, if both residences are to be occupied by an individual who earns more than 50 percent of his or her gross income on the farm. 
(5)  Separation of farm residences and related structures which existed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and which remain after farm consolidation. 
(6)  The following agricultural accessory uses, provided they meet the definition of Wis. Stats. § 91.01(1)(a)(b)or(d): 
a.  Horse boarding, breeding, training and other equestrian facilities. 
b.  Bed and breakfast establishments. 
c.  Agricultural entertainment activities anticipated to have an attendance of more than 500 persons at any one time during the day. 
(7)  Agriculture - Related Uses and any other use that the department of agriculture, trade and consumer protection, by rule identifies as an agriculture-related use, such as: 
(a)  Agricultural equipment dealership. 
(b)  Agricultural research facilities. 
(c)  Grain elevators. 
(d)  Manure digesting facilities which serve more than one farm operation. 
(e)  Dairy processing facilities. 
(f)  Feed mills. 
(g)  Animal feed storage facilities. 
(h)  Agricultural related educational facilities, such as secondary schools, community college or university facilities to support agricultural course work. 
(8)  Nonmetallic mineral extraction operations that comply with Wis. Stats. § 91.46(6). 
(9)  A new or expanded facility that will be used to keep cattle, swine, poultry, sheep or goats, and that will have more than 500 animal units, if the proposed facility meets the standards prescribed in ch. ATCP 51, Wis. Adm. Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.72, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2012-O-03, 4-24-2012)  
Sec. 22-484. - Dimensional standards. 
For the A-X Exclusive Agriculture District, dimensional standards are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum parcel size: 35 acres. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 150 feet. 
(3)  Front setback: 35 feet. 
(4)  Side setback: ten feet. 
(5)  Rear setback: 50 feet. 
(6)  Side yard abutting public street: 30 feet. 
(7)  Maximum height of dwelling structures: 35 feet. 
(8)  Maximum height of farm buildings: No limitation. 
(9)  Maximum height of other structures: 45 feet, may exceed on a conditional use basis. 
(10)  Side setback for barns, feeding or loafing sheds, hog houses and the like: 100 feet, if adjacent to residential district. 
(11)  General provisions: 
a.  Any lot or parcel shown in a preliminary subdivision plat or a certified survey map which has been received for review by the agency prior to the effective date of the A-X Exclusive Agriculture District shall have the same status as pre-existing lots. 
b.  Any preexisting substandard parcels in the A-X Exclusive Agriculture District that have a width of less than 150 feet and have an area of less than five acres do not permit the keeping or raising of livestock. 
c.  Any pre-existing residential building or its accessory building that is located on a lot that does not meet the area requirements of section 22-58 and is destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God or act of public enemy, the building may be rebuilt, provided the locational requirements of the R-L Residence District are complied with. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.73, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2012-O-03, 4-24-2012)  
Secs. 22-485—22-506. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - A-T TRANSITIONAL AGRICULTURE DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 22-507. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of the A-T Transitional Agriculture District is to provide a non-certified agricultural zoning district to preserve productive farm operations. Productive farm operations include lands historically exhibiting good crop yields or capable of such yields; lands which have been demonstrated to be productive for dairying, livestock raising and grazing; other lands which are integral parts of such farm operations; land used for the production of specialty crops such as mint, sod, fruits and vegetables; and lands which are capable of productive use through economically feasible improvements such as irrigation. The A-T district does not qualify for farmland preservation tax credits. 
(b)  The permitted and conditional uses and dimensional standards required in the A-T district are the same as the A-X district. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.74, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2012-O-03, 4-24-2012)  
Secs. 22-508—22-537. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - A-S SMALL LOT AGRICULTURE DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 22-538. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purposes of the A-S Small Lot Agriculture District are to: 
(1)  Preserve productive agricultural land for food and fiber production; 
(2)  Maintain a viable agricultural base to support agricultural processing and service industries; 
(3)  Prevent conflicts between incompatible uses; and 
(4)  Reduce costs for providing services to scattered nonfarm uses on zoning lots below 35 acres in size. 
(b)  This district may be applied to areas where smaller agricultural parcels form a portion of a contiguous agricultural block of land and where non-agricultural development would be incompatible with surrounding agricultural uses. The A-S district is also intended to ensure that urban agriculture and community gardens in the urban service area are located to meet the needs for local food production. The A-S district is not intended for residences. The A-S district does not qualify for farmland preservation credit. 
(c)  This district may also be used as a temporary holding zone for outlots created for staging purposes and which are to be replatted and developed at a later date consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-539. - Permitted uses. 
For the A-S Small Lot Agriculture District, permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Agricultural uses. The number of livestock kept on a zoning lot in the A-S district shall not exceed one animal unit for each full acre. 
(2)  Roadside stands for the sale of agricultural products produced primarily from that farm operation. 
(3)  Undeveloped and natural resource and open spaces areas. 
(4)  Structures and improvements that are consistent with agricultural uses such as, but not limited to barns, silos, livestock shelters or storage sheds for farm equipment. 
(5)  Agricultural entertainment activities anticipated to have an attendance of less than 150 persons at any one time during the day. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-540. - Conditional uses. 
For the A-S Small Lot Agriculture District, conditional uses are as follows: 
(1)  Additional livestock over the one animal unit per full acre. 
(2)  Agriculture-related uses and any other use that the state department of agriculture, trade and consumer protection by rule identifies as an agriculture-related use, such as: 
a.  Agricultural equipment dealership. 
b.  Agricultural research facilities. 
c.  Grain elevators. 
d.  Manure digesting facilities which serve more than one farm operation. 
e.  Dairy processing facilities. 
f.  Feed mills. 
g.  Animal feed storage facilities. 
h.  Agricultural related educational facilities, such as secondary schools, community college or university facilities to support agricultural course work. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-541. - Dimensional standards. 
For the A-S Small Lot Agriculture District, dimensional standards are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum parcel size: 
a.  Three acres. 
(2)  Maximum parcel size: Less than 35 acres. 
(3)  Front setback: 35 feet. 
(4)  Side setback: ten feet. 
(5)  Rear setback: 50 feet. 
(6)  Side setback for barns, feeding or loafing sheds, hog houses and the like: 100 feet if adjacent to residential district. 
(7)  Side yard abutting public street: 30 feet. 
(8)  Maximum building height: 45 feet, except there is no height limitation for farm buildings. Other structures may exceed 45 feet on a conditional use basis. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2013-O-33, § 1, 1-14-2014)  
Secs. 22-542—22-560. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PARK AND RECREATION DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 22-561. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the Park and Recreation District is threefold: 
(1)  This district provides for those areas dedicated to or owned by the city for purposes of use as public park or open space. 
(2)  This district provides protection against problems which may result from development in areas where development is inappropriate by reason of unsuitable soils, wetlands, floodplains, or steep slopes. 
(3)  This district provides appropriate areas for commercially operated recreational uses of land within the city, including uses consistent with those of a recreational nature. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.75, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-562. - Permitted uses. 
For the Park and Recreation District, permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Hunting, fishing and trapping. 
(2)  Propagation and raising of game animals, fowl and fish. 
(3)  Sustained yield forestry. 
(4)  The harvesting of any wild crops. 
(5)  Grazing. 
(6)  Utility and governmental facilities. 
(7)  Parks, recreation areas and other recreational facilities located on publicly owned or controlled land. 
(8)  Greenways, drainageways and open space areas. 
(9)  Golf courses, not lighted for operating during hours of darkness. 
(10)  Historic, natural and scientific areas. 
(11)  Game farms and refuges. 
(12)  Fish and wildlife habitat. 
(13)  Wildlife preserves. 
(14)  Pedestrian and bike trails (non-motor equipment only, except for maintenance and service vehicles). 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.76, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-563. - Conditional uses. 
For the Park and Recreation District, conditional uses are as follows: 
(1)  Recreational facilities not otherwise allowed in section 22-562, located on privately owned lands. 
(2)  Recreational camps, campgrounds and camping resorts. 
(3)  Skeet, trap, rifle and pistol ranges. 
(4)  Private hunting and shooting preserves. 
(5)  Hotels and bed and breakfast places. 
(6)  Parking areas. 
(7)  Stables and horse shows. 
(8)  Restaurants, class I, II and V. 
(9)  Uses incidental to the operation of any permitted or conditional use. 
(10)  Wireless communication facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.77, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-564. - Dimensional standards. 
For the Park and Recreation District, dimensional standards are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
(3)  Minimum front setback: 25 feet. 
(4)  Minimum side setback: ten feet. 
(5)  Minimum rear setback: 50 feet. 
(6)  Minimum open space: 50 percent. 
The provisions of subsections (1) through (6) of this section do not apply to public outlots used for drainage, connectivity or public recreation purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.78, 10-12-2010)  
Secs. 22-565—22-591. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - SPECIAL DISTRICTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-592. - PD Planned Development District. 
(a)  The PD Planned Development District, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(b), provides a regulatory framework to encourage improved environmental design by allowing flexibility in the development of land while ensuring compliance with the basic intent of the zoning ordinance and with the city comprehensive plan. The planned development district has no set standards and specifications. Developers can propose uses or combination of uses and configurations of intensity and density of development. Through a process of plan commission review, public hearing and common council review and approval, accompanied by discussions with developers and, as appropriate, with other interested parties, individualized zoning standards shall be created. These standards have the same legal force and effect as do standard zoning requirements. 
(b)  To achieve the community benefits of the PD zoning district, the project size shall be large enough to allow clustering and to establish a coherence of design. The land area shall be at least 100,000 square feet. 
(c)  The objective of the planned development district is not simply to allow exceptions to otherwise applicable regulations. It is instead to encourage a higher level of design and amenity than is possible to achieve under other zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.82, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-593. - Procedure for general implementation plan (GIP). 
The procedure for rezoning to a planned development district shall be as required for any other zoning district change under this chapter, except that, in addition thereto, the following information describing a general implementation plan shall be filed by the applicant with the plan commission staff: 
(1)  A map of the project area including its relationship to surrounding properties and topography and other key features, such as, but not limited to, woodlots, heritage or specimen trees, streams, wetlands, floodplains, environmental corridors, rock outcroppings, and existing buildings or improvements. Specific wetland, woods or tree inventories, impact analysis, or other studies relative to key features may be required by planning staff or the plan commission. 
(2)  A statement of rationale as to why the planned development district zoning is proposed. The proposal shall detail in text, graphic, and statistical forms the lack of other available chapter 22 zoning districts to provide the development intended. The statement shall identify barriers that the developer perceives in other chapter 22 zoning districts and opportunities for community betterment the developer suggests are available through the proposed planned development district zoning. 
(3)  An analysis of social and economic impacts on the community of the project. 
(4)  An analysis of how the proposal is consistent with, and will advance the goals, policies and objectives of the comprehensive plan. 
(5)  A detailed analysis discussing the intended specific environmental design, the amenities to be gained by the planned development district zoning proposal, and, specifically, a statement as to why such benefits and amenities would not be realized under any other chapter 22 zoning district. 
(6)  A general development plan of the proposed project showing at least the following information in sufficient detail to make possible evaluation against criteria for approval: 
a.  Public and private roads, driveways and parking facilities; bicycle and pedestrian facilities, bus shelters, and any other multi-modal forms of transportation and their related facilities. 
b.  Land uses and size, arrangement and location of lots and proposed buildings or groups of buildings. 
c.  The types, size, intended uses, and location of structures. 
d.  A general utility plan, preliminary grading plan. 
e.  The location of recreational and open space areas and facilities and specifically describing those that are to be reserved or dedicated for public acquisition and use. 
f.  General landscape treatment plan. 
g.  Statistical data on size of the development, density/intensity of various parts of the development, ratio of various land uses, economic analysis of the development, expected staging, and any other plans or data required by the plan commission or common council. 
(7)  General outline of the intended organizational structure for a property owners association, if any; proposed condominium documents, if any; deed restrictions and all agreements necessary to accommodate private provision of common services, if any. 
(8)  For any project plan proposed, a schedule for completion of the public and private improvements proposed within the project plan. 
(9)  Neighborhood input. 
a.  Prior to the formal petition for rezoning, the applicant shall make a reasonable effort to meet with property owners and individuals within and near the area of the proposal. Property owners and residents within the project area and those within 300 feet of the project boundary shall be noticed at least ten days prior to a meeting in which the conceptual project will be presented. The meeting shall be fashioned to solicit input on the proposed design. More than one neighborhood meeting may be necessary to gather input, address comments received, and provide information relative to any intended application. 
b.  A statement describing the reasonable efforts made to meet with and receive input from individuals required to receive notice shall be submitted with the rezoning petition application when it is filed for review at the planning department. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.83, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-594. - Plan commission review. 
(a)  Following determination by the plan commission staff that an application is complete, the matter shall be reviewed by city staff and shall then be placed on a plan commission agenda for initial review, prior to the filing of a formal application. Initial review is a review of the project at the concept level and is not binding. The preferred procedure is for an iteration of the plan commission's initial review to occur prior to introduction of a formal petition for rezoning. The purpose of this meeting, or meetings, is to allow a discussion of the plan commission regarding the possible planned development zoning application, need for planned development district zoning, and the environmental, economic, environmental, social and other benefits of design to be obtained from the proposal, general statistics on the possible project and why not other existing zoning district will suffice. The plan commission may recommend that the project not be pursued under planned development zoning. After this meeting, or meetings, with the plan commission, the applicant may then submit a formal application for planned development district general implementation plan zoning. Whenever the required petition is introduced, the normal rezoning procedure occurs, including notice and hearing before the plan commission. The issues that are the subject of this public hearing are the rezoning request and the general implementation plan. 
(b)  Following the required public hearing before the plan commission, the plan commission shall meet to make a determination and recommendation whether to advise the common council to approve the rezoning and the general implementation plan, to approve it with modifications, or to deny it. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.84, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-595. - Criteria for approval. 
As a basis for determining the acceptability of a planned development district, the following criteria shall be applied to the general implementation plan with specific consideration as to whether or not it is consistent with the general purpose and intent of the city zoning ordinance, the city comprehensive plan, the city comprehensive park open space and recreation plan, whether it has been prepared with competent professional expertise and guidance, that it produces significant community benefits of an environmental design nature or otherwise that compensate for modifications in standards of municipal zoning. 
(1)  Character and intensity of land use. The uses proposed and their intensity and arrangement on the site shall: 
a.  Respect the physical attributes of the site with particular concern for preservation of natural features, tree growth and open space. The project shall be accomplished in such a manner as to minimize grading of the existing terrain, by working with topographic conditions. Grading and improvements on slopes of 12 percent or greater shall be limited. 
b.  Produce an attractive environment of sustained aesthetic and ecological desirability, economic stability and functional practicality compatible with the development prospects for the area. 
c.  Not adversely affect the anticipated provision of school or municipal services. 
d.  Not create traffic or parking demand incompatible with the existing or proposed facilities to serve it. 
e.  Produce a transportation network that emphasizes connectivity and reduction of motor vehicle trips. 
f.  Provide a block structure appropriate to pedestrian activity. 
g.  Ensure environmental features are protected to a greater degree than that which would otherwise be required, or occur. 
h.  Provide an environmental design, including amenities, of buildings and site improvements that are greater than that which would otherwise occur or be required. 
i.  Provide a greater level of economic, social and other benefits than would otherwise be realized. 
(2)  Economic feasibility and impact. The proponents of a planned development district shall provide evidence satisfactory to the plan commission and the common council that the project will not adversely affect the economic prosperity of the city or the values of surrounding properties. 
(3)  Engineering design standards. Streets and other ways, outdoor lighting, provision for stormwater drainage, sanitary sewer service, water supply, or other similar environmental and municipal engineering considerations of current ordinance requirements shall, at a minimum be met, but to advance environmental design will likely need to be exceeded. The plan commission and common council may require the use of higher levels of transportation and lighting improvements, stormwater management, or water conservation techniques than is required by current ordinance or other governmental guidelines. Such standards shall be appropriate to advancing environmental design objectives and the public health, safety and welfare as determined by the city. 
(4)  Preservation and maintenance of open space in a planned development district. Provision shall be made for the preservation and maintenance of open spaces either by public reservation or dedication to public entities or commitment to preservation by a private entity. PD contracts shall contain specific reference to the ownership of such open space areas and to the provision for maintenance. 
(5)  Transmittal of plan commission recommendations, report and related matters. The plan commission's reports and recommendations shall be made in a written report to the common council. A complete set of maps, plans and written documentation fully describing the proposed development as recommended by the plan commission at a general implementation plan level shall accompany the report of the plan commission. The matter shall not be considered by the council unless this documentation has a signature by the plan commission secretary over a statement that the documentation is complete and that it accurately reflects plan commission recommendations. In a situation in which the applicant disagrees with certain recommendations of the plan commission and is urging the common council to approve with modifications, the applicant shall supply documentation of those modifications to the council prior to the matter being placed on the agenda of the common council. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.85, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-596. - Owner's consent following common council approval. 
After the planned development district general implementation plan (PD-GIP) ordinance is adopted by the common council, to take effect, the owners of record and mortgage holders of all included parcels shall consent in writing and provide an original signed and notarized document to the city clerk and a signed copy to the zoning administrator within 30 days of the date of common council adoption in order for the PD-GIP rezoning ordinance. Consent shall be binding upon future owners of the parcels in question. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.86, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-597. - Effect of PD-GIP zoning. 
The approval of a general implementation plan shall not authorize issuance of building permits. The permits shall not be issued until approval by the city of the specific implementation plan. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.87, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-598. - Filing; effective date. 
When the consent signatures for lands in the parcel being rezoned are all acquired and delivered to the city clerk and zoning administrator within the 30 days as required by section 22-596, the documentation on plan commission and common council action and on the general implementation plan and the consent signatures shall be logged in and filed by the city, and the property shall be indicated as rezoned on city zoning maps. The date this occurs is the effective date of the rezoning. The map indication shall be PD-GIP. The city clerk shall record at the Dane County register of deeds office an affidavit of notice of PD zoning against all real property included in the district. This shall be done as near the effective date of the PD-GIP rezoning as is possible. The city shall require the applicant to supply necessary property descriptions, parcel numbers and to pay recording and publication fees. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.88, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-599. - Specific implementation plan (SIP). 
After the common council approval and recording of the PD-GIP ordinance, the applicant may file a specific implementation plan for review and recommendation by the plan commission and approval by the common council. For applications submitted prior to October 12, 2010, a SIP shall be filed (for all or part of the project) within one year of the date of council approval of the PD-GIP. For PD-GIP applications submitted after October 12, 2010, the specific implementation plan (for the entire PD-GIP) shall be filed within three years of the date of council approval of the PD-GIP. 
(1)  The specific implementation plan shall be a precise plan for development, containing graphic and tabular presentations at a level of detail equivalent to the level of detail of a final plat, and for multi-family and commercial buildings, include scaled drawings of building dimensions, building and site improvement placement. Accompanying text information shall describe in detail the development plans, methodologies and timetables, building and site uses for the area covered by the specific implementation plan. 
(2)  For PD-GIP ordinances approved or submitted prior to October 12, 2010, the area included in a specific implementation plan may be only a portion of the area included in a previously approved general implementation plan. For specific implementation plans for PD-GIP applications submitted after October 12, 2010, the following shall apply: 
a.  The specific implementation plan shall cover all land in the approved general implementation plan as one submittal. 
b.  The PD-SIP for the entire PD-GIP shall be submitted within three years of the common council approval of the PD-GIP ordinance. If not submitted within three years, the PD-GIP approval lapses and a new PD-GIP approval pursuant to sections 22-593 through 22-596, or a different zoning approval is required. After three years, no PD-SIP shall be approved unless the GIP has been reapproved. 
c.  A public hearing as if it were a matter of rezoning, shall be held on any specific implementation plan (PD-SIP) application or amendment (substantial alteration) to a PD-SIP. 
(3)  The specific implementation plan submission may include specific site plan and design information, allowing the plan commission to combine design review and review of the specific implementation plan. Design review may, at the choice of the applicant, be deferred until a later time when specific site and building developments will be brought forth. 
(4)  As part of submission for specific implementation plan approval, the applicant shall submit proof of financing capability pertaining to construction and maintenance and operation of public works and public improvement elements of the proposed development. 
(5)  A copy of the recorded general implementation plan and all approved and relevant documents shall be submitted with the specific implementation plan request. 
(6)  The plan commission or common council may specify other plans, documents or schedules that must be submitted prior to consideration or approval of the specific implementation plan, as such may be relevant to review procedures and standards. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.89, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2012-O-03, 4-24-2012)  
Sec. 22-600. - Plan commission review. 
(a)  When the specific implementation plan submission is deemed by plan commission staff to be complete, the matter shall be reviewed by staff and then placed upon an agenda of the plan commission for review, consideration and approval, modification or rejection. 
(b)  The specific implementation plan submission shall be reviewed by the plan commission against the current standards of this chapter, the comprehensive plan and the previously approved general implementation plan. Without limiting the plan commission's ability to deny a specific implementation plan, in order to approve a specific implementation plan, the plan commission must determine that the specific implementation plan is consistent with the general implementation plan as well as the current standards of this chapter and the comprehensive plan. 
(c)  If the plan commission recommends approval of a specific implementation plan, complete documentation describing this specific implementation plan, and any contracts that the plan commission deems necessary for the implementation of the plan, shall be prepared, reviewed by zoning administrator as complete and, when found to be complete by said zoning administrator, shall be placed on the agenda of the common council. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.90, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2012-O-03, 4-24-2012)  
Sec. 22-601. - Common council review. 
The common council shall consider and act on the specific implementation plan after reviewing the recommendations of the plan commission on same. The specific implementation plan submission shall be reviewed by the common council against the current standards of this chapter, the current comprehensive plan, and the previously approved general implementation plan. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.91, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-602. - Filing and effective date. 
Sections 22-596 through 22-598 apply to the processing, consent signatures and recording of a specific implementation plan following approval by the common council. Signatures are required by property owners and mortgage holders only in the area affected by the specific implementation plan. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.92, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-603. - Effect of SIP approval; alterations. 
The filing of an approved specific implementation plan (SIP) shall only authorize release of building and other land use permits necessary to carry out development activities consistent with that approved plan, when all conditions or requirements of the SIP and other ordinances have been met. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide proof of satisfaction of all conditions and requirements. 
(1)  If a proposed amendment to the PD-SIP is inconsistent with or alters an approved general implementation plan, the PD-SIP shall not be approved unless the PD-GIP is amended in accordance with the procedures pursuant to sections 22-593 through 22-596. 
(2)  Any subsequent change of use of any parcel or any modification of the specific implementation plan shall first be submitted for approval to the plan commission and if, in the opinion of the plan commission, such change or modification constitutes a substantial alteration of the specific implementation plan, the specific implementation plan shall be required to be amended through the same procedures used to approve, file and record the specific implementation plan. If, in the opinion of the plan commission, such changes or modification do not constitute a substantial alteration of the specific implementation plan, the change may be accomplished by approval of the plan commission. Such approved modifications shall be documented and recorded in the official file of the city on the PD district. 
(3)  For specific implementation plan zoning approved prior to October 12, 2010, a specific implementation plan approval lapses one year after its date of adoption by the common council if substantial development progress has not occurred. 
(4)  For general implementation plans approved after October 12, 2010 (including the specific implementation plan approved under that GIP), all public improvements shall be required to be installed within 12 months of the date of common council approval unless a staging plan has been approved per chapter 24 (land division). 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.93, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-604. - Design review; objectives. 
Design review is implemented under municipal authority to promote the public health, safety and welfare and under municipal zoning authority. Requirements for design review and approval apply to uses and developments regardless of the characterization of the use or development within this chapter as a permitted use or conditional use. Projects submitted under the SmartCode District shall not be subject to design review under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.98, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-605. - Developments requiring design review. 
(a)  Site and structural development of residential projects having three or more dwelling units. 
(b)  Site and structural development in business districts. 
(c)  Site and structural development in industrial districts. 
(d)  Site and structural development in planned development districts. 
(e)  Utility and governmental facilities. 
(f)  Those variance cases deemed by the zoning board of appeals to justify design review. Design review shall be advisory to the zoning board of appeals. 
(g)  Any parking area, even if not accompanying an otherwise included development, if it has five or more parking spaces. 
(h)  In addition, design review districts may be designated by ordinance adopted by the common council. Once adopted, design review standards shall apply to such districts within the terms of such designated ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.99, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-606. - Administration of design review. 
(a)  The zoning administrator shall advise applicants when they apply for zoning permits or other approvals whether design review applies. If design review applies, the applicant will be given checklists, application forms and timetables. These documents shall have prior plan commission approval as to format and content. Applicants may request and have pre-application conferences with staff. 
(b)  Completed applications and supporting materials must be reviewed by staff prior to placement on the plan commission agenda. Staff must be satisfied that a complete packet of information will be available to the plan commission prior to the commencement of the plan commission meeting at which the item is set for decision review. 
(c)  The plan commission will review applications set for design review. Following such review, discussions with applicants and agents, and discussion within the plan commission and with staff, the commission shall render a decision of approval, conditional approval or rejection. Decisions shall be in writing and shall identify those elements of the approved design which the commission intends to be mandatory. The zoning administrator shall have applicants sign acknowledgments of receipts of written plan commission design review decisions prior to issuance of a zoning/building permit. 
(d)  A project that has had design review and that has a zoning/building permit is approved for execution only in accord with the directives included in the design review approval. Construction or execution that deviates from directives may not occur within terms of this chapter without prior city approval. The zoning administrator is responsible for determining whether to give staff approval to such deviations on a finding that they are minor variations as to the plan commission's decision or whether full plan commission review and approval is needed upon a finding that the deviations are major. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.100, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-607. - Design review standards. 
(a)  Jurisdiction. Design review applies to exterior structural and design features, landscaping and site planning. 
(b)  Directives. The following specific design standards are established and are intended to be applied in the informed judgment of the plan commission: 
(1)  The land forms and landscape will be preserved in their natural state, insofar as practicable, by minimizing soil and tree removal that is not essential to project development and by retaining grades and contours in keeping with the general appearance of neighboring developed areas. 
(2)  Building masses and long, straight building fronts and sides (relative to the overall length of the building) that are visually accessible shall be broken up and made more variegated with staggers and offsets, with landscaping or surficial features or with accumulation of mass in the form of smaller, related units. This is a directive standard as to residential and commercial structures and those industrial structures that are visually accessible to larger volumes of traffic and a recommendatory standard to industrial buildings within the center core of industrial districts. 
(3)  Within residential properties, parking areas that are located in front or street-side yards must have landscape screening and/or screening by fencing having decorative character to soften views of parked vehicles. All design reviewed parking lots shall have decorative landscape treatment at the perimeter of the lot and, for larger lots, in island areas within the lot, to provide break-up of the expanse of paving. (See section 22-609.) 
(4)  Mechanical equipment (heating, air conditioning and ventilation) that will be readily visible when viewed from ground level from other properties or from major public ways should be softened by screening or covered in a manner that forms an integral part of the building design. 
(5)  External garbage or refuse containers shall be screened by walls, fences, berms or effective landscaping, or combinations thereof. 
(6)  Landscaping. Each project subject to design review must provide landscaping of sufficient height and density to accomplish positive visual impact within three years from the time of planting. 
(7)  All developments and occupancies subject to design review shall be planned and constructed so that surface drainage drains from structures. Impervious surface ratios shall be limited to no more than 65 percent, except where a different level has been set forth through an approved plan, land division approval, other zoning standard, or other zoning approval. The commission, in its judgment, may allow a higher ratio provided it is not contrary to an existing approval, and on-site infiltration, pervious pavement or other measures to mitigate the higher ratio are provided and maintained. 
(8)  The following principles of landscape design are stated as guides to be applied with discretion by the plan commission taking into account how visible the site is to public view, sensitivity of neighboring properties and the cost considerations: 
a.  Overhead canopy trees contribute to a pattern within the neighborhood and streetscape focus plantings (trees or shrubs) accomplish screening of less attractive elements, afford privacy, noise control and windbreak, soften transitions from vertical to horizontal features and create visual focal points. 
b.  Ground plane plantings (lawns, ground cover, etc.) provide lower level continuity, and retard soil erosion. 
c.  Terraces, trellises, walks, drives, garden walls and berms and related elements increase variety. 
d.  Plan commission preferences on species shall be made available in writing to project applicants. 
(9)  The plan commission shall, in the exercise of its judgment, prohibit or regulate outdoor storage, product display or sale of items where a plan or design goal, objective, directive or suggestion exists, or where the advancement of the public interest, welfare or safety is involved. Any outdoor storage area, display or sale area shall be clearly identified on submitted site plan. At a minimum, storage of materials, fuel, scrap, inoperative vehicles and similar objects in places that are readily visible from major public rights-of-way or parts of neighboring properties where a significant amount of viewing is expected shall be minimized and, where necessary, shall be effectively screened. Where other portions of this chapter establish more stringent standards, the other portions shall govern. 
(10)  Exterior lighting, when used, shall be established, directed and maintained so as not to be cast directly on public rights-of-way or occupied structures or neighboring properties or be lighted in intensity or colors seriously disturbing to neighboring properties. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.101, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-608. - Recommendations. 
Other features of site design and construction, building and structural design and construction and landscaping that are not listed under directives may also be addressed by plan commission advisory suggestions within the design review process upon a finding that the suggestion would be desirable to make the development a positive asset to the visual appearance of the community and positive contribution to the growth and stability of the community tax base. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.102, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-609. - Off-street parking and loading. 
(a)  Purpose. This section provides for the regulation of accessory off-street parking and loading facilities. Projects submitted under the SmartCode District shall be subject only to parking and loading regulations under chapter 23. For all other districts, these regulations are intended to: 
(1)  Increase the safety and capacity of public streets by requiring off-street loading facilities to be provided. 
(2)  Minimize adverse effects of off-street parking and loading facilities on adjoining properties. 
(3)  Lessen congestion and prevent the overtaxing of public streets by regulating the location and capacity of accessory off-street parking or off-street loading facilities. 
(b)  General regulations. 
(1)  Application to changing circumstances. 
a.  When the intensity of use of any building, structure or premises shall be increased through addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity or other units of measurement specified herein for required parking or loading facilities, parking and loading facilities as required herein shall be provided for such increase in intensity of use. 
b.  When the existing use of a building or structure is changed to a new use, parking or loading facilities shall be provided as required for such new use. 
c.  Accessory off-street parking or loading facilities in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and located on the same lot as the building or uses served shall not hereafter be reduced below, or if already less than, shall not be further reduced below the requirements for a similar new building or use under the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Permissive parking and loading facilities. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of accessory off-street parking or loading facilities to serve an existing use of land or buildings, provided that there is adherence to all regulations herein governing the location, capacity, design and operation of such facility. 
(3)  Control of off-street parking facilities. In cases where parking facilities are permitted on land other than the zoning lot on which the building or use served is located, such facilities shall be in the same possession as the zoning lot occupied by the building or use to which the parking facilities are accessory. Such possession shall be by deed whereby the owner of land on which the parking facilities are to be located shall be bound by a covenant filed and recorded in the county register of deeds office, requiring such owner, his/her heirs or assigns to maintain the required number of parking facilities for the duration of the use served. 
(4)  Specifications of off-street parking facilities. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided in accordance with the regulations set forth herein as well as subsection (3) of this section. 
a.  Utilization. In the residence district, accessory off-street parking facilities provided for uses listed herein shall be solely for the parking of passenger automobiles of occupants or guests and not more than one truck limited to four tons gross vehicle weight. 
b.  Computation. When determination of the number of off-street parking spaces required by the city results in a requirements of a fractional space, any fraction may be disregarded. 
c.  Mixed uses. Where parking demand for particular parcels or uses have definite time patterns, the parking area for one may be shared with another use having a complementary time pattern, subject to conditional use approval. Parking areas that are provided off-site and/or shared parking facilities shall be subject to plan commission conditional use review and conditions to ensure workability. 
d.  Size, layout, landscaping and surfacing. The standards of the city for size of spaces, layouts of parking areas, surfacing access from parking areas to streets or driveways, and landscaping shall be governed by specifications and standards, promulgated administratively by the zoning administrator and approved by the plan commission. These specifications and standards shall be periodically reviewed and updated, as necessary. In the formulation and review of such standards, requirements as to handicapped access, variations in size and type of vehicles and other relevant considerations shall be taken into account. 
e.  Lighting. Illumination of off-street parking areas shall be established and directed so as not to be cast directly upon public rights-of-way or occupied structures or neighboring properties or to be illuminated in intensity or color or character that is likely to be seriously disturbing to neighboring properties. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.105, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-610. - Off-street loading facilities. 
Off-street loading berths accessory to uses allowed by this chapter shall be provided in accordance with the regulations set forth herein. Projects submitted under the SmartCode District shall only be subject to off-street loading facilities under chapter 23. 
(1)  Utilization. Space allocated to any off-street loading berths shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements of any off-street parking facilities or portions thereof, and off-street loading berths shall be available for their designated purpose when needed. 
(2)  Size. Unless otherwise specified, a required off-street loading berth shall be at least ten feet in width by at least 35 feet in length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space and shall have a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet. 
(3)  Access. Each required off-street loading berth shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in such manner that will least interfere with traffic movements or the safety of intersections. 
(4)  Applicability of parking area requirements. Parking area requirements for design, paving and maintenance shall be applied to loading berths. 
(5)  Schedule of off-street loading facilities. The required number of loading facilities and standards for layout, surfacing, and landscaping shall be established by a schedule promulgated administratively by the zoning administrator with prior approval of the plan commission. Said schedule shall be reviewed and updated periodically. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.107, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-611. - RC Rural Cluster District. 
(a)  The Rural Cluster (RCD) District provides a regulatory framework, as identified in Sections 22-612—22-623 herein, to provide limited development by using the potential splits of one per 35 acres (see the city's Rural Residential Development Criteria , Appendix B - City of Fitchburg Comprehensive Plan ) on property outside of the urban service area and future urban development boundary, while complying with the comprehensive plan as well as maintaining compatibility with the surrounding agricultural uses. Such clustered development is intended to better harmonize rural development with surrounding agricultural activities recognizing that it is the city's primary goal to preserve and enhance farming and farmland in rural Fitchburg. This option is intended to conserve agricultural, forested and open space land, historic and natural features. Such clustered development is intended to permit the compact grouping of homes located to blend with the existing landscape and other natural features and to preserve the visual character of the landscape. 
(b)  RCD has no set standards or specifications, other than what is set forth in this section. Developers are encouraged to propose uses that preserve, complement and enhance natural features such as but not limited to topography, woodlands, wetlands, and streams. The common council shall approve the standards and specifications which shall constitute the zoning and architectural controls of the property. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-18, § 1, 12-11-2012)  
Sec. 22-612. - RC Rural Cluster District—Procedures for general implementation plan (GIP). 
In addition to the procedure required for all zoning changes, the following information describing a general implementation plan shall be filed by the applicant with plan commission staff: 
(1)  A survey of the project area including its relationship to surrounding properties and uses, with topographic, soil type and other key features, such as, but not limited to, woodlots, heritage or specimen trees, streams, all drainage channels, waterways, wetlands, floodplains, environmental corridors, rock outcroppings, and existing buildings or improvements. Specific wetland, woods or tree inventories, impact analysis, or other studies relative to key features may be required by planning staff or the plan commission. 
(2)  An overview map which shall place the proposed site in the middle of an area at least one-half mile in the four directions to clearly identify adjacent land ownership and uses. 
(3)  A statement as to the rationale as to why the RC zoning is proposed. Identify the private and public benefits and liabilities of the development. 
(4)  An analysis of the social, environmental, traffic and economic impacts on the community of the project. 
(5)  An analysis of how the proposal is consistent with, and will advance the goals, policies and objectives of the comprehensive plan. 
(6)  A general development plan of the proposed project showing and describing at least the following information in sufficient detail to make a possible evaluation against criteria for approval: 
a.  Public and private roads, driveways, and parking facilities, current and planned. 
b.  Land uses, arrangement, location and size of lots. 
c.  All proposed buildings or groups of buildings with their uses identified. 
d.  Impact of traffic with trips generated and likely traffic routes and count increases. 
e.  A waste disposal plan including septic limitations and system types required. Per chapter 24, land division code, in no case shall a new building site or new habitable building be allowed if sanitary service is required by a holding tank. 
f.  A water supply plan with types of well or wells and how they are shared. 
g.  An inventory of trees, prairies or prairie remnants, wetland and wetland plants, 300 foot wetland buffer, natural features, threatened and endangered species and fence lines. 
h.  An inventory of existing historic features, historic buildings or buildings of possible historic value. 
i.  General landscape treatment plan, including species to be used. Native and non-invasive species are required. 
j.  Statistical data on the size of the development, density, ratio of land uses, expected staging and any other plans or data required by the plan commission or common council. 
k.  Soil types by name and class, and percent of development on each class type. 
l.  Tillage history. 
(7)  An outline of the intended ownership structure including owners association if any, ownership of open space, deed restrictions, and the provision of common services, if any. 
(8)  For wooded or partly wooded site, a forestry plan. 
(9)  Ownership of claims that are being used to allow dwelling unit construction at one claim per dwelling unit planned. Agreement for the purchase of claims (with signatures from the owners) will need to be submitted for each dwelling unit proposed at the time of the rezone to GIP. 
(10)  A map identifying the lands to which the claims are associated and an outline of potential areas (35 acres per each claim) to be placed in a restriction, limiting the property to agricultural uses of land [Note: uses to be determined] in favor of the city during the SIP approval process. The restriction may be removed or altered by a 2/3 majority vote of the common council, but only after entry of the property into the urban service area. Nothing herein contained shall prevent a property owner from instituting a non-removable restriction, such as an agricultural conservation easement, through agreement with a third party or other means. Land subject to restriction in favor of the city shall not be located within the urban service area or a long-term growth boundary. 
(11)  Neighborhood input. 
a.  Prior to the formal petition for rezoning, the applicant shall make a reasonable effort to meet with property owners and individuals within and near the area of the proposal. Property owners and residents within the project area and those within 300 feet or a minimum of the three closest property owners of the project boundary shall be noticed at least ten days prior to a meeting in which the conceptual project will be presented. The meeting shall be fashioned to solicit feedback on the proposed design. More than one neighborhood meeting may be necessary to gather input, address comments received and provide information relative to any intended application. 
b.  A statement describing the reasonable efforts made to meet with and receive input from individuals required to receive notice shall be submitted with the rezoning petition application when it is filed for review at the planning department. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-18, § 1, 12-11-2012)  
Sec. 22-613. - RC Rural Cluster District—Plan commission review. 
(a)  Following determination by the zoning administrator that an application is complete, the matter shall be reviewed by city staff and shall then be placed on a plan commission agenda for initial review, prior to the filing of a formal application. Initial review is a review of the project at the concept level and is not binding. The preferred procedure is for an iteration of the plan commission's initial review to occur prior to introduction of a formal petition for rezoning. The purpose of this meeting, or meetings, is to allow a discussion of the plan commission regarding the possible planned development zoning application and the environmental, economic, social and other benefits of design to be obtained from the proposal and general statistics on the possible project. 
(b)  Following the required public hearing before the plan commission, the plan commission shall meet to make a determination and recommendation whether to advise the common council to approve the rezoning and the general implementation plan, to approve it with modifications, or to deny it. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-18, § 1, 12-11-2012)  
Sec. 22-614. - RC Rural Cluster District—Criteria for RC approval. 
The intent of this code is to allow for limited development outside of the future urban development boundary while preserving certain natural characteristics of the property. To this end, the plan commission shall evaluate each proposed rezoning in light of the following criteria: 
(1)  RC rezoning requests shall be located on land at least 75 percent of which has either no tillage history and/or has a soil classification of IV, V, VI, VII, or VIII for that portion to be divided to accommodate the residential development. Specific site reviews should be based on the types of agricultural uses surrounding the rural cluster. If high quality agricultural soils with large contiguous acres are present, the compatibility and blending should occur to maintain the large contiguous agricultural acres, with the cluster being located at the edge/corner. 
(2)  RC requests shall be considered on the basis of one dwelling unit per 35 acres, utilizing 1979 as the base year. Potential claims that are outside of the future urban development boundary may be transferred to another property for the intent of creating a rural cluster that is located outside of the future urban development boundary. Agreements for the purchase of claims (with signatures from the owners and mortgage holders) will need to be submitted with the GIP. As a condition of SIP approval, land (35 acres per each claim) shall have a restriction with the city recorded at the county register of deeds restricting development to approved agricultural land uses [Note: Uses to be determined]. This restriction shall follow criteria identified in subsection 22-612(10). A land owner may, at their option, also file a non-removable restriction, such as a conservation easement, with a recognized 501(c)(3) land trust or conservancy, or other acceptable means. 
(3)  Requests are to be compatible with nearby agricultural zoning uses and shall provide for only one single family detached dwelling unit per claim, and require all new residential lots to have a right to farm document recorded to protect surrounding agricultural operations. A rural cluster shall consist of at least two and no more than ten single family detached dwelling units. 
(4)  The rezoning requests shall incorporate techniques to accomplish the following: 
a.  Protection and preservation of farmland and natural features. 
b.  Preservation and enhancement of natural features, including but not limited to woodlands, wetlands, prairies, streams, ponds, lakes, and other natural features. 
c.  Preservation of wildlife and flora habitat. 
d.  Enhancement of wildlife and flora habitat, including but not limited to small game, birds, waterfowl, and other fauna. 
e.  Be consistent with or advantageous for the Fitchburg Parks and Open Space Plan. 
(5)  Aesthetic desirability and effect on rural viewscape: 
a.  Preserve scenic views by minimizing views of new development from existing roads. 
b.  Rural clusters may be visible from access and surrounding roads so long as the cluster is designed to be unobtrusive in the rural viewscape. This can be accomplished as follows: 
1.  The buildings are grouped together to appear as a single farmstead and are designed utilizing historicist architecture (See section 22-623). 
2.  The buildings are grouped together to appear to be a rural hamlet and are designed utilizing historicist architecture. 
3.  The visible buildings from access and surrounding roads of a cluster fulfill the requirements of 1. or 2. above and the balance of the buildings are not visible. 
4.  The visible buildings of the cluster are designed with organic architecture so that their visual impact is minimal, blending into the landscape. 
c.  Building groupings to permit reduced minimum lot sizes. Where practicable, each lot shall adjoin another lot. Each lot shall have frontage and driveway access to a public street. The public street to serve a rural cluster shall provide at least two separate and distinct routes of travel. 
d.  Fencing, new plantings, and other screening. 
e.  Historic restoration. 
f.  Woodland, wetland or prairie restoration, improvement or expansion, along with maintenance. 
g.  Other features of site design and construction, building and structural design and construction and landscaping that are not listed above may also be addressed by the plan commission as advisory suggestions within the design review process upon a finding that the suggestion would be desirable to make the development a positive asset to the visual appearance of the community and positive contribution to the growth and stability of the community tax base. 
(6)  Compatibility with recreational trails, bike trails - specifically the Fitchburg Heritage Circle Route and wildlife corridors noted in the Fitchburg Park and Open Space Plan. 
(7)  Engineering design standards. Streets and other ways, provision for stormwater drainage, sanitary sewer/septic service, water supply, or other similar environmental and municipal engineering considerations of current ordinance requirements shall, at a minimum be met, but advanced environmental design will likely be required. Dark sky certified outdoor lighting shall be used. The plan commission and common council may require the use of higher levels of transportation and lighting improvements, stormwater management or water conservation techniques than is required by current ordinance or other governmental guidelines. Such standards shall be appropriate to advancing environmental design objectives and the public health, safety and welfare as determined by the city. Stormwater stay on-shall be at 90—100 percent of the predevelopment rate. 
(8)  Driveways. Each residential building shall be served by its own driveway from the public street and follow standards created and set forth by the public works department under section 27-399 of the Fitchburg Municipal Code. 
(9)  Preservation and maintenance of open space in a Rural Cluster District. Provision shall be made for the preservation and maintenance of any open spaces either by public reservation or dedication to public entities or commitment to preservation by a private entity. RC agreements shall contain specific reference to the ownership of such open space areas and to provision for maintenance. Rural clusters shall provide plans and documents in written and graphic form to fully describe the project and its benefits. Draft deed restrictions, easements, and preservation and maintenance of open space documents shall be submitted with the application. This section is only relevant if providing a public or private community open space within the cluster. 
(10)  Park dedication or fee in lieu and park improvement fees are part of the land division approval process and shall be determined as defined in subsections 24-2(d)(1)—(3) of the city's land division code, chapter 24. 
(11)  Transmittal of plan commission recommendations, report and related matters. The plan commission's reports and recommendations shall be made in a written report to the common council. A complete set of maps, plans and written documentation fully describing the proposed development as recommended by the plan commission at a general implementation plan level shall accompany the report of the plan commission. The matter shall not be considered by the council unless this documentation has a signature by the plan commission secretary over a statement that the documentation is complete and that it accurately reflects plan commission recommendations. In a situation in which the applicant disagrees with certain recommendations of the plan commission and is urging the common council to approve with modifications, the applicant must supply documentation of those modifications to the council prior to the matter being placed on the agenda of the common council. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-18, § 1, 12-11-2012)  
Sec. 22-615. - RC Rural Cluster District—Owner's consent. 
The owners of record and mortgage holders of all included rezone parcels shall consent in writing and provide an original signed and notarized document to the city clerk and a signed copy to the zoning administrator within a single 30-day period following common council adoption in order for the RC general implementation plan (RCD-GIP) zoning to take effect. Consent shall be binding upon future owners of the parcels in question. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-18, § 1, 12-11-2012)  
Sec. 22-616. - RC Rural Cluster District—Effect of RCD-GIP zoning. 
The approval of a general implementation plan shall not authorize issuance of building permits. The permits may not be issued until approval by the city of the specific implementation plan, and the conditions of the approval are met. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-18, § 1, 12-11-2012)  
Sec. 22-617. - RC Rural Cluster District—Filing—Effective date. 
When the consent signatures for lands in the parcel being rezoned to RCD-GIP are all acquired and delivered to the city clerk and zoning administrator within the 30 days as required by section 22-615, the documentation on plan commission and common council action and on the general implementation plan and the consent signatures shall be logged in and filed by the city, and the property shall be indicated as rezoned on city zoning maps. The date this occurs is the effective date of the rezoning. The map indication shall be RCD-GIP. The city clerk shall record at the county register of deeds the ordinance or an affidavit of notice of RC zoning against all real property included in the district. This shall be done as near the effective date of the RCD-GIP rezoning as is possible. The city shall require the applicant to supply necessary property descriptions, parcel numbers and to pay recording and publication fees. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-18, § 1, 12-11-2012)  
Sec. 22-618. - RC Rural Cluster District—Specific implementation plan (SIP). 
After the common council approval and recording of the RCD-GIP ordinance, the applicant may file a specific implementation plan for review and recommendation by the plan commission and approval by the common council. The specific implementation plan (for the entire RCD-GIP) shall be filed within three years of the date of council approval of the RCD-GIP. 
(1)  The specific implementation plan shall be a precise plan for development and shall contain graphic and tabular presentations at a level of detail equivalent to the level of detail of a final plat. Accompanying plans and text information shall describe in detail the building development plans, methodologies and timetables for the area covered by the specific implementation plan. The specific implementation plan shall cover all land in the approved general implementation plan as one submittal. 
(2)  The RCD-SIP for the entire RCD-GIP shall be submitted within three years of the common council approval of the RCD-GIP ordinance. If the SIP request is not submitted within three years, the RCD-GIP approval lapses and a new RCD-GIP approval shall be obtained pursuant to section 22-612 through 22-614. After three years, no RCD-SIP shall be approved unless the GIP has been reapproved. 
(3)  A public hearing as if it were a matter of rezoning, shall be held on any specific implementation plan (RCD-SIP) application or amendment to a RCD-SIP. 
(4)  The specific implementation plan submission may include site plan and design information, allowing the plan commission to combine design review and review of the specific implementation plan. Design review (see section 22-623) may, at the choice of the applicant, be deferred until a later time when specific site and building plans will be brought forth. 
(5)  RC requests shall be considered on the basis of one dwelling unit per 35 acres, utilizing 1979 as the base year. Potential claims that are outside of the future urban development boundary may be transferred to another property for the intent of creating a rural cluster that is located outside of the future urban development boundary. Land (35 acres) that is tied to each potential claim shall, as a condition of SIP approval, have a restriction in accord with section 22-620 and in favor of the city limiting land use to agriculturally approved uses [Note: uses to be determined] recorded at the county register of deeds. A land owner may, at their option, also file a non-removable restriction, such as a conservation easement, with a recognized 501(c)(3) land trust or conservancy, or other acceptable means. Signed agreements regarding the use of claims from outside the property, and relevant land restriction(s) shall be submitted with the RCD-SIP application, but the recording of such agreements shall be a condition of RCD-SIP approval. 
(6)  As part of submission for specific implementation plan approval, the applicant shall submit proof of financing capability pertaining to construction and maintenance and operation of public works elements of the proposed development. 
(7)  A copy of the recorded general implementation plan and all approved and relevant documents shall be submitted with the specific implementation plan request. 
(8)  The plan commission or common council may specify other plans, documents or schedules that must be submitted prior to consideration or approval of the specific implementation plan, as such may be relevant to review procedures and standards. 
(9)  No land division approval, except for comprehensive development plan, and/or preliminary plat approval, shall occur prior to approval of RCD-SIP zoning. Final plat or certified survey map land division approval shall be a condition of RCD-SIP approval. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-18, § 1, 12-11-2012)  
Sec. 22-619. - RC Rural Cluster District—Plan commission review. 
(a)  When the specific implementation plan submission is deemed by the zoning administrator to be complete, the matter shall be reviewed by staff and then placed upon the agenda of the plan commission for review, consideration and approval, modification or rejection. 
(b)  The specific implementation plan submission shall be reviewed by the plan commission against the standards of sections 22-611—22-623, the comprehensive plan and the previously approved general implementation plan. In order to approve a specific implementation plan, the plan commission must determine that the specific implementation plan is reasonably consistent with the previously approved general implementation plan as well as the current standards of this chapter and the comprehensive plan. 
(c)  If the plan commission recommends approval of a specific implementation plan, complete documentation describing this specific implementation plan, and any agreements that the plan commission deems necessary for the implementation of the plan, shall be prepared, reviewed by zoning administrator as complete and, when found to be complete by said zoning administrator, shall be placed on the agenda of the common council. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-18, § 1, 12-11-2012)  
Sec. 22-620. - RC Rural Cluster District—Common council review. 
The common council shall consider and act on the specific implementation plan after reviewing the recommendations of the plan commission on same. The specific implementation plan submission shall be reviewed by the common council against the current standards of this chapter, the current comprehensive plan, and the previously approved general implementation plan. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-18, § 1, 12-11-2012)  
Sec. 22-621. - RC Rural Cluster District—Filing and effective date. 
Upon approval, and receipt of consent of property owner signatures, which shall occur within 30 days of common council approval of the RCD-SIP, the ordinance noting RCD-SIP zoning shall be recorded at the county register of deeds. No land division approval, except for comprehensive development plan and/or preliminary plat approval shall occur prior to approval of RCD-SIP zoning. Final land division approval shall be a condition of RCD-SIP approval. Applicant shall pay for all publication and recording costs. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-18, § 1, 12-11-2012)  
Sec. 22-622. - RC Rural Cluster District—Effect of SIP approval; alterations. 
The filing and recording of an approved specific implementation plan shall only authorize release of building and other land use permits necessary to carry out development activities consistent with that approved plan, when all conditions or requirements of the SIP and other ordinances have been met. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide proof of satisfaction of all conditions and requirements. 
(1)  If a proposed amendment to the RCD-SIP is inconsistent with or alters an approved general implementation plan, the RCD-SIP shall not be approved unless the RCD-GIP is amended in accordance with the procedures pursuant to sections 22-612 to 22-614. 
(2)  Any subsequent change of use of any parcel or any modification of the specific implementation plan shall first be submitted for approval to the plan commission and if, in the opinion of the plan commission, such change or modification constitutes a substantial alteration of the specific implementation plan, the specific implementation plan shall be required to be amended through the same procedures used to approve, file and record the specific implementation plan. If, in the opinion of the plan commission, such changes or modification do not constitute a substantial alteration of the specific implementation plan, the change may be accomplished by approval of the plan commission. Such approved modifications shall be documented and recorded in the official file of the city on the RC district. 
(3)  All public improvements shall be required to be installed within 12 months of the date of common council approval unless a staging plan has been approved per chapter 24, land division code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-18, § 1, 12-11-2012)  
Sec. 22-623. - RC Rural Cluster District—Design review. 
(a)  All new residential, agricultural or other structures visible from access and surrounding roads shall be required to obtain architectural design review approval, pursuant to sections 22-604—22-606 of chapter 22, zoning ordinance and chapter 25, architectural control, before any building permits may be issued. Architectural design review applies to all exterior structural and design features including site planning, site facilities and any building done within or on the site, as outlined in the aesthetic desirability and effect on rural lands, section 22-614(5). Any structure that is not visible from access and surrounding roads does not require design review. 
(b)  Architectural standards for clusters visible from access and surrounding roads: 
(1)  Historicist architecture is building design that utilizes traditional Midwestern American forms and surface decoration. These may include Greek Revival, Queen Anne, Italianate, Second Empire, Gothic Revival, Four square or Rural Victorian Vernacular styles. The use of Builder's Modern or Ranch, Shed contemporary, Norman Scansion, Georgian Revival and other suburban styles are not Historicist. Large-scale renditions of traditional forms may not be Historicist. 
(2)  The new building, from a reasonable distance such as the access road, shall appear to be of a building type and age similar to other pre-1930 buildings currently existing on the rural landscape. Such building, if placed next to an existing rural structure constructed prior to 1930, would not clash in scale or decorative surfaces with the pre-existing structure. 
(3)  Building groupings may recapitulate farmsteads, grouped farmsteads or rural hamlets, mimicking the historic forms of pre-existing pre-1930 groupings. 
(4)  The use of fencing, landscaping, berms and other landscaping devises to obscure or hide buildings or portions of buildings when the building themselves or their grouping does not conform to (1), (2) or (3) above will be allowed as long as the viewscape goals are met. 
(5)  The restoration of an existing structure that has lost its original appearance may be used to provide a portion of a visible cluster. E.g., a "modernized" vinyl sided house with a traditional rural pre-1930s form may be restored or re-skinned to an original or Historicist appearance and other Historicist buildings clustered with the restored building. 
(6)  The restoration of significant buildings, such as pre 1980s structures, whether originally used for residential, agricultural or commercial purposes is encouraged. 
(7)  The restoration of wetlands or prairies may be required as part of the landscape and viewscape improvement of the cluster. A tall grass prairie may be used with organic or historicist architecture to "stage set" a rural cluster by providing a feeling of distance between existing roads and the cluster. The expansion and restoration of wooded areas may reduce or eliminate from the viewscape some or all buildings of a cluster that do not meet the standards for visible architecture. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-18, § 1, 12-11-2012)  
Secs. 22-624—22-638. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 22-639. - Zoning amendments. 
(a)  The city zoning ordinance may be amended pursuant to procedures provided by state law. 
(b)  Petitions to amend the zoning ordinance may be initiated by any alderperson or any city board, committee, commission or officer. Petitions to amend zoning districts may, in addition, be initiated by any person owning real estate, provided that the proposed amendment affects real estate owned by such person or a larger parcel that includes real estate owned by such person. 
(c)  The plan commission shall direct that application forms for zoning ordinance amendment petitions be developed and approved by the commission and that such, or close equivalents, shall be used to initiate amendment petitions. 
(d)  All petitions for amendment shall be introduced to the zoning administrator and referred to the plan commission with the information notice of the introduction and referral being given by the administrator to the common council. 
(e)  The plan commission shall establish a date for public hearing before the plan commission on all proposals for zoning amendments. Class 2 notice shall be given prior to such hearing. At least ten days' prior written notice shall be given to the clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are within 1,000 feet of any lands affected by a proposed change in zoning district boundaries. Failure to give such notice to nearby municipalities shall not invalidate the hearing or the change, if adopted. The public hearing shall be conducted by the plan commission in accordance with the notice, unless recessed and rescheduled in accordance with state law. 
(f)  At least ten days' prior written notice shall be given by ordinary mail to owners of record of all lots or parcels within the protest petition area under Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7) and to the alderpersons of the affected district. 
(g)  Protest petitions may be lodged regarding amendments to zoning district maps in accordance with provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7). 
(h)  Following the public hearing, the plan commission shall issue its recommendations on the proposed amendment to the common council. 
(i)  Following receipt of the recommendations and report of the plan commission, the common council may take action upon the proposed amendment. 
(j)  Where allowed by state zoning law, rezonings may be conditioned where the common council deems imposition of conditions a necessity to achieve the public interest and the intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.112, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-640. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  Identification and purpose. The city zoning ordinance identifies certain uses of property within each zoning district as conditional uses. Applications to establish or modify such uses shall be decided pursuant to this section as a matter of discretionary judgment, upon consideration of the specific proposal in relation to the site, uses of neighboring properties, area conditions and the provisions of the city land use plan. Approval of conditional uses shall be accompanied by conditions established by the plan commission. 
(b)  Procedures. 
(1)  Applications for conditional use approval shall be made on application forms developed and approved by the plan commission. 
(2)  An application fee, as set forth in the annual budget appendix fee schedule, shall be paid at the time an application is filed. Applications originated by the city shall be exempt from application fee. 
(3)  A conditional use application that has been rejected shall not be accepted for resubmittal within six months from the date of rejection unless the plan commission determines that there has been a significant change in the proposal or in relevant conditions. 
(4)  When the plan commission staff has received a complete application, and the application fee, and when the staff has completed such research and staff review as the plan commission has directed be applied to such applications, the application and related file shall be transmitted to the plan commission for its review and consideration. 
(5)  The plan commission shall establish a date for public hearing before the plan commission on all proposals for conditional use approvals. Class 1 notice shall be given prior to such hearing. At least ten days' prior written notice shall be given to the clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are within 1,000 feet of any lands affected by a proposed change in zoning district boundaries. Failure to give such notice to nearby municipalities shall not invalidate the hearing or the use, if adopted. The public hearing shall be conducted by the plan commission in accordance with the notice, unless recessed and rescheduled in accordance with state law. 
(6)  At least ten days prior written notice shall be given by ordinary mail to owners of record of all lots or parcels within 300 feet or a minimum of the three closest property owners, and to other parties of interest, including alderpersons representing the district in which the request has been made. 
(7)  Following the public hearing, the plan commission may approve, disapprove or approve with modifications a conditional use application. The decision of the plan commission shall be recorded in the minutes and shall contain a written statement of reasons for the commission's determination, including reasons specifically related to the standards of this chapter or of documents related to this chapter by cross-referencing provisions, and of any conditions required to be imposed upon the use if the application is approved or approved with modifications. 
(8)  Adopted motions to approve conditional uses shall include identification of conditions. These conditions may address, without limitation because of specific enumeration: the site plan, timetable of development, operation of the proposed use, surety requirements for performance of required activities, increased yard requirements, period or hours of operation, landscaping or planting screens, deed restrictions, parking areas and signs, types of construction, erosion control, preservation of significant natural or historic features or other considerations relevant to applicable standards and all conditions referenced in section 22-717(b). All conditions imposed shall be recorded in the minutes and correspondence sent to the applicant and other parties registering an interest and may, at the discretion of the commission, be recorded, at the expense of the applicant, in legal documentation filed in relation to the property at the county register of deeds. All such conditions shall be fully binding upon the property as if they were specific terms of this article. 
(9)  A decision of the plan commission granting or denying a conditional use may be appealed to the common council. Applications for such appeal shall be signed by the applicant or by persons who would have protest petition rights under Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7) were the matter one of rezoning, or by any member of the common council. Such application for appeal shall be filed within ten days of the date of the plan commission action. Upon filing of the appeal application, the entire plan commission file shall be submitted by commission staff to the city clerk for transmittal to the common council and all plan commission minutes on the matter shall be reproduced and sent to members on the common council. The appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the common council. Before rendering its decision on the appeal, the common council shall hold a public hearing. The common council may either affirm, reverse or modify the action of the plan commission. In making its determination the common council shall be guided and controlled by subsection (a) of this section. 
(10)  Where an approved conditional use contemplates construction of buildings and structures, the failure to commence such construction within one year after approval of the conditional use shall render the approval void. In addition, the failure to complete such construction within two years after approval shall render the approval void unless the applicant has demonstrated good cause to the plan commission and the plan commission has affirmatively voted to provide such an extension. In no case shall the plan commission grant an extension longer than one year nor shall the plan commission grant more than one extension for a single approved conditional use. 
(11)  If a use allowed by a conditional use permit is established but ceases for a period of 24 or more consecutive months, the conditional use permit for the area shall expire. 
(c)  General standards. No conditional use shall be approved by the plan commission unless the commission shall find: 
(1)  That the establishment, maintenance, or operation of the conditional use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort or general welfare. 
(2)  That the conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood. 
(3)  That the establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the district. 
(4)  That adequate utilities, access road, drainage and/or necessary facilities have been or are being provided. 
(5)  That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets. 
(6)  That the conditional use shall, in all other respects, conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(d)  Conditions. Conditions such as landscaping, architectural design, type of construction, construction commencement and completion dates, sureties, lighting, fencing, planting screens, operational control, hours of operation, improved traffic circulation, deed restrictions, highway access restrictions, increased yards, or parking requirements, may be required by the plan commission upon its finding that these are necessary to fulfill the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.115, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2012-O-03, 4-24-2012)  
Sec. 22-641. - Conditions on rezonings. 
(a)  Statement of purpose. Conditional re-zonings are authorized as provided herein to enable adaptation of zoning to unique circumstances regarding particular sites, uses or neighborhoods when the city has not had sufficient experience with the type of use in question to lead to treatment of the use as conditional use. 
(b)  The plan commission may recommend and the common council may adopt an ordinance effecting an amendment of the zoning district map containing the condition that the change in the map will take effect on such date occurring within three months of the date of common council approval of the amendment when the first on-site inspection for building location is made and approved for the project sought to be established, and in the event such approved inspection has not occurred by the three-month time period, the possibility of making effective the re-zoning will then be terminated. 
(c)  The plan commission may recommend and the common council may adopt an ordinance effecting an amendment of the zoning district map containing the condition that the change in map will take effect on such date occurring with within three months of date of common council approval of the amendment when a restrictive covenant has been recorded binding the property to conditions specified in the amending ordinance, and in the event such covenant is not recorded by the end of the three-month period, the possibility of making effective the re-zoning will then be terminated. Conditions specified to be in such required covenants shall be related to the purposes of the ordinance. They may include, as specific cases warrant, limits of permissible uses to less than the full range of uses otherwise allowable in the district into which the land is being placed. Enforcement rights over such covenant controls shall be afforded to the city and owners of property within 300 feet of the site. The covenant controls shall be amendable or repealable upon petition of the owner of the lands subject to the controls, and approval of the common council after a hearing similar to a re-zoning hearing. A re-zoning of the lands to a different zoning district shall also act to repeal the covenant controls. Except as provided above, the covenants shall run with the land. 
(d)  Other similar controls appropriate to handling by covenant provisions may also be imposed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.116, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-642. - Zoning board of appeals. 
(a)  Appointments, terms, rules and procedures. The zoning board of appeals shall be appointed and shall be governed as to terms, vacancies, removals, and as to rules and procedures by Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e) and by provisions herein. 
(b)  Functions of zoning board of appeals. Functions of the board of appeals shall be to hear and decide applications for variances under the zoning ordinance and to hear and decide applications for appeal of administrative interpretations. 
(c)  Public hearings. The zoning board of appeals shall conduct a public hearing on all administrative appeals, variances and other decision matters before it and shall cause a class I notice under Wis. Stats. ch. 985 to be published and shall give due notice of the hearing to all parties in interest. For appeals or variances in overlay districts written notice shall be given to the southern district office of the department at least ten days prior to hearings on proposed variances and appeals for map or text interpretation. 
(d)  Any party may appear in person or by agent at such hearing. The chair may administer oaths to parties testifying and may compel attendance of witnesses. All testimony before the board by persons other than board members and all documentary evidence or material pertaining to matters before the board shall be received at hearings conducted by the board, provided that the content of relevant ordinance or statutory materials shall be deemed to be before the board in all cases and need not be entered into the record. All parties in interest shall be afforded reasonable opportunity to comment on all materials or information so received. Board members who are in possession of facts that may have a bearing on the matter before the board shall enter same into the record of the hearing and opportunity shall be allowed for comment on such entries. 
(e)  Deliberations and decisions. The board shall deliberate on matters before it. The concurring vote of four members of the board shall be necessary to approve any appeal, variance or other decision matter before the board. The vote of each matter decided by the board shall be recorded in the minutes. If a member is absent or if a member fails to vote, such facts shall similarly be recorded. The minutes of the board shall show the board's decisions and the votes of members thereon. Each decision of the board shall be accompanied by written reasons in support of the decision. All decisions shall be made in strict accordance with the standards of the ordinance and the board shall decide all matters before it within a reasonable time. For overlay districts copies of all decisions shall be submitted to the department within ten days after they are granted or denied. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.117, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2012-O-03, 4-24-2012)  
Sec. 22-643. - Appeals board functions—Appeals of interpretations of the zoning administrator. 
(a)  Appealable matters. Decisions by the zoning administrator that consist of interpretations of the terms of the city zoning ordinance and that are made in the course of determining whether a permit or approval will be issued by the administrator are appealable to the zoning board of appeals as administrative appeals. Decisions by the zoning administrator to issue an enforcement demand or to commence other enforcement activities, where the administrator has determined that a violation of the ordinance exists, are appealable to the board of appeals as an administrative appeal. 
(b)  Procedures for initiating an administrative appeal. 
(1)  Eligible appellants. Administrative appeals may be initiated by any person aggrieved by the decision or interpretation being appealed, or by any officer, department, board or committee of the city government. 
(2)  Time for appeals. An appeal shall be commenced within 30 days after decision or interpretation was made. 
(3)  Initiating an appeal. An appeal may be commenced by filing with the zoning administrator a notice of appeal identifying the decision being appealed, the grounds for the requested relief and payment of applicable fees. Upon receipt of such a notice, the zoning administrator shall notify the board of appeals and shall transmit to the board all papers and files which constitute the record of the decision being appealed. 
(4)  Stays. An appeal of a decision to issue a permit or approval or to issue an enforcement demand or to commence other enforcement proceedings shall cause the permit or approval action to be suspended or shall stay further enforcement prosecution unless the zoning administrator or city attorney files with the board of appeals a certificate, supported by a statement of facts, alleging that suspension or stay will cause imminent peril to life or property. If such a certificate is filed, proceedings shall not be stayed except upon a restraining order issued by a court. 
(5)  Decisions of the zoning board of appeals. Following the procedures specified in section 22-642(c) through (e), the board shall decide the matter based upon whether the decision, determination or interpretation being appealed was in error. The board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision appealed from, or may make such decision as ought to have been made, and to that end shall have all powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. Decisions by the board on administrative appeals shall be based upon the terms of the ordinance and evidence as to legislative intent. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.119, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-644. - Same—Variances. 
(a)  Initiating a request for variance. Applications for variances in zoning regulations may be filed by any party having a property interest in the property in question, along with payment of the applicable fee. The zoning administrator shall transmit the application to the board. 
(b)  Review and decision. Following a public hearing and other investigations, including review of plan commission recommendations, if available, the board shall decide the matter based upon the following standards: 
(1)  No variance may be granted that would have the effect of allowing a use of land or property that would violate state law or administrative rules. 
(2)  To grant a variance, the board must find that the variance will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special and peculiar conditions, applicable only to the specific property in question, a literal enforcement will result in exceptional practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public health, safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done. 
a.  Exceptional practical difficulty and unnecessary hardship shall be construed as a whole, with no distinction made. 
b.  When considering a dimensional standard variance that will not involve significant change in the character of the neighborhood, the hardship/difficulty test is whether compliance with the strict letter of the restrictions on lot area, setbacks, frontage, height, lot area coverage or occupancy or density would unreasonably prevent the owner from using the property for an allowed purpose or would render conformity unnecessarily burdensome. 
c.  When considering a dimensional variance that would, if approved, cause significant change in the character of the neighborhood, the hardship/difficulty test is whether, in absence of approval, no feasible use can be made of the property. 
d.  Use variances (variances allowing a use not specified for that district by this article) should be considered only when the use in question is new or is one not provided for anywhere in the ordinance. The board may consider such variances only when the use is very similar in its inherent characteristics and impact characteristics to uses within the district in question. 
(3)  The board may grant a variance to extend a zoning district boundary for a distance not to exceed 25 feet, but only where the boundary of a district divides a lot in a single ownership. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.120, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-645. - Zoning administrator. 
(a)  Position designated. A zoning administrator shall be designated through city personnel procedures. 
(b)  Duties, responsibilities and authority. 
(1)  Records. The zoning administrator shall be responsible for keeping all records of applications received, committee, board or office actions on such applications, permits issued, inspections made, enforcement actions undertaken and similar activities, as well as general correspondence pertaining to the functions of the office and program. 
(2)  Inspections. Zoning administration shall make such inspections of premises as are required, to determine compliance of land use activities with the terms of this chapter. Except in cases of emergency, such inspections shall be made only at reasonable hours, with reasonable notice to property owners and/or occupants and with consent, unless made pursuant to an inspection warrant issued pursuant to state law. 
(3)  Determinations and interpretations. The zoning administrator shall make those administrative decisions and determinations required for administration of this chapter. 
(4)  Permits, approvals, fees or certificates of occupancy. The zoning administrator shall receive applications under this chapter and shall process the applications and collect and dispose of fees in accordance with city ordinance and administrative procedures. Permits or approvals issued by the zoning administrator shall be issued on the basis of plans and applications as submitted and authorize only the uses, arrangements and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement or construction. Use, arrangement or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. Permits shall lapse and become void if operations described in the permit are not commenced within one year of issuance of the permit, unless otherwise specified in this chapter or by specific approval of an extension or variation. 
(5)  Advice and recommendations. The zoning administrator shall, upon general or specific request of the plan commission or board of appeals or other body or officer of the city, issue reports, and make recommendations on matters that come before such commission, board or officer. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.125, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-646. - Permits. 
(a)  Certain development activities and occupancies shall require application for and issuance of a permit in order for them to be legally established. The plan commission is hereby delegated the authority to promulgate permit requirements, to establish forms for permit applications and permit forms themselves. 
(b)  Failure to obtain a required permit is a violation of this article. 
(c)  Issuance of a permit authorizes only the development of occupancy set forth in approved plans submitted as part of a permit application and no other development or occupancy. Issuance of a permit creates no liability on the part of the city or its issuing officers and does not limit the right of the city to change ordinance requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.127, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-647. - Park fee requirements. 
The following fees shall be required as a condition for any rezoning, conditional use permit or design review for any residential unit receiving such approval within the city, unless provision of fee, land or street frontage for the proposed development has been applied previously to the real estate subject to the application. This section is not applicable to the SmartCode District under chapter 23. 
(1)  Fee in lieu of dedication. 
a.  Chapter 24, land division, requires a park land dedication of 2,900 square feet per dwelling unit. Where the park commission, in its sole discretion, determines that there is no suitable land for a park, or parks, within the proposed development, the dedication of land is not feasible, or the dedication would not be compatible with the comprehensive plan, or the park commission determines that a cash contribution would better serve the public interest, the parks commission shall then require a fee in lieu of making a land dedication. 
b.  The fee to be imposed under subsection (1)a of this section shall be a per dwelling unit fee as set forth in the annual budget appendix fee schedule. In calculating the fee, the typical cost of land sold for residential subdivisions or development shall be considered. This fee shall be collected and paid in lump sum, prior to any land division being executed by the city, or prior to any zoning permit or building permit being issued if a land division is not required. 
c.  The park commission may, in its sole discretion, permit the developer to satisfy the requirement of subsection (1)a of this section by combining a land dedication with a fee payment. 
d.  The city shall place any fee collected pursuant to the provisions of this section in a separate account to be used for land acquisition and development of adequate park, playground, recreation and open space to meet the needs created by the proposed development. 
(2)  Park improvement fee. The developer shall pay, prior to issuance of a zoning permit or building permit a per dwelling unit park improvement fee (a separate fee for single-family units, two-family units and multifamily units) as set forth in the annual budget appendix fee schedule. The collected fees shall be utilized to construct park facilities for the plat, survey or development. The park commission shall give priority to establishing the proper neighborhood park facilities according to the plan for parks and open spaces and the generally accepted standards prior to expenditure for facilities in area or community parks. The collected fee shall go into special segregated funds. The fee, per unit, relates to the cost of improvements for a neighborhood park. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.128, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2018-O-38, § 4, 11-27-2018)  
Sec. 22-648. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Declarations of unlawful conduct, activities and conditions. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any building or structure to be erected, constructed, placed, moved or structurally altered, or for any use of land, premises, building or structure to be established or changed in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with any standard of this chapter or with any condition or qualification placed upon the issuance of a permit or approval or variance granted in due course under this chapter. 
(b)  Liability. 
(1)  Owners of lands or properties, occupiers of land or premises, and agents of owners or occupiers including, without limitation because of enumeration, contractors, surveyors, plumbers, installers, soils technicians, or their agents, or lending institutions and insurers or their agents are responsible for compliance with all provisions of this chapter which bear upon their area of competency and responsibility. 
(2)  Any such party who violates or aids or abets in a violation shall be liable to prosecution or remedial action. 
(3)  This chapter applies fully to all public governmental and quasi-public and quasi-governmental lands, developments and activities unless specifically exempted by state or federal law. 
(c)  Investigation of compliance; notice of violations. 
(1)  The zoning administrator is responsible for inspecting and investigating compliance of land use activities with the terms of this chapter. 
(2)  If, upon such inspection or investigation, the zoning administrator becomes aware of a condition which he/she concludes is or likely to become unlawful, the administrator shall immediately notify the parties to the situation whom he/she deems to be responsible and potentially liable. Such notice shall include: 
a.  A demand that the condition that is alleged to constitute the present or potential violation be halted, prevented from occurring or remedied; or 
b.  A statement that a complaint on the condition and request for prosecution has been or will be transmitted to the city attorney and/or to enforcement officials, state agencies, or both. 
(3)  If an enforcement demand is issued and is not complied with, the zoning administrator may file a request for prosecution with the city attorney, unless an administrative appeal has been commenced and a stay order has been issued. 
(d)  Enforcement and penalties. 
(1)  Any building or structure hereafter erected, moved or structurally altered or any use hereafter established in violation of any provision of this Code shall be deemed an unlawful building, structure or use. The zoning administrator shall promptly report all such violations to the city attorney who shall cause an action to be brought to enjoin the erection, moving or structural alteration of such building or the establishment of such use or to cause such building, structure or use to be vacated, or removed. 
(2)  Any person who violates any provision of this Code or disobeys or refuses to comply with the enforcement of any provision of this Code shall also be subject to a forfeiture of $100.00 per day. 
(e)  Other enforcement provisions. 
(1)  Where a conditional use, variance, planned development or design review has been approved subject to specified conditions, and where such conditions are not complied with, the body which last approved such conditions may conduct a hearing pursuant to this section upon a petition submitted by any interested party or by the zoning administrator to revoke the approval. A finding of noncompliance with the conditions imposed shall be grounds for revocation. 
(2)  Relationship to nuisance actions. No provision of this chapter shall be construed to bar an action to enjoin or abate the use or occupancy of any land or structure as a nuisance upon the laws of the state. 
(3)  Conditions placed on rezonings, approvals or permits may include requirement of bonds or similar surety arrangements to ensure performance of required obligations. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.130, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-649. - Interpretation and definitions. 
(a)  Relationship of zoning to plan documents. City comprehensive plan documents or plans for components of city development shall, unless otherwise specified herein, be guides to interpretation of this chapter. Wherever possible, interpretation decisions rendered under this chapter shall harmonize zoning regulation decisions with plans and with other plan implementation regulations. 
(b)  General intent. The intent of this chapter is to contribute to the betterment of the community for the benefit of persons who reside in the community. The chapter intends to promote the public health, safety and welfare, to promote orderly development in all sectors, and to maintain and improve the quality of the community. 
(c)  Rules of language construction. The language set forth in the text of this chapter shall be interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction: 
(1)  The singular number includes the plural and the plural is singular. 
(2)  The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future the present. 
(3)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(4)  The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders. 
(5)  Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this chapter, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in such definition thereof. 
(d)  Liberal interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(e)  Conflicting regulations. Where the standards of this chapter are either more restrictive or less restrictive than standards imposed by any other laws, ordinances, statutes, resolutions, or regulations, the regulation that is more restrictive or that imposes higher standards or requirements shall prevail. The SmartCode, chapter 23, shall prevail over the terms of this chapter. 
(f)  Classification of uses. In each zoning district, there are uses which are permitted uses and uses which are conditional uses. 
(1)  Permitted uses for each district may be undertaken in that district upon issuance of a zoning permit for those permitted uses that require a permit, and upon compliance of the use with other applicable laws and ordinances. 
(2)  Uses listed in each zoning district as conditional uses may be undertaken in that district only upon approval of a conditional use application pursuant to this chapter and upon compliance of the use with other applicable laws and ordinances. 
(3)  A term "allowable uses" in this chapter refers to both permitted and conditional uses. 
(g)  Uses not classified. When a use is not specifically provided for in this chapter, the plan commission or a property owner may request a study by the plan commission to determine whether the proposed use is compatible with the land use plan, what zoning district would be appropriate and a determination as to conditions and standards relating to such use; the common council may, upon receipt of the study, initiate an amendment to this chapter to provide for the particular use under consideration or find that the use is not compatible in the particular location. 
(h)  Separability. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the common council that the several provisions of this chapter are separable. If a court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision of this chapter not specifically included in said judgment. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this chapter to particular property, building or structure, such judgment shall not affect application of said provision to any other properties, buildings or structures not specifically included in said judgment. 
(i)  SIC reference. Use listings in the business and industrial districts generally employ terminology of the Standard Industrial Classification SIC Manual published by the US Printing Office and interpretive decisions shall be guided by reference to that publication. 
(j)  General provisions for use. Any use not listed as a permitted use in a district is prohibited in that district and except as otherwise expressly provided, any use listed as a permitted use in any other district shall be construed as a prohibited use in any other district. 
(k)  "Land use plan" and "master plan" defined. The terms "land use plan" and "master plan" shall mean the city comprehensive plan, adopted March 24, 2009, as subsequently amended. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.135, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-650. - Standards for lots and setbacks. 
(a)  Each lot newly created shall provide appropriate size, shape and configuration for the uses that predominate or typify the zoning district in which the lot is established. 
(b)  Each structure or occupancy for which a minimum lot size and lot dimensions are specified in this chapter shall have a lot prescribed for it, either a traditional legal land parcel or a zoning lot. A zoning lot is a lot equivalent, exclusively identified for the particular structure or occupancy to allow determination of lot standards. The structure or occupancy need not have exclusive legal possession of the zoning lot, but no two zoning lots shall overlap. The zoning administrator or plan commission may establish rules so that zoning lots function in a manner equivalent to traditional lots, but condominium forms of ownership shall not be discriminated against in the administration of this chapter. 
(c)  No required yard shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make such yard or other open space less than the minimum required by this chapter. 
(d)  Setbacks are established within the various use districts. No structure to accommodate a principal use may be established or maintained within a setback. Section 22-55 governs other structural development or occupancies within setbacks. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall not be applied to projects permitted under the SmartCode District, chapter 23. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.136, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-651. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory means a use of property or an activity that is subordinate and incidental to the primary use and/or activity and that does not alter the appearance of the premises or the external impacts that the premises has on the neighborhood so as to be out of character with dominant, principal uses allowed under this chapter. 
Agricultural accessory use means any of the following land uses on a farm: 
(1)  A building, structure, or improvement that is an integral part of, or is incidental to, an agricultural use. 
(2)  An activity or business operation that is an integral part of, or incidental to, an agricultural use. 
(3)  A business, activity, or enterprise, whether or not associated with an agricultural use that is conducted by the owner or operator of a farm, that requires no buildings, structures or improvements other than those described in part (1) or farm residences that employ no more than 4 full-time employees annually, and that does not impair or limit the current or future agricultural use of the farm or of other protected farmland. 
Agricultural entertainment means a farm based activity, enterprise or business that combines the elements and characteristics of agriculture and tourism, which is not necessarily located in an existing building and may have more than one (1) full-time equivalent employee. Examples of agricultural entertainment include: corn mazes, hay rides, sleigh rides, petting farms, on farm tours, agricultural related museums, demonstrations of farming practices, techniques and methods, fee based fishing and hunting, horseback riding, nature trails, haunted barns and similar activities which are related to agriculture. 
Agricultural related use means: 
(1)  An agricultural equipment dealership, facility providing agricultural supplies, facility for storing or processing agricultural products, or facility for processing agricultural wastes. 
(2)  Any other use that the department of agriculture, trade and consumer protection (DATCP), by rule, identifies as an agriculture-related use. 
Agricultural uses mean any of the following: 
(1)  Any of the following activities conducted for the purpose of producing an income or livelihood: crop or forage production, keeping livestock, beekeeping, nursery, sod or Christmas tree production, floriculture, aquaculture, fur farming, forest management and enrolling land in a federal agricultural commodity payment program or a federal or state agricultural land conservation payment program. 
(2)  Any other use that the department of agriculture, trade and consumer protection (DATCP) by rule, identifies as an agricultural use. 
Animal husbandry means all operations primarily oriented to the on-site raising and/or use of animals, at an intensity of less than one animal unit per acre. It does not include domestic animals that are raised or live in or about habitation of humans and are dependent on people for food or shelter. Animal husbandry is limited to rabbits, poultry, beekeeping, fish farming, and only where and when the person performing the animal husbandry lives on the site. 
Animal unit. One animal unit shall be defined as being the equivalent of one cow, or four hogs, or ten sheep, or ten goats, or 100 poultry, or one horse, or one pony, or one mule, or 100 rabbits. 
Bed and breakfast establishment means a lodging establishment as defined in Wis. Stats. § 254.61, such that the establishment shall provide eight or fewer rooms for rent to no more than a total of 20 tourists or transients, provides no meals other than breakfast and provides the breakfast only to renters of the place, is the owner's personal residence and is occupied by the owner at the time of lodging. In addition, the bed and breakfast must have been originally built and occupied as a single-family residence, or prior to use as a place of lodging, was converted to use and occupied as a single-family residence. 
Boathouse, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 30.121(1), means a permanent structure used for the storage of watercraft and associated materials and includes all such structures which are totally enclosed, have roofs or walls, or any combination of structural parts. 
Building means a structure having a supported roof intended for a shelter or enclosure. 
Building height measurement means a distance to be measured from the mean ground eave immediately adjoining the front of the structure to the top of the cornice of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to a point on the roof directly above the highest wall of a shed roof, or to the uppermost point on a round or other arch type roof, or to the midpoint of the highest gable on a pitched or hip roof. 
Building permit means the permit or permits issued by the zoning administrator in enforcing this chapter. 
Building separation means the intended purpose of side yard setbacks, specifically to allow adequate separation for privacy, fire safety, emergency vehicular access and open space provision. 
Campground means a parcel or tract of land, maintained, intended or used for the purpose of supplying temporary or overnight living accommodations to the public by providing designated areas for the placement of trailers, tents, buses, automobiles or sleeping bags, and may include buildings to provide services to the patrons such as restrooms, bathing, laundry and commissary facilities. A primitive campground shall be any area or site designated for camping purposes which is accessible only by hiking, boating or canoeing. 
Cemetery shall include, but not be limited to, cemeteries, mausoleums, columbarians, crematoriums and burial chapels and shall be subject to Wis. Stats. § 157.06. 
Certificate of compliance means a certification issued by the zoning administrator stating that the construction and use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the first floor of a structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this article. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct normal flow of water. 
Church is defined in section 22-222. 
Classes of notice shall be established pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 985. 
Clinic means an office or building in which dental, veterinary, medical or paramedical services are provided on an out-patient basis. Such services as laboratory, X-ray and first aid services may be provided. 
Club means a nonprofit association of persons paying membership fees, whose premises are generally restricted to members and their guests. 
Commercial animal operation means a licensed establishment for the housing, grooming, breeding, boarding, training or selling of animals on a commercial, for gain basis. 
Community garden means one form of urban agriculture, where an area of land is managed and maintained by a non-profit organization, neighborhood group, community group, or the city. The land is categorized into management plots (usually not exceeding 20 feet by 20 feet), with each plot gardened by different citizens or groups to grow locally produced food and/or ornamental crops, such as flowers, not for sale. 
Conceal from view means substantially block view from most off-site locations. A site is not required to be concealed from view from locations that have considerably higher elevation. 
Conditional use means a use which is permitted by this article provided that certain conditions specified in the ordinance are met and that a permit is granted by the plan commission or, where designated, the board of appeals. 
Consistent with means free from variation or contradiction so that there is agreement between the comprehensive plan and the regulations used to implement the comprehensive plan. A regulation is consistent with the comprehensive plan if any element addressed in both the comprehensive plan and the proposed regulations are free from variation, is in agreement, and achieves the goals, objectives and policies of the comprehensive plan. 
Construction equipment shall include, but not be limited to, tractors, both wheeled an crawler types, graders, end loaders, scrapers, bulldozers, cranes, back hoes, drag lines, trucks, including dump, stake body or semi-trailer of more than 2½ ton capacity, utility service vehicles and air compressors. Any of the aforementioned equipment that is used in connection with a farm operation and is not leased or contracted for use on any other property shall not be considered construction equipment. 
Convenience cash business is a business licensed pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 138.09, or 218.05 which provide nontraditional, short-term consumer loans in which the consumer receives cash in exchange for giving the lender a post-dated check, title to a motor vehicle, or electronic access to the consumer's bank account for the amount of the loan for a period of time before negotiating the check or for payment to the lender an agreed-upon finance fee or refinancing or consolidating such transaction. Such businesses are also known as, but not limited to, payday loan, cash advance, or check-cashing, or title loan. This does not include financial institutions authorized to do business under state or federal laws including, without limitation, banks and trust companies, savings banks, building and loan associations, savings and loan associations and credit unions. 
Cooperative housing means a dwelling unit where 100 percent of ownership is held by a cooperative corporation incorporated under Wis. Stats. ch. 185 in which all the residents are members of the cooperative, as the term is used in Wis. Stats. ch. 185. In such housing all residents have private bedrooms, but share cooking, dining and common areas and share some household maintenance and cooking duties. The entire structure and real property is under common ownership as contrasted to a condominium dwelling where individual units are under separate individual occupant ownership. 
Day care means provision of custodial care for persons for remuneration. If done within a welling unit in which residential living is the primary usage in residential occupancy, the use is classified as family day care. If one in other premises, the use is classified as general day care. 
Department means the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
Development means any new use, change of use and any change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures; any placement of mobile homes; the construction of additions or substantial alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the placement of buildings or structures; ditching, lagooning, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; and the deposition or extraction of earthen materials or public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities. 
Drainage system means one or more artificial ditches, tile drains or similar devices which collect surface runoff or groundwater and convey it to a point of discharge. 
Dwelling structures means buildings having one or more dwelling units plus associate areas storage, utility spaces, recreation spaces, hallways, entryways). Dwelling structures do not, for purposes of this article, include mobile homes or manufactured homes. 
Dwelling units means sets of rooms or spaces within which sleeping, kitchen, bathroom facilities are provided, contained within the unit, and serving a single person or group of persons who constitute the household that is occupying the dwelling unit. 
Electrical interconnection means the point at which the wind tower electrical system is connected to an existing electric distribution system. 
Encroachment means any fill, structure, building, use or development in the floodway. 
Environmental control facility means any facility, temporary or permanent, which is reasonably expected to abate, reduce or aid in the prevention, measurement, control or monitoring of noise, air or water pollutants, solid waste and thermal pollution, radiation or other pollutants, including facilities installed principally to supplement or to replace existing property or equipment not meeting or allegedly not meeting acceptable pollution control standards or which are to be supplemented or replaced by other pollution control facilities. 
Equipment means apparatus not constituting a structure. 
Existing mobile home park or mobile home subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more mobile home lots for rent or sale on which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the construction of streets) is completed before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
Family means any number of individuals related by blood or marriage, or not to exceed five persons not so related, living together on the premises as a single housekeeping unit, including any domestic servants. 
Farm. See Wis. Stats § 71.613(1)(d). 
Farm residence. A single-family or duplex residence that is the only residential structure on the farm or is occupied by any of the following: 
(1)  An owner or operator of the farm. 
(2)  A parent or child of an owner or operator of the farm. 
(3)  An individual who earns more than 50 percent of his or her gross income from the farm. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) means the federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
Fixed houseboat, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 30.121(1), means a structure not actually used for navigation which extends beyond the ordinary highwater mark of a navigable waterway and is retained in place either by cables to the shoreline or by anchors or spudpoles attached to the bed of the waterway. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by the overflow of inland waters, or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly unusual event. 
Floodplain means that land which has been or may be hereafter covered by floodwater during the regional flood. The floodplain is comprised of the floodway and the floodfringe and general floodplain areas. 
Freeboard represents a factor of safety usually expressed in terms of a certain amount of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for the many unknown factors that contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated. These unknown factors include, but are not limited to, ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and floodways, the effects of urbanization on the hydrology of the watershed, loss of flood storage areas due to development and the sedimentation of a river or stream bed. 
Garage means that part of a building or structure, including a carport intended or used primarily for storing passenger vehicles, trailers, motor homes, and trucks. 
Garage sale means any display of used goods, and sale of said goods on a property customarily used as a residence. The person or persons conducting the sale shall reside on the lot where the same is conducted. 
Gas station. 
(1)  Gas station, class I, means a retail place of business engaged only in the sale of motor fuels and incidental petroleum products. 
(2)  Gas station, class II, means a retail place of business engaged primarily in the sale of motor fuel, but also engaged in supplying goods and services generally associated with the operation and maintenance of motor vehicles. This may include the sale of petroleum products, sale and servicing of tires, batteries, automotive accessories and replacement items, washing and lubrication services and the performance of automotive maintenance and repair. 
(3)  Gas station, class III, means a retail place of business engaged in the sale of motor fuels and dispensing of services generally associated with the operation and maintenance of motor vehicles; the dispensing of food when food is served to a customer and consumed by him/her while seated at a counter or table; and providing of places of temporary residence for motorists, tourists or travelers. 
Group home means community living arrangements under Wis. Stats. § 46.03(22), including those child welfare agencies, group homes for children and community based residential facilities identified therein. For purposes of applying lot size, parking and similar requirements to group homes, the zoning administrator shall classify the structure by size as being equivalent to a single-family, two-family or a multiple-unit structure with a specified number of units or equivalent units. 
Hard surfaced parking and drive areas means effectively dust-proofed, through means as specified by the city zoning administrator. The administrator shall, from time to time, consult with the plan commission in regard to this list of means. 
Hearing notice means a publication or a posting meeting the requirement of Wis. Stats. ch. 985. Class 1 notice is required at a minimum for appeals; published at least one week (seven days) before the hearing. Class 2 notice is required at a minimum for all zoning ordinances and amendments; published twice, once each week consecutively, the last publication at least one week (seven days) before the prior. 
Home occupation or household occupation means a limited vocational activity allowed as part of a residential occupancy, provided that such activity meets the following criteria: 
(1)  The activity must be clearly secondary and incidental to residential use. 
(2)  The activity must not significantly alter the residential character on the dwelling unit, dwelling structure or the parcel. 
(3)  The activity must not unreasonably interfere with residential occupancy of other parcels in the neighborhood. 
(4)  The activity must not create environmental, safety or health hazards such as noise, lights, odors, vibrations, electrical emissions, or other fire or safety hazards that are noticeably out of character with those produced by normal residential occupancy. 
(5)  Traffic generated by the vocational activity many not exceed that which is customary to residential occupancies in the neighborhood. 
(6)  Signage for the vocational activity must comply with city sign regulations. 
(7)  The parcel and structure must contain adequate area to accommodate the vocational activity without interfering with residential occupancy of other parcels in the neighborhood. 
Hospital means an institution providing health services, primarily for in-patients, and medical and surgical care of the sick and injured, including as an integral part of the institution, such related facilities as laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central service facilities and staff offices. 
Hotel means a building in which board and lodging are provided to the transient public for compensation. 
Hydraulic reach means that portion of the river or stream extending from one significant change in the hydraulic character of the river or stream to the next significant change. These changes are usually associated with breaks in the slope of the water surface profile, and may be caused by bridges, dams, expansion and contraction of the water flow, and changes in stream bed slope or vegetation. 
Hydrologic reach means a designated length of river, stream or lake where the storage of floodwaters therein has been taken into account to reduce the regulatory flood discharge. Major manmade or natural changes in the river character, limits of political jurisdiction, or a change in the flood-routing technique used to determine the storage and translation of a flood wave through the area of interest may be used to define the end of a hydrologic reach (e.g., a dam may be considered a major manmade change in the river character or a change from channel routing to reservoir routing may be considered a major change in the flood-routing technique). 
Incidental encompasses secondary and accessory and means developments and occupancies that are subordinate or secondary to the actual dominant use or the uses that are intended to be dominant in the district. 
Incidental retail sales means sales provided for the convenience of occupants of the building. 
Land use means any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real estate. Also see Development. 
Lines represents the limits of obstruction to flood flows. These lines are designated on both sides of, and generally parallel to, the channel of a river or stream. They are established by assuming that the area landward (outside of the encroachment lines) will ultimately be developed in such a way that it will not convey flood flows, but the development will not cause an increase to regional flood elevations upstream. It is assumed that any development riverward of these lines will cause an obstruction and will require a detailed analysis to determine its effect on the regional flood elevations upstream. 
Livestock includes, but is not limited to, bovine animals, equine animals, goats, poultry, sheep, swine, farm-raised deer, farm-raised game birds, camelids, ratites, and farm raised fish. 
Lot area means the area of a lot in a horizontal plane bounded by the lot lines, but not including any area occupied by waters of an existing lake or river or by wetlands or by lands which have been dedicated as a public thoroughfare, street, park, conservation area, path or trail. Each dwelling structure shall have a lot and a lot area within that lot specified for it and all submission for city approval and all approvals shall specifically reference the lot and lot area for each dwelling structure. Required lot areas shall be owned in fee title. It shall not be legal to establish required lot dimensions by combining lands owned in fee title with lands in which the owner has only an easement or similar interest. 
Lot coverage means the portions of a lot or parcel occupied by the principal structure or structures; detached garages and carports; detached gazebos, screen enclosures and patios and decks as provided in section 22-56; storage buildings, sheds and enclosures; pet houses/runs and hard surface play areas not part of a driveway. Pool decking shall be considered as a patio or deck. 
Lot line means a perimeter line of a lot, except where any portion of a lot extends into the public right-of-way or a proposed public right-of-way, the nearest line of such public right-of-way shall be the lot line for applying the provisions of this chapter. 
Lot line, front, means the boundary of a lot which abuts an existing public street, and in the case of a corner lot, it shall be the shortest dimension on a public street. If the dimensions of a corner lot are within ten percent of being equal, the front lot line shall be that street line designated by the owner and filed in the office of the zoning administrator. 
Lot line, rear, means that boundary line of a lot which is opposite the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less than ten feet in length, or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be aligned ten feet in length within the lot, connecting the side lot lines and parallel to the front lot line. 
Lot line, side, means any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
Lot of record means a platted lot or lot described in a certified survey map or metes and bounds description which has been approved by the city or by the county and has been recorded in the office of the register of deeds. 
Lot width means the minimum distance between the side lot lines of any lot measure parallel to the front lot line measured at the setback distance required by this article. 
Manufactured home means any structure, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode is 12 body feet or more in width, and 18 feet or more in length and at least 864 square feet when erected on site, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and which complies with all manufactured home construction and safety standards established under 242 USC 5401 et seq. 
Manufactured housing. See Wis. Admin. Code § ILHR 20(52). The term "manufactured housing" does not include manufactured homes. 
Mobile home means every vehicle manufactured or assembled before June 15, 1976, designed to be towed as a single unit or in sections upon a highway by a motor vehicle and equipped and used, or intended to be used, primarily for human habitation, with walls of rigid uncollapsible construction, except that excluded from this definition is every "manufactured home" as defined above. 
Mobile homes park means any plot or plots of ground upon which two or more units, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for an accommodation. Is subject to the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 66.058. 
Motel means a building containing sleeping rooms for the temporary accommodation of tourists and not for permanent occupancy except by the owner or resident operator. 
Municipality means city, village or town. 
Navigable waters means Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, all natural inland lakes within the state, and all streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages and other waters within the territorial limits of this state, including the Wisconsin portion of boundary waters, which are navigable under the laws of this state. 
Neighboring properties means properties directly affected by deck or related developments (see section 22-55). If the neighboring property is not occupied by a dwelling structure, the plan commission must approve variations in separations. 
Nonconforming structure means a structure that was once conforming to dimensional standards but is now nonconforming as to the current dimensional standards of this code. 
Nonconforming use means a use or activity that was lawful prior to the adoption, revisions, or amendment of the zoning ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. 
Notice, classes. See Classes of notice. 
Occupancy means human or human directed occupation of a lot, with or without physical, structural development. 
Open space means space which is not occupied by structures, facilities or hard surface, whether or not impervious or pervious. It does not include gravel drives and parking areas, but would include clear landscape stone unless underlain by a nonpervious barrier. Open space does include lawns, gardens or bark beds, sandboxes or similar type facilities. 
Open space use means those uses having a relatively low flood damage potential and not involving structures. 
Ordinary highwater mark means the point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic. 
Owner of record means the owner of a lot of record as per the then current city tax records. 
Parking space, structured, means spaces inside garages roofed and enclosed on at least three sides. 
Person means an individual, or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, municipality or state agency. 
Person aggrieved means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, public or private organization, officer, department, board, commission or agency of the municipality, whose rights, duties or privileges are adversely affected by a determination under this chapter. 
Planning agency means the municipal planning commission, agency, committee or a board of public land commissioners of the municipality's governing body created under Wis. Stats. § 62.23(1) which acts on matters pertaining to planning and zoning. 
Premises means a lot together with buildings, structures or equipment thereon. 
Principal means the primary or dominant use of a lot or premises. 
Recreational facility is defined in division 8 of article II. 
Regional flood means a flood determined to be representative of large floods known to have generally occurred in Wisconsin and which may be expected to occur on a particular stream because of like physical characteristics. The flood frequency of the regional flood is once in every 100 years. This means that in any given year, there is a one percent chance that the regional flood may occur or be exceeded. During a typical 30-year mortgage period, the regional flood has a 26 percent chance of occurrence. The regional flood is based upon a statistical analysis of stream flow records available for the watershed or an analysis of rainfall and runoff characteristics in the general watershed region or both. FEMA uses the term "base flood" which means the regional flood. 
Residential occupancy means the occupancy of a dwelling unit, dwelling structure and parcels containing such entities for residential living purposes. 
Restaurant means an establishment where food and drink is prepared and served. Restaurants are classified by this chapter as follows: 
(1)  Sit down, substantially all of patrons sit at tables inside. 
(2)  A predominant percentage of patrons sit down inside, although some may carry out food. 
(3)  A predominant number of patrons carry out, although some inside seating is provided. 
(4)  All patrons carry food out. 
(5)  Concession establishments without seating, selling ice cream, popcorn and comparable items as the primary use. 
Roadside stand means a structure having a ground area of not over 200 square feet, not permanent by being attached to the ground, readily removable in its entirety and to be used solely for the sale of farm and garden products produced on the premises. Such structures may be located within the setback lines of roads, but shall not interfere with visibility along the highway. 
Rotor means a system of rotating aerodynamic elements attached to a single shaft that converts the kinetic energy in the wind into mechanical shaft energy. 
Sanitary landfill means a type of land disposal operation involving the disposal of solid waste on land. 
School is defined in division 8 of article II. 
Secondhand business is any person or business requiring a license under chapter 66 of the Fitchburg Municipal Code. 
Setback means a minimum horizontal distance measured from the specified property line or street right-of-way (see lot line front) to a point parallel to the lot line or street right-of-way. 
Shorelands means lands within the following distances from the ordinary highwater mark of navigable waters; 1,000 feet from a lake, pond or flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater. 
Sleeping room rental means rental, on a regular basis, or sleeping accommodations, whether or not combined with meals or related services, within a dwelling unit that is also occupied by the lessor. 
Small animals means animals generally below a weight of 100 pounds kept on a domesticated basis as household pets, also includes birds such as parrots, parakeets, canaries and the like. 
Soften views means impose partial interferences with direct visual contact from most off-site locations, so that the object of view is not constantly dominant. 
Solid waste disposal operation means the operation or maintenance of a solid waste disposal site or facility, for the collection, storage, utilization, processing or final disposal of solid waste, including, but not limited to, land disposal, incinerator, transfer, air curtain destruction, composting reduction, shredding, compression, processing and salvage. In house re-use of the imperfect finished products to make a merchantable finished product is not a solid waste disposal operation. 
Solid waste recycling center means a solid waste disposal operation at which temporary storage and processes such as baling of paper, grinding of glass and flattening of cans, are conducted on segregated solid waste to facilitate re-use of the segregated solid waste as raw material. 
State classified manufacturing means manufacturing uses and operations as defined in Wis. Stats. § 70.955(1) to (3). 
Storage capacity of a floodplain means the volume of space above an area of floodplain land that can be occupied by floodwater of a given stage at a given time, regardless of whether the water is moving. 
Story (measurement of height) means that portion of the building located above the basement. A space is considered a basement if it is below grade or partly below grade but located so that the vertical distance from average grade to the floor below is more than the vertical distance from average grade to ceiling. 
Structure means materials forming a construction for use, occupancy or ornamentation, whether installed on or above lands or waters. Includes buildings and other constructed objects. 
Turbine height means full height measured from ground level at base to the tip of the blade vertically extended. 
Unnecessary hardship means that circumstance where special conditions, which were not self-created, affect a particular property and make strict conformity with the restrictions governing dimensional standards such as area, setbacks, frontage, or height unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purpose of this article. Unnecessary hardship is present only where, in the absence of a variance, no feasible use can be made of the property. 
Urban agriculture means cultivation or growing of vegetables, fruits, grains, nuts, herbs or flowers for human consumption or ornamental use. Urban agriculture may also include animal husbandry. Urban agriculture shall also include processing for human consumption food grown on site. Plant waste, and animal manure generated on-site may be composted and used on site as a soil amendment or fertilizer. 
Use means: 
(1)  A purpose or activity of a development or occupancy. 
(2)  A detached subordinate structure or a use which is clearly incidental to, and customarily found with, the principal structure or use to which it is related and which is located on the same lot as that of the principal structure or use. 
Utility and governmental facility means the transmission, switching and related facilities, antenna, and similar equipment of installations necessary to conduct public utility, gas, electric, telephone, cable communications within the community or through the community; and municipal lands, facilities, installations or equipment necessary to perform governmental functions. For purposes of this section, municipal includes city, town, county, state, educational agencies, metropolitan sewerage commission, federal entities, and private entities performing public services under service contracts with the municipality. Municipality also includes private entities performing public services under service contracts with a municipality. Municipal lands and facilities include those leased by or to a municipality. 
Variance means an authorization granted by the board of appeals to construct, alter or use a building or structure in a manner that deviates from the dimensional standards of this article. A variance may not permit a use of property otherwise prohibited by the ordinance or allow construction not protected to the flood protection elevation. 
Water surface profile means a graphic representation showing the elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along a reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile of the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas. 
Wetland alteration means any filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching, tiling, excavating, temporary water level stabilization measures or dike and dam construction in a wetland area. 
Wetland district means the zoning district, created in this zoning ordinance, comprised of areas that are designated as wetlands on the wetlands inventory maps which have been adopted and made a part of this article. 
Wetlands means those areas where water is at, near or above the land surface long enough to support aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which have soils indicative of wet conditions. 
Wind turbine system means any mechanical device designed for the purpose of converting win energy into electrical or mechanical power. 
Window well means an area below grade that retains the earth around a window that is either entirely or partially below grade, and is constructed for the primary purpose of providing light and ventilation and/or egress from a below grade space during an emergency. 
Zero-lot line lot means a lot created with no side yard set back on one side of the lot to create a shared building envelope between the two lots. This shared building envelope shall only be used to build or divide a duplex where the common wall between the two units is built, or determined to be, the common boundary line to create two separate attached single-family dwelling units. 
Zero-lot line side yard means the side yard of a zero-lot line lot with no setback. No lot can have more than one side yard with the zero set back. 
Zoning lot means a lot containing a single zoning classification within all or a part of a lot of record. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.150, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2012-O-03, 4-24-2012; Ord. No. 2015-O-02, § 6, 1-27-2015)  
Secs. 22-652—22-675. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - WETLAND OVERLAY ZONING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-676. - Statutory authorization. 
This article is adopted pursuant to the authorization in Wis. Stats. §§ 62.23, 62.231, 59.692, and 281.31. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.201, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-677. - Findings of fact. 
The uncontrolled development and use of the wetlands, rivers and streams, and the pollution of navigable waters of the city would adversely affect the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare and impair the tax base. The state legislature has delegated responsibility to all municipalities to further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions; prevent and control water pollution; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites, placement of structures and land uses; and preserve shore cover and natural beauty. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.202, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-678. - Purpose. 
To promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare, and protect life, health and property this article has been established to: 
(1)  Maintain the stormwater and floodwater storage capacity of wetlands; 
(2)  Protect life, health and property; 
(3)  Prevent and control water pollution by preserving wetlands which filter or store sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters; 
(4)  Protect fish spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life and wildlife by preserving wetlands and other fish and aquatic habitat; 
(5)  Prohibit certain uses detrimental to the wetland area; 
(6)  Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by restricting wetland excavation, filling and other earth moving activities; 
(7)  Minimize expenditures of public monies for costly flood control projects; 
(8)  Reduce rescue and relief efforts, generally undertaken at the expense of the tax paying public; 
(9)  Prevent business interruptions which usually result in the loss of local incomes; 
(10)  Reduce damage to public facilities such as utilities, municipal buildings, streets and bridges which may be located in the floodplains; 
(11)  Prevent the occurrence of future flood blight areas on floodplains; 
(12)  Discourage the victimization of unwary land and home buyers; and 
(13)  Prevent increases in regional flood heights which could increase damage during floods and which may result in conflicts or litigation between property owners. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.203, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-679. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the Wetland Overlay Zoning for the City of Fitchburg, Wisconsin. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.204, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-680. - Compliance; other permits. 
Any development, as defined in section 22-651, in wetlands shall be in full compliance with the terms of this article. However, see section 22-691 for the standards applicable to nonconforming uses. It is the responsibility of the applicant to secure all other necessary permits from appropriate federal, state, and local agencies, including those required by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.211, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-681. - Municipalities and state agencies regulated. 
Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are required to comply with this article and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if Wis. Stats. § 13.48(13) applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation are exempt when Wis. Stats. § 30.12(4)(a) applies. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.212, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-682. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
(a)  This article supersedes all the provisions of any zoning ordinance enacted under Wis. Stats. § 62.23 which relate to wetlands, except that where another zoning ordinance is more restrictive than the provisions contained in this article, that ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise. The more restrictive of either the wetland district or floodplain district (see article X of this chapter for floodplain district regulations) regulations shall apply when a property is located in both zoning overlay districts. 
(b)  This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. However, where this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.213, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-683. - Interpretation. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the city and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by the state law. Where a provision of this article is required by a standard in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 117, and where the article provision is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 116 or Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 117 standards in effect on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.214, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-684. - Severability. 
Should any portion of this article be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this article shall not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.215, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-685. - Zoning maps. 
The maps designated below are hereby adopted and made part of this article. They are on file in the office of the zoning administrator: 
Wisconsin Wetland Inventory maps stamped "FINAL" on January 22, 1986. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.216, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-686. - District boundaries of wetlands. 
(a)  The wetland zoning district includes all wetlands in the city which are two acres or more in size and are shown on the final wetland inventory map that has been adopted and made a part of this article in section 22-685. 
(b)  When an apparent discrepancy exists between the wetland district boundary shown on the official zoning maps and the actual field conditions at the time the maps were adopted, the zoning administrator shall contact the appropriate district office of the department to determine if the wetland district boundary as mapped, is in error. If department staff concur with the zoning administrator that a particular area was incorrectly mapped as a wetland, the zoning administrator shall have the authority to immediately grant or deny a land use or building permit in accordance with the regulations applicable to the correct zoning district. In order to correct wetland mapping errors shown on the official zoning maps, the zoning administrator shall be responsible for initiating a map amendment within a reasonable period. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.217, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-687. - Permitted uses in wetlands. 
The following uses are permitted subject to the provisions of Wis. Stats. chs. 30 and 31 and the provisions of other local, state and federal laws, if applicable: 
(1)  Activities and uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning permit, provided that no wetland alteration occurs: 
a.  Hiking, fishing, swimming, boating and the following outside the urban service area: hunting, snowmobiling and trapping; 
b.  The harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild rice, berries, tree fruits and tree seeds, in a manner that is not injurious to the natural reproduction of such crops; 
c.  The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning and harvesting of timber; 
d.  The pasturing of livestock; 
e.  The cultivation of agricultural crops; and 
f.  The construction and maintenance of duck blinds. 
(2)  Uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning permit and which may involve wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided below: 
a.  The construction and maintenance of fences for the pasturing of livestock, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance; 
b.  The maintenance, repair, replacement and reconstruction of existing highways and bridges, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such maintenance, repair, replacement or reconstruction. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.218, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-688. - Conditional uses in wetlands. 
(a)  The following conditional uses may be allowed in the wetland district, including wetland alteration only to the extent specifically provided below and notification to the southern district office of the state department of natural resources at least ten days prior to the hearing and mailing a copy of the action on the conditional use to said office: 
(1)  The construction and maintenance of roads which are necessary for the continuity of the municipal street system, the provision of essential utility and emergency services or to provide access to uses permitted under section 22-687, provided that: 
a.  The road cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland; 
b.  The road is designed and constructed to minimize the adverse impact upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in section 22-690(a); 
c.  The road is designed and constructed with the minimum cross-sectional area practical to serve the intended use; 
d.  Road construction activities are carried out in the immediate area of the roadbed only; and 
e.  Any wetland alteration must be necessary for the construction or maintenance of the road. 
(2)  The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings provided that: 
a.  The building is used solely in conjunction with a use permitted in the wetland district or for the raising of waterfowl, minnows or other wetland or aquatic animals; 
b.  The building cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland; 
c.  The building does not exceed 500 square feet in floor area; and 
d.  Only limited filling and excavating necessary to provide structural support for the building is allowed. 
(3)  The establishment and development of public and private parks and recreation areas, outdoor education areas, historic, natural and scientific areas, game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal farms, wildlife preserves and public boat launching ramps, provided that: 
a.  Any private development allowed under this article shall be used exclusively for the permitted purpose; 
b.  Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the development of public boat launching ramps, swimming beaches or the construction of park shelters or similar structures is allowed; 
c.  The construction and maintenance of roads necessary for the uses permitted under this subsection are allowed only where such construction and maintenance meets the criteria in section 22-687; and 
d.  Wetland alterations in game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal farms, and wildlife preserves shall be for the purpose of improving wildlife habitat or to otherwise enhance wetland values. 
(4)  The construction and maintenance of electric and telephone transmission lines and water, gas and sewer lines, and related facilities provided that: 
a.  The transmission and distribution lines and related facilities cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland; 
b.  Only limited filling or excavating necessary for such construction or maintenance is allowed; and 
c.  Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize the adverse impact upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in section 22-690(a). 
(5)  The construction and maintenance of line-haul railroad operations within railroad rights-of-way provided that: 
a.  The line-haul railroad improvement cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland; 
b.  Only limited filling for railroad beds or excavating for drainage necessary for such construction and maintenance is allowed; and 
c.  Such construction or maintenance including vegetation cutting is done in a manner designed to minimize the adverse impact upon the natural functions of the wetlands listed in section 22-690(a). 
(6)  The maintenance and repair of existing drainage systems, where permissible under Wis. Stats. § 30.20 to restore preexisting levels of drainage, including the minimum amount of filling necessary to dispose of dredged spoil, provided that the filling is permissible under Wis. Stats. ch. 30 and that dredged spoil is placed on existing spoil banks where possible. 
(7)  The construction and maintenance of piers, docks and walkways, observation decks and trail bridges built on pilings, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance. 
(8)  The installation and maintenance of sealed tiles for the purpose of draining lands outside the wetland zoning district provided that such installation or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize the adverse impact upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in section 22-690(a). 
(9)  Hunting, snowmobiling and trapping within the urban service area. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.21, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-689. - Prohibited uses in wetlands. 
Any use not listed in section 22-687 is prohibited, unless the wetland or a portion of the wetland has been rezoned by amendment of this article in accordance with sections 22-687 and 22-720. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.220, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-690. - Rezoning wetlands. 
(a)  Rezoning of a wetland shall require amendment of the Final Wisconsin Wetland Inventory Map adopted in section 22-685 pursuant to procedures established in section 22-720. The city shall not rezone a wetland in a wetland zoning district, or any portion thereof, where the proposed rezoning may result in a significant adverse impact upon any of the following: 
(1)  Stormwater and floodwater storage capacity; 
(2)  Maintenance of dry season stream flow or the discharge of groundwater to a wetland, the recharge of groundwater from a wetland to another area or the flow of groundwater through a wetland; 
(3)  Filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that would otherwise drain into surface waters; 
(4)  Shoreline protection against soil erosion; 
(5)  Fish spawning, breeding, nursery or feeding grounds; 
(6)  Wildlife habitat; or 
(7)  Areas of special recreational, scenic or scientific interest, including scarce wetland types and habitat of endangered species. Upon notification of a proposed amendment as required by section 22-720, if the district office of the department determines that a proposed rezoning may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in this subsection (a), the department shall so notify the city of its determination either prior to or during the public hearing held on the proposed amendment. 
(b)  If the department notifies the city plan commission in writing that a proposed amendment may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in subsection (a) of this section, that proposed amendment, if approved by the city shall not become effective until more than 30 days have elapsed since written notice of the council approval was mailed to the department, as required by section 22-720. If within the 30-day period, the department notifies the council or board that the department intends to adopt a superseding wetland zoning ordinance for the city under Wis. Stats. § 62.231(6) the proposed amendment shall not become effective until that ordinance adoption procedure is completed or otherwise terminated. The record of the council or board decision on the proposed amendment shall advise the petitioner of the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.221, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-691. - Nonconforming structures and uses. 
(a)  Notwithstanding Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(h), the repair, reconstruction, renovation, remodeling or expansion of a legal nonconforming structure in existence at the time of adoption or subsequent amendment of this article adopted under Wis. Stats. § 62.231 or of an environmental control facility in existence on May 7, 1982, related to that structure, is permitted under Wis. Stats. § 62.231(5). Section 62.23(7)(h) applies to an environmental control facility that was not in existence on May 7, 1982, but was in existence on the effective date of this article or amendment. 
(b)  The lawful use of a building, structure or property which existed at the time this article, or an applicable amendment to this article, took effect and which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article, including the routine maintenance of such a building or structure, may be continued, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future use of the building, structure or property shall conform to the appropriate provisions of this article. 
(2)  Any legal nonconforming use of property which does not involve the use of a structure and which existed at the time of the adoption or subsequent amendment of this article adopted under Wis. Stats. § 62.231 may be continued although such use does not conform with the provisions of the article. However, such nonconforming use may not be extended or increased. 
(3)  The maintenance and repair of nonconforming boathouses which are located below the ordinary highwater mark of any navigable waters shall comply with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 30.121. 
(4)  Uses which are nuisances under common law shall not be permitted to continue as nonconforming uses. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.222, 10-12-2010)  
Secs. 22-692—22-710. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 22-711. - Zoning administrator. 
The zoning administrator shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  Advise applicants as to the provisions of this article, assist them in preparing permit applications and appeal forms. 
(2)  Issue permits and certificates of compliance and inspect properties for compliance with this article. 
(3)  Keep records of all official actions such as: 
a.  All permits issued; 
b.  Inspections made; 
c.  Work approved; 
d.  Records of water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and ordinances, nonconforming uses and structures including changes, appeals, variances and amendments. 
(4)  Have access to any structure profiles, maps and ordinances, nonconforming uses and structures including changes, appeals, variances and amendments. 
(5)  Investigate and report violations of this article to the appropriate municipal planning agency and the district attorney, corporation counsel or municipal attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.231, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-712. - Zoning permits. 
(a)  When required. Unless another section of this article specifically exempts certain types of development from this requirements, a zoning permit shall be obtained from the zoning administrator before any development, as defined in section 22-651, including any change in the use of an existing building or structure, is initiated. 
(b)  Application. An application for a permit shall be made to the zoning administrator upon forms furnished and shall include the following information for the purpose of proper enforcement of these regulations: 
(1)  General information. 
a.  Name, address, and telephone number of applicant, property owner and contractor. 
b.  Legal description of the property and a general description of the proposed use or development indicating new construction or modification to existing structures. 
(2)  Site development plan. The site development plan shall be drawn to scale and submitted as a part of the permit application form and shall contain the following information: 
a.  Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot noted on a copy of the wetland inventory map, if applicable; 
b.  Location and boundaries of wetlands; 
c.  Specifications and dimensions for areas of proposed wetland alteration; 
d.  Location of the ordinary highwater mark of any abutting navigable waterways; 
e.  Existing and proposed topographic and drainage features and vegetative cover; 
f.  Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot lines and center line of all abutting streets or highways; 
g.  Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private water supply systems; 
h.  Location and elevation of existing or future access roads. 
(c)  Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this article shall expire six months from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.232, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-713. - Certificates of compliance. 
(a)  Except where no zoning permit or conditional use permit is required, no land shall be occupied or used, and no building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied, until a certificate of compliance is issued by the zoning administrator, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or premises or part thereof, and the proposed use, conform to the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the application for a permit. 
(3)  The certificate of compliance shall be issued within ten days after notification of completion of the work specified in the permit, providing the building or premises or proposed use conforms with all the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The zoning administrator may issue a temporary certificate of compliance for a building, premises or part thereof according to rules and regulations established by the municipality. 
(c)  Upon written request from the owner, the zoning administrator shall issue a certificate of compliance for any building or premises existing at the time of adopting of this article, certifying after inspection, the extent and type of use made of the building or premises and whether or not such use conforms to the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Other permits. The applicant must secure all necessary permits from federal, state, and local agencies, including those required by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.233, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-714. - Fees. 
The common council shall set fees for the following and include in the annual budget appendix fee schedule: 
(1)  Zoning permits. 
(2)  Certificates of compliance. 
(3)  Board of appeals. 
(4)  Rezonings, including PDDs. 
(5)  Conditional use permits. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.234, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-715. - Board of appeals. 
The mayor shall appoint a board of appeals under Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e), consisting of five members subject to confirmation by the governing body. The board of appeals shall adopt rules for the conduct of their business as required by Wis. Stats. § 63.23(7)(e)3. 
(1)  Powers and duties. The board of appeals shall: 
a.  Appeals in overlay zoning districts. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
b.  Variances. May grant, upon appeal, a variance from the dimensional standards of this article pursuant to section 22-716. 
(2)  Appeals to the board. 
a.  Generally. Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved of by an officer, department, board or bureau of the community affected by any order, requirement decision, or determination of the official whose decision is in question. Such appeals shall be taken within 60 days as provided by the rules of the board, by filling with the official whose decision is in question, and with the board of appeals, a notice of appeal specifying the reasons for the appeal. The official whose decision is in question shall transmit to the board all the documents constituting the record concerning the matter appealed. 
b.  Notice and hearing. The board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing on the appeal or application. Public notice shall be provided by publishing the appropriate notice as required by state law with the notice specifying the date, time and place of the hearing and the matters to come before the board. Notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest. Written notice shall be given to the southern district office of the department at least ten days prior to hearing on proposed conditional uses. At the public hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
c.  Decision. A decision regarding the appeal or application shall be made as soon as practical. Copies of all decision on conditional uses, shall be submitted to the appropriate district office of the department within ten days after they are granted or denied. The final disposition of an application to the board of appeals shall be in the form of a written resolution or order signed by the chairman and secretary of the board. Such resolution shall state the specific facts which are the basis of the determination and shall either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed, in while or in part, dismiss the application for lack of jurisdiction or prosecution or grant the application. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.235, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-716. - Variances. 
(a)  The board of appeals may, upon appeal, grant a variance from the dimensional standards of this article where an applicant convincingly demonstrates that: 
(1)  Literal enforcement of the provisions of the article will result in unnecessary hardship on the applicant; 
(2)  The hardship is due to adoption of the article and special conditions unique to the property; and not common to a group of adjacent lots or premises (in such case the zoning ordinance or map must be amended); and 
(3)  Such variance is not contrary to the public interest; 
(4)  Such variance is consistent with the purpose of this article (section 22-678). 
(b)  A variance shall not: 
(1)  Allow development below regional flood elevations; 
(2)  Grant or increase any use of property prohibited in the zoning district; 
(3)  Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or loss; 
(4)  Be granted for a hardship which is self created; 
(5)  Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the area. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.236, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-717. - Conditional use permits. 
(a)  Any use listed as a conditional use in this article shall be permitted only after an application has been submitted to the zoning administrator and a conditional use permit has been granted by the plan commission, following the procedures in subsection (c) of this section. To secure information upon which to base its determination, the plan commission may require the applicant to furnish, in addition to the information required for a zoning permit, other pertinent information which is necessary to determine if the proposed use is consistent with the purpose of this article. 
(b)  Conditions. Upon consideration of the permit application and the standards applicable to the permitted uses in this article, the plan commission shall attach such conditions to a conditional use permit, in addition to those required elsewhere in this article, as are necessary to further the purposes of this article as listed in section 22-678. Such conditions may include specifications for, without limitation because of specific enumeration: type of shore cover; erosion protection measures; increased side yard setbacks; specific sewage disposal and water supply facilities; landscaping and planting screens; period of operation; operational control; sureties; deed restrictions; location of piers; docks, parking areas and signs; and type construction. 
(c)  Hearing applications for conditional use permits. 
(1)  Notice and hearing. The plan commission shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing on the appeal or application. The plan commission shall give public notice by publishing a class 1 notice under Wis. Stats. ch. 985 specifying the date, time and place of the hearing and the matters to come before the board. Notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest. Written notice shall be given to the southern district office of the department at least ten days prior to hearings on proposed conditional uses. At the public hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(2)  Decision. A decision regarding the appeal or application shall be made as soon as practical. Copies of all decision on conditional uses, shall be submitted to the appropriate district office of the department within ten days after they are granted or denied. The final disposition of an application to the board of appeals shall be in the form of a written resolution or order signed by the chairman and secretary of the board. Such resolution shall state the specific facts which are the basis of the determination and shall either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed, in while or in part, dismiss the application for lack of jurisdiction or prosecution or grant the application. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.237, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-718. - To review appeals or permit denials. 
(a)  The board of appeals shall review all data constituting the basis for the appeal of permit denial. The data may include (where appropriate): 
(1)  Permit application data listed in section 22-712; 
(2)  Other data submitted to the zoning administrator with the application, or submitted to the board with the appeal. 
(b)  For appeals of all denied permits the board shall: 
(1)  Follow the procedures of section 22-715; 
(2)  Consider any zoning agency recommendations; 
(3)  Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.238, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-719. - Public information. 
(a)  Where useful, marks on bridges or buildings or other markers may be set to show the depth of inundation during the regional flood at appropriate locations within the floodplain. 
(b)  All available information in the form of maps, engineering data and regulations shall be readily available and should be widely distributed. 
(c)  All legal descriptions of property in the floodplain should include information designating the floodplain zoning classification when such property is transferred. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.239, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-720. - Amending wetland zoning regulations—procedures. 
The city may supplement or change the district boundaries and the regulations contained in this article according to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d)2, Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 117, and the following: 
(1)  The wetland district amendment provisions of section 22-690 apply. 
(2)  A copy of each proposed text or map amendment shall be submitted to the appropriate district office of the department within five days of the submission of the proposed amendment to the plan commission. 
(3)  All proposed text and map amendments shall be referred to the plan commission, and a public hearing shall be held as required by Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d)2, following publication of a class 2 notice as defined in section 22-651. The appropriate district office of the department shall be provided with written notice of the public hearing at least ten days prior to such hearing. 
(4)  A copy of the decision on each amendment shall be provided to the department district office within ten days of the decision. No map or text amendment shall become effective until reviewed and approved by the department. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.240, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-721. - Enforcement and penalties. 
See forfeitures schedule in chapter 70 for penalties for any person who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article. Every violation of this article is a public nuisance and the creation thereof may be enjoined and the maintenance thereof may be abated by action at suit of the municipality, the state, or any citizen thereof pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 87.30(2). 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.241, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-722. - Definitions. 
Definitions of this article are the same as those found in section 22-651. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.250, 10-12-2010)  
Secs. 22-723—22-742. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION 
 
Sec. 22-743. - Purpose and authority. 
(a)  The residents of the city depend exclusively on groundwater for a safe drinking water supply. Certain land use practices and activities can seriously threaten or degrade groundwater quality. The purpose of this article, the wellhead protection ordinance (hereafter "this article" or "WHP ordinance"), is to institute land use regulations and restrictions to protect the municipal water supply of the city and promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents. 
(b)  Statutory authority of the city to enact these regulations was established by the Wisconsin Legislature in 1983, Wisconsin Act 410 (effective May 11, 1984), which specifically added groundwater protection, in Wis. Stats. §§ 59.69(1) and 62.23(7)(c) to the statutory authorization for county and municipal planning and zoning to protect the public health, safety and welfare. In addition, under Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(c), the city has the authority to enact this article, effective in the incorporated areas of the city, to encourage the protection of groundwater resources. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.301, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-744. - Application of regulations. 
The regulations specified in this WHP ordinance shall apply within the city's corporate limits. If there is a conflict between this article and the other zoning ordinance provisions, the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.302, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-745. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means an individual, partnership, association, corporation, municipality or state agency, or other legal entity who causes activities which are regulated by this chapter. 
Aquifer means a saturated, permeable geologic formation that contains and will yield significant quantities of water. 
Domestic wastewater means a combination of liquid and water-carried wastes and wastewater discharged from toilets, conveniences, or other sanitary plumbing facilities, which contain no incompatible pollutants exceeding the limitations set forth in the sewer use ordinance, and which contain no substances prohibited by the terms of the sewer use ordinance, or by the Madison Metropolitan Sewage District (MMSD). 
Municipal water supply means the municipal water supply of the City of Fitchburg. 
Recharge area means the area which encompasses all areas or features that, by surface infiltration of water, reaches the zone of saturation of and aquifer that supplies groundwater to a well. This area extends beyond the city's corporate limits. 
State of Wisconsin authorizing agency means the State of Wisconsin Department of Commerce or successor agencies or other regulating agencies. 
UST facilities means underground fuel oil or gasoline storage tank facilities, including but not limited to, fueling stations and storage tanks, both public and private. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.303, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-746. - Groundwater protection overlay districts. 
(a)  Restricted zone. The primary portion of the Fitchburg wells recharge areas to be protected is an area of land having a radius of 1,200 feet, whose center is offset 600 feet south of each municipal well. If any portion of a parcel falls within the above defined radius the whole parcel shall be considered within the restricted zone. The restricted zones for each well shall more specifically be defined as the areas outlined in the maps attached hereto as exhibits A through H and incorporated herein as if fully set forth. Any parcel that is outlined in exhibits A through H that is later divided by a certified survey map or plat will be considered removed from the restricted zone if the new parcel limits fall outside the above defined radius. These lands are subject to land use and development restrictions because of their close proximity to the well fields and the corresponding threat of contamination. 
(b)  Management zone. Lands outside the restricted zone but within the corporate limits of the city shall be considered in the "management zone." The city reserves the right to require applications for approval in this zone, in accordance with section 22-750, for uses considered restricted in the restricted zone and to require additional environmental monitoring/structures. All underground gasoline and fuel oil storage tanks in this zone shall be approved and installed in accordance with section 22-752. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.304, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-747. - Requirements for existing facilities and land uses. 
The following requirements apply to the existing facilities within the restricted zone at the time of enactment of such zone which may cause or threaten to cause environmental pollution include, but are not limited to, the state department of natural resources draft or current list of "Inventory of Sites or Facilities Which May Cause or Threaten to Cause Environmental Pollution" kept on file in the director of public work's office, the state department of commerce's list of underground storage tanks, list of facilities with hazardous, solid waste permits, and all other facilities which are considered a restricted use in restricted uses, section 22-749, all of which are incorporated herein as if fully set forth. 
(1)  Such facilities as above shall provide copies of all federal, state and local facility operation approvals, permits, or certificates; operational safety plans; and ongoing environmental monitoring results to the city. 
(2)  Such facilities shall provide additional environmental or safety structures/monitoring as deemed necessary by the city, which may include but is not limited to, the production of any and all environmental statements detailing the extent of chemical use and storage on the property, stormwater runoff management and/or groundwater monitoring. 
(3)  Such facilities as above cannot engage in or employ a use, activity, or structure listed in restricted uses, section 22-749, which they did not engage in or employ at the time of enactment of a restricted zone, and can only expand, replace or rebuild those present uses, activities, equipment, or structures on the site or property of record associated with the facility at the time of enactment of a restricted zone, and in a manner that improves the environmental and safety technologies already being utilized. No existing use, activity, or structure listed as a restricted use shall be expanded, replaced, modified, or rebuilt unless a conditional use permit is granted for such expansion, replacement, modification, or rebuilding. This section does not apply to normal maintenance or minor repairs. 
(4)  If deemed necessary by the city, such facilities shall have the responsibility of divesting, filing and maintaining, with the city, a current contingency plan satisfactory to the city, which details how they intend to respond to any emergency which may cause or threaten to cause environmental pollution that occurs at their facility, including notifying municipal, county and state officials. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.305, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-748. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the restricted zone. An approval application shall be submitted in accordance with section 22-751(1) for all uses not listed here or in section 22-749. 
(1)  Public and private parks, playgrounds and beaches, provided there are no on-site wastewater disposal systems or holding tanks. 
(2)  Wildlife, natural, and woodland areas. 
(3)  Biking, hiking, skiing, nature, equestrian and fitness trails. 
(4)  Residential which is municipally sewered. 
(5)  Unsewered (single-family) existing residential lots which meet all the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code ch. COMM 83 and the separation distance requirement of section 22-750(3). 
(6)  Commercial office and retail activities listed in sections 22-247 and 22-248, excluding agriculture production, which are municipally sewered and only discharge domestic wastewater into the sewer system. 
(7)  Limited road salting. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.306, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-749. - Restricted uses. 
The following uses are restricted within the restricted zone. An approval application shall be submitted in accordance with section 22-751(2) for all restricted uses. These uses are restricted based on the high probability that activities associated with these uses will cause groundwater contamination. 
(1)  Animal confinement facilities, animal waste spreading, and animal waste storage except animal waste storage facilities regulated by the county. 
(2)  Stockyards and feedlots. 
(3)  Rendering plants and slaughterhouses. 
(4)  Wastewater treatment and spray facilities. 
(5)  Septic or sludge spreading, storage or treatment. 
(6)  Septic wastewater and sewage lagoons, pits, spreading, storage and treatment. 
(7)  Private on-site wastewater treatment systems or holding tanks receiving 8,000 gallons per day or more. 
(8)  Bulk fertilizer and/or pesticide facilities. 
(9)  Hazardous and/or toxic material waste facilities and/or storage. 
(10)  Buried hydrocarbon and/or hazardous chemical storage tanks. Hazardous chemicals are identified by OSHA criteria under 40 CFR 370. 
(11)  UST facilities. 
(12)  Coal, salt and deicing material storage. 
(13)  Asphalt products manufacturing. 
(14)  Dry cleaning, exterminating, and printing and duplicating businesses. 
(15)  Bus or truck terminals. 
(16)  Railroad yards and maintenance stations. 
(17)  Junkyards or auto salvage yards. 
(18)  Paint, coating, electroplating and wood preserving facilities and/or manufacturing. 
(19)  Radioactive waste facilities. 
(20)  Chemical manufacturers (Standard Industrial Classification Major Group 28). 
(21)  Industrial lagoons and pits. 
(22)  Pesticide and fertilizer dealer, transfer or storage. 
(23)  Motor vehicular service stations, repair, renovation and auto body repair. 
(24)  Nonmetallic earthen materials extraction or sand and gravel pits. 
(25)  Landfills, solid waste and recycling facilities. 
(26)  Cemeteries. 
(27)  Stormwater infiltration basins without pretreatment, including vegetative filtration and/or temporary detention. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.30, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-750. - Separation distances. 
The following separation distances as specified in the Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 811 shall be maintained and shall not be exempted as listed in section 22-746 or as later amended by the state. 
(1)  50 feet between a municipal well and a storm sewer main. 
(2)  200 feet between a municipal well and any sanitary sewer main, sanitary sewer manhole, lift station or a single-family residential fuel oil tank. A lesser separation distance may be allowed for sanitary sewer mains where the sanitary sewer main is constructed of water main materials and joints and successfully air pressure tested in place to meet current Standard Specifications for Sewer and Water Construction in Wisconsin. In no case may the separation distance between a municipal well and a sanitary sewer main be less than 50 feet. 
(3)  400 feet between a municipal well and a septic system, tank or soil absorption unit receiving less than 8,000 gallons per day, a cemetery or a storm water drainage pond. 
(4)  600 feet between a municipal well and any gasoline or fuel oil storage tank installation that has received written approval from Department of Commerce or its designated agent under Wis. Admin. Code § COMM 10.10. 
(5)  1,000 feet between a municipal well and land application of municipal, commercial or industrial waste; industrial, commercial or municipal wastewater, lagoons or storage structures; manure stacks or storage structures; and septic tanks or soils absorption units receiving 8,000 gallons per day or more. 
(6)  1,200 feet between a municipal well and any solid waste storage, transportation, transfer, incineration, air curtain destructor, processing, wood burning, one time disposal or small demolition facility; sanitary landfill; coal storage area; gasoline or fuel oil storage tanks that have not received written approval from Department of Commerce or its designated agent under Wis. Admin. Code § COMM 10.10; bulk fuel storage facilities; and pesticide handling or storage facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.308, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-751. - Exemptions and waivers. 
The city shall review all written exemption requests for all uses not listed in section 22-748 for approval. All determinations shall be made by the city within 60 days of the request for approval, provided however, that this 60 day period of limitations may be extended by the city for good cause as determined in the sole and absolute discretion of the city. No exemption shall be granted for UST Facilities and to the separation distances listed in section 22-750. 
(1)  Approval application for uses not listed in sections 22-748 and 22-749. All requests shall be in writing, whether on or in substantial compliance with forms to be provided by the city, and may require an environmental assessment report prepared by a licensed professional engineer specialized in environmental engineering. Supplemental information which must be submitted to the city shall include: 
a.  Name and address of the applicant. 
b.  Name and address of the owner of the property. 
c.  Description of proposed use. 
d.  Location of proposed use in relation to existing and proposed city public water supply wells. 
Said application shall be forwarded to the zoning administrator for recommendation from the director of public works. The director of public works shall have the ability to request additional information if necessary. 
(2)  Application for uses listed in section 22-749. All requests shall be in writing, whether on or in substantial compliance with forms to be provided by the city, and may require an environmental assessment report prepared by a licensed environmental engineer. Supplemental information which must be submitted to the city shall include: 
a.  Name and address of the applicant. 
b.  Name and address of the owner of the property. 
c.  Proposed use. 
d.  Location of proposed use in relation to existing and proposed city public water. 
e.  Site plan of the project showing layout of the restricted use. 
f.  Contingency plan for public notification in event of an emergency, or discovery of a release of contaminants. 
Said application shall be forwarded to the zoning administrator for recommendation from the director of public works. The director of public works shall have the ability to request additional information if necessary. 
(3)  Review process. All the following factors shall be considered during the review process: 
a.  The city's responsibility, as a public water supplier, to protect and preserve the health, safety and welfare of its citizens. 
b.  The degree to which the proposed land use practice, activity or facility may seriously threaten or degrade groundwater quality in the city. 
c.  The economic hardship which may be faced by the landowner if the application is denied. 
d.  The availability of alternative options to the applicant, and the cost, effect and extent of availability of such alternative options. 
e.  The proximity of the applicant's property to other potential sources of contamination. 
f.  The location of the applicant's property in the restricted zone. 
g.  The existing condition of the city's groundwater flow, including topography, depth of soil, extent of aquifer, depth of water table and location of private wells. 
h.  Any other hydrogeological data or information which is available from any public or private agency or organization. 
i.  The potential benefit, both economic and social, from the approval of the applicant's request for permit. 
If the director of public works, in consultation with the zoning administrator, determines to approve the application, an approval letter shall be sent to the applicant with the terms and conditions of approval and statement that the applicant agrees to comply with the terms and conditions set forth by the city. 
(4)  Conditional approval. Any approvals granted will be made conditional and may include environmental and/or safety monitoring which indicates whether the facility may be emitting any releases or harmful contaminants to the surrounding environment. The city may require that a bond be posted for future monitoring and cleanup costs if deemed necessary at the time of granting an exemption. 
(5)  Revocation of approval. The city's approval may be rescinded or revoked, prior to its expiration date, if the city, upon a determination, after notice and hearing before the board of public works, that rescission or revocation is appropriate and that any one or more of the following have occurred: 
a.  Provisions of this article have been violated, and the violations have not been or cannot be satisfactorily remedied in a time frame acceptable to the city. 
b.  Conditions imposed on the approval have been violated, and the violations have not been or cannot be satisfactorily remedied in a time frame acceptable to the city. 
c.  Use of the property is discontinued for a period of one year. 
d.  Applicant is required by state or federal regulations or state authorizing agency to permanently discontinue use. 
(6)  Application costs. The applicant shall be solely and exclusively responsible for any and all costs associated with the application, including the following: 
a.  The cost of an environmental impact study if so required by the city or its designee. 
b.  The cost of groundwater monitoring or groundwater wells if required by the city. 
c.  The costs of an appraisal for the property of other property evaluation expense if required by the city or its designee. 
d.  The costs of city's employee's time associated in any way with the application based on the hourly rate paid to the employee multiplied by a factor, determined by the city, representing the city's costs for expenses, benefits, insurance, sick leave, holidays, overtime, vacation and other similar benefits. 
e.  The cost of city equipment employed. 
f.  The cost of mileage reimbursed to the city employees. 
(7)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. Nothing set forth in this chapter shall be construed as or is intended to be a waiver or release of any other agreements, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, where this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.309, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-752. - Requirements for proposed UST facilities. 
(a)  Approval. UST facility approval is required for all proposed UST facilities as outlined in section 22-746(b). 
(1)  Approval application. A person desiring to install a UST facility shall file with the city clerk a copy of all applicable federal, state and county permit applications for the proposed UST installation and shall obtain written approval from the city prior to commencing the installation. Supplemental information which must be submitted to the city shall include name and address of the applicant, the name and address of the owner of the property, the location of proposed UST facility in relation to existing and proposed city public water supply wells, site plan of project showing layout of proposed UST facility, and a contingency plan for public notification in event of an emergency, or discovery of a release of contaminants. 
(2)  Review of application. The city clerk shall forward a completed application to the zoning administrator for determination of compliance with provisions of this article. If the zoning administrator, in consultation with the director of public works, determines that the application is complete and the requirements of this article are met, a UST facility approval letter shall be sent to the applicant with the terms and conditions of approval and statement that the applicant agrees to comply with the terms of this article. 
(3)  Term of approval. The city's approval of the UST facility shall coincide with the terms of the underground storage tank permit issued for the UST facility by the state authorizing agency. The city's approval may be transferred to a new owner or assign upon notice to the city via a copy of the registration of change of ownership submitted to state authorizing agency by the new owner or assign. UST facility approval shall be renewed provided that owner submits to city copies of the following: 
a.  All state authorizing agency UST permit renewal forms and accompanying material. Upon receipt of the renewed state UST permit, the owner shall provide a copy to the city. 
b.  An affidavit confirming that the UST facility is in compliance with the requirements of the expiring UST facility approval letter. 
c.  A statement confirming that the UST facility conforms with the requirements of any current UST-WHP or wellhead protection ordinance. 
(4)  Revocation of approval. The city's approval may be rescinded or revoked, prior to its expiration date, the common council upon a determination, after notice and hearing, that rescission or revocation is appropriate and that any one or more of the following have occurred: 
a.  Provisions of this article have been violated, and the violations have not been or cannot be satisfactorily remedied in a time frame acceptable to the city. 
b.  Conditions imposed on the approval have been violated, and the violations have not been or cannot be satisfactorily remedied in a time frame acceptable to the city. 
c.  Use of the property is discontinued for a period of one year. 
d.  UST facility owner is required by state or federal regulations or state authorizing agency to permanently close the UST facility. 
(5)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. Nothing set forth in this chapter shall be construed as or is intended to be a waiver or release of any other agreements, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, where this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall govern. 
(b)  Design requirements. Underground storage tanks shall be designed and installed in accordance with applicable federal, state and local statutes and codes, Wis. Admin. Code § COMM 10.51 or its successor statute or code, and as specified herein. Where there is conflict between this article and applicable statutes and codes, the more restrictive shall apply. 
(1)  Tanks shall be double wall with interstitial monitoring. Fiberglass reinforced plastic external corrosion protection shall be required if a steel tank is used. 
(2)  Piping shall be double walled noncorrosive pipe. 
(3)  Spill and overfill prevention shall consist of equipment that will restrict flow to tank when at 95 percent full, alert, operator one minute prior to overfilling, and provide automatic shutoff of flow into storage tank so none of the fittings on tank top are exposed to product. 
(4)  Tank leak detection shall consist of interstitial monitoring with sensors between tank walls. 
(5)  Piping leak detection shall consist of automatic line leak detection, and interstitial monitoring. 
(6)  Provide deep burial submersible containment sump to contain leakage and install sensors to monitor the piping interstitial space. 
(7)  Provide deep burial dispenser pan containment to contain leakage from dispenser and stall pan sensors to monitor the interstitial space of the piping. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.310, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-753. - Inspections. 
Subject to applicable provisions of law, the city or authorized representative thereof shall be permitted to enter private property at any reasonable time, with reasonable cause or with prior notification, for such purposes as inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and records examination pertaining to the requirements of this chapter to ensure that activities are in accordance with the provisions of sections 22-747 through 22-752. Upon request of the entity which is the subject of the inspection, and if permitted by the state Public Records Law, information obtained as a result of the inspection shall be maintained as confidential. If the owner or tenant does not consent to the entry of the appointed individual for the above stated purposes, the board of public works may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an appropriate warrant or other authority to enter said property. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.311, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-754. - Variances and administrative appeals. 
(a)  The owner of an existing or proposed restricted use may appeal any decision of the zoning administrator and/or director of public works, with such appeals being accomplished in accordance with the rules established under section 22-643. A variance may be requested from the requirements of this code within the rules and procedures set forth by the board of appeals and in section 22-644. Variances will not be granted where environmental protection will be compromised as deemed by the board of appeals. A variance shall not be granted from any design standard or requirement of state or federal law, nor may any variance be granted which results in requirements which are less stringent than those of state or federal law. 
(b)  A request for variance shall include a detailed analysis as prepared, certified and sealed by a professional engineer as to why the variance is being requested, proposed method of installation and potential environmental risk of proposed installation versus required installation. 
(c)  A request for variance will be acted on by zoning board of appeals with input from the board of public works. The board of public works will submit input within 30 days from date of filing appeal. If variance is approved, it shall be noted as a condition on the restricted use approval letter and shall run for the period of the approval or such shorter period as established in the approval. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.312, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-755. - Remediation; cost reimbursement. 
(a)  In the event that the individual and/or facility causes the release of any contaminants which endanger or potentially threaten the city's groundwater supply, the individual and/or facility is responsible for seeing that the activity causing said release shall immediately cease, the contingency plan for public notification shall be immediately initiated and remedial action satisfactory to the city and other state or federal agency with jurisdiction shall promptly occur. The city's requirements are in addition to any other state or federal requirements. The city may take steps to protect the groundwater if an imminent threat exists or the person fails to do so when requested by the city. 
(b)  The individual/facility shall be responsible for all costs of remediation and shall reimburse the city for its direct and indirect costs incurred for inspection, oversight, review and documentation of the remedial action. 
(1)  City consultant fees (legal and/or engineering) at the invoice amount plus administrative costs for oversight, review and documentation. 
(2)  The cost of city employees' time associated in any way with cleanup based on the hourly rate paid to the employee multiplied by a factor determined by the city representing city's cost for expenses, benefits, insurance, sick leave, holidays, overtime, vacation, and similar benefits. 
(3)  The cost of city equipment employed. 
(4)  The cost of mileage reimbursed to city employees attributed to the cleanup. 
(c)  The applicant, or any other person shall also be responsible for any and all costs incurred or damages suffered by the city or other affected persons, if they cause or contribute contamination of the city's groundwater supply. 
(d)  Following any release or threatened release, the city may require additional test monitoring and/or facility improvements and/or may revoke city approval of the application pursuant to sections 22-751 and 22-752. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.313, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-756. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00, plus the costs of prosecution for each violation. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The city may seek restraining orders, injunctive relief and/or any other available legal remedy to obtain compliance with the provisions of this article and/or protect the city's groundwater supply from contamination. If the city prevails in whole or in part in pursuit of such legal remedies, the city shall be entitled to recover its litigation costs, including actual reasonable attorney's fees. 
(c)  If a person fails or refuses to pay all costs or make all reimbursement as required in section 22-755, then the city may levy such amounts due as a special charge against the property upon which the potential contamination is located or any other property owned by the person within the city and collect the amounts due in accordance with the procedures of Wis. Stats. § 66.0703. 
(d)  These enforcement provisions are not intended to be mutually exclusive nor do they preclude private claims or actions. The city may pursue enforcement actions it deems appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.314, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 22-757. - Conflict, interpretation and severability. 
(a)  Conflict and interpretation of provisions. If the provisions of the different chapters of this Code conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to all matters and questions arising out of the subject matter of such chapter. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be held to be the minimum and are not deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by state law. 
(b)  Severability of code provisions. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of the Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by reason of any decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any other section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase or portion thereof. The common council hereby declares that they would have passed this Code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases, or portions may be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The following exhibits are available in color in the official ordinance book in the clerk's office for viewing: 
Exhibit A 	Well No. 4 - Restricted Zone 
Exhibit B 	Well No. 5 - Restricted Zone 
Exhibit C 	Well No. 7 - Restricted Zone 
Exhibit D 	Well No. 8 - Restricted Zone 
Exhibit E 	Well No. 9 - Restricted Zone 
Exhibit F 	Well No. 10 - Restricted Zone 
Exhibit G 	Well No. 11 - Restricted Zone 
Exhibit H 	Future Well No. 12 - Restricted Zone 
 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.315, 10-12-2010)  
Secs. 22-758—22-782. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-783. - Statutory authorization. 
This article is adopted pursuant to the authorization in Wis. Stats. §§ 61.35 and 62.23, and the requirements in Wis. Stats. § 87.30. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.401, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-784. - Findings of fact. 
The uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains, rivers and streams, and the pollution of navigable waters of the city would impair the public health, safety, convenience, general welfare and the tax base. The state legislature has delegated responsibility to all municipalities to further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions; prevent and control water pollution; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites, placement of structures and land uses; and preserve shore cover and natural beauty. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.402, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-785. - Purpose. 
This subchapter is intended to regulate floodplain development to: 
(1)  Protect life, health and property; 
(2)  Minimize expenditures of public funds for flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize rescue and relief efforts, undertaken at the expense of the taxpayers; 
(4)  Minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplains; 
(6)  Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas on floodplains; 
(7)  Discourage the victimization of unwary land and homebuyers; 
(8)  Prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage and result in conflict or litigation between property owners; and 
(9)  Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable alternative to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the floodplain. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.403, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-786. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the Floodplain Overlay Zoning for the City of Fitchburg, Wisconsin. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.404, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-787. - Areas to be regulated. 
This article regulates all areas that would be covered by the regional flood or base flood as shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or other maps approved by DNR. Base flood elevations are derived from the flood profiles in the flood insurance study (FIS) and are shown as AE, A1-30, and AH zones on the FIRM. Other regulatory zones are displayed as A and AO zones. Regional flood elevations (RFE) may be derived from other studies. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.411, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-788. - Official maps and revisions. 
(a)  The boundaries of all floodplain districts are designated as A, AE, AH, AO or A1-30 on the maps based on the flood insurance study (FIS) listed below. Any change to the base flood elevations (BFE) or any changes to the boundaries of the floodplain or floodway in the FIS or on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) must be reviewed and approved by the WIDNR and FEMA through the letter of map change process (see § 22-851, Amendments) before it is effective. No changes to regional flood elevations (RFEs) on non-FEMA maps shall be effective until approved by the WIDNR. These maps and revisions are on file in the office of the city planning department. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply. 
(b)  Official maps, based on the FIS: 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM), panel numbers: 55025C0413G, 55025C0416G, 55025C0417G, 55025C0418G, 55025C0419G, 55025C0438G, 55025C0576G, 55025C0580G, 55025C0601G, 55025C0605G, dated January 2, 2009 and 55025C0584H, 55025C0585H, dated September 17, 2014 with corresponding profiles that are based on the flood insurance study (FIS), Volume number 55025CV001D, 55025CV002D, 55025CV003D, 55025CV004D, dated June 16, 2016. Approved by the DNR and FEMA. 
(c)  Official maps, based on other studies: Any maps referenced in this section must be approved by the DNR and be more restrictive than those based on the FIS at this site of the proposed development. 
City of Fitchburg Flood Storage District, Panels 10, 20 & 21 of 21. Dated September 17, 2014. Prepared by the WDNR. Approved by the WDNR. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.412, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014; Ord. No. 2016-O-08, § 1, 3-22-2016)  
Sec. 22-789. - Establishment of floodplain zoning districts. 
The regional floodplain areas are divided into four districts as follows: 
(1)  The Floodway District (FW), is the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional floodwaters and are contained within AE zones as shown on the FIRM. 
(2)  The Floodfringe District (FF) is that portion of the floodplain between the regional flood limits and the floodway and displayed as AE zones on the FIRM. 
(3)  The General Floodplain District (GFP) is those areas that have been or may be covered by floodwater during the regional flood and does not have a BFE or floodway boundary determined, including A, AH and AO zones on the FIRM. 
(4)  The Flood Storage District (FSD) is that area of the floodplain where storage of floodwaters is calculated to reduce the regional flood discharge. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.413, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-790. - Locating floodplain boundaries. 
(a)  Discrepancies between boundaries on the official floodplain zoning map and actual field conditions shall be resolved using the criteria in this section. If a significant difference exists, the map shall be amended according to section 22-851. The zoning administrator can rely on a boundary derived from a profile elevation to grant or deny a land use permit, whether or not a map amendment is required. The zoning administrator shall be responsible for documenting actual pre-development field conditions and the basis upon which the district boundary was determined and for initiating any map amendments required under this section. Disputes between the zoning administrator and the applicant over the district boundary line shall be settled according to the board of appeals as discussed in sections 22-844 and 22-845 and the criteria in this section. Where the flood profiles are based on established base flood elevations from a FIRM, FEMA must approve any map amendment or revision pursuant to section 22-851. 
(1)  If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile elevations shall determine the district boundary. The regional or base flood elevations shall govern if there are any discrepancies. 
(2)  Where flood profiles do not exist, the location of the boundary shall be determined by the map scale. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.414, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-791. - Removal of lands from floodplain. 
Compliance with the provisions of this article shall not be grounds for removing lands from the floodplain unless it is filled at least two feet above the regional or base flood elevation, the fill is contiguous to lands outside the floodplain and the map is amended pursuant to section 22-851. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.415, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-792. - Compliance; other permits. 
Any development or use within the areas regulated by this article shall be in full compliance with the terms of this article, and other applicable local, state, and federal regulations. (See division 2 of this article for the standards applicable to nonconforming uses.) It is the responsibility of the applicant to secure all other necessary permits from appropriate federal, state, and local agencies, including those required by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.416, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-793. - Municipalities and state agencies regulated. 
Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are required to comply with this article and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if Wis. Stats. § 13.48(13) applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges by the state department of transportation is exempt when Wis. Stats. § 30.2022 applies. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.417, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-794. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
(a)  This article supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning ordinance enacted under Wis. Stats. § 62.23 or 87.30, which relate to floodplains. A more restrictive ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise. 
(b)  This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. If this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.418, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-795. - Interpretation. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article are the minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the city and are not a limitation on or repeal of any other powers granted by the state law. If a provision of this article, required by Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 116, is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the standards in effect on the date of the adoption of this article or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.419, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-796. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The flood protection standards in this article are based on engineering experience and research. Larger floods may occur or the flood height may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply or guarantee that non-floodplain areas or permitted floodplain uses will be free from flooding and flood damages, nor does this article create liability on the part of, or a cause of action against, the municipality or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that may result from reliance on this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.420, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-797. - Severability. 
Should any portion of this article be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this article shall not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.421, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-798. - Annexed areas for cities and villages. 
The Dane County floodplain zoning provisions in effect on the date of annexation shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the city for all annexed areas until the city adopts and enforces an ordinance which meets the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code and 44 CFR 59-72, National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). These annexed lands are described on the city's official zoning map. County floodplain zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for the purpose of administering this section and are on file in the office of the city's zoning administrator. All plats or maps of annexation shall show the regional flood elevation and the floodway location. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.422, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-799. - General development standards. 
The community shall review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads; be constructed with flood-resistant materials; be constructed to minimize flood damages and to ensure that utility and mechanical equipment is designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the equipment during conditions of flooding. 
Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the above standards. All subdivision proposals (including manufactured home parks) shall include regional flood elevation and floodway data for any development that meets the subdivision definition of this article and all other requirements in section 22-840. Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards and all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.423, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-800. - General provisions for all floodplain districts. 
(a)  Hydraulic and hydrologic analyses. 
(1)  No floodplain development shall: 
a.  Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters by itself or with other development, causing any increase in the regional flood height; or 
b.  Cause any increase in the regional flood height due to floodplain storage area lost. 
(2)  The zoning administrator shall deny permits if it is determined the proposed development will obstruct flow or cause any increase in the regional flood height, based on the officially adopted FIRM or other adopted map, unless the provisions of section 22-851, Amendments, are met. 
(b)  Watercourse alterations. 
(1)  No land use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped floodplain shall be issued until the local official has notified in writing all adjacent municipalities, the department and FEMA regional offices, and required the applicant to secure all necessary state and federal permits. The standards of subsection (a) of this section must be met and the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained. 
(2)  As soon as is practicable, but no later than six months after the date of the watercourse alteration or relocation and pursuant to section 22-851, Amendments, the community shall apply for a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA. Any such alterations must be reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR through the LOMC process. 
(c)  State statute chapters regarding development. Development which requires a permit from the department, under Wis. Stats. chs. 30 and 31, such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, dams and navigational aids, may be allowed if the necessary permits are obtained and amendments to the floodplain zoning article are made according to section 22-851, Amendments. 
(d)  Public or private campgrounds. Public or private campgrounds shall have a low flood damage potential and shall meet the following provisions: 
(1)  The campground is approved by the department of health services. 
(2)  A land use permit for the campground is issued by the zoning administrator. 
(3)  The character of the river system and the campground elevation are such that a 72-hour warning of an impending flood can be given to all campground occupants. 
(4)  There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground that offers the minimum notice required under this section to all persons in the campground. This procedure shall include a written agreement between the campground owner, the municipal emergency government coordinator and the chief law enforcement official which specifies the flood elevation at which evacuation shall occur, personnel responsible for monitoring flood elevations, types of warning systems to be used and the procedures for notifying at-risk parties, and the methods and personnel responsible for conducting the evacuation. 
(5)  This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at which time the agreement shall be reviewed and updated by the officials identified in subsection (4) of this section to remain in compliance with all applicable regulations, including those of the state department of health services and all other applicable regulations. 
(6)  Only camping units that are fully licensed, if required, and ready for highway use are allowed. 
(7)  The camping units shall not occupy any site in the campground for more than 180 consecutive days, at which time the camping unit must be removed from the floodplain for a minimum of 24 hours. 
(8)  All camping units that remain on site for more than 30 days shall be issued a limited authorization by the campground operator, a written copy of which is kept on file at the campground. Such authorization shall allow placement of a camping unit for a period not to exceed 180 days and shall ensure compliance with all the provisions of this section. 
(9)  The municipality shall monitor the limited authorizations issued by the campground operator to ensure compliance with the terms of this section. 
(10)  All camping units that remain in place for more than 180 consecutive days must meet the applicable requirements in either section 22-801, 22-802, or 22-804 for the floodplain district in which the structure is located. 
(11)  The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all entrances warning of the flood hazard and the procedures for evacuation when a flood warning is issued. 
(12)  All service facilities, including but not limited to refuse collection, electrical service, gas lines, propane tanks, sewage systems and wells shall be properly anchored and placed at or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.430, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-801. - FW Floodway District. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to all floodway areas on the floodway zoning maps and those identified pursuant to section 22-804(d). 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following open space uses are allowed within the Floodway District, and in the floodway areas of the General Floodplain District, provided that they are not prohibited by any other regulations, that the standards contained in subsections (c) and (d) of this section are met, and that all permits or certificates have been issued according to sections 22-840 and 22-841: 
(1)  Agricultural uses, such as farming, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture and wild crop harvesting. 
(2)  Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading areas, parking areas and airport landing strips. 
(3)  Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis courts, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting, trap and skeet activities, hunting and fishing areas, and hiking and horseback riding trails subject to the fill limitations of section 22-801(c)(4). 
(4)  Uses or structures accessory to open space uses, or classified as historic structures that comply with subsections (c) and (d) of this section. 
(5)  Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials according to subsection (c)(4) of this section. 
(6)  Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or wharves, dams, flowage areas, culverts, navigational aids and river crossings of transmission lines, and pipelines that comply with Wis. Stats. chs. 30 and 31. 
(7)  Public utilities, streets and bridges that comply with subsection (c)(3) of this section. 
(c)  Standards for developments in the floodway. 
(1)  General. 
a.  Any development in the floodway shall comply with section 22-800 and have a low flood damage potential; 
b.  Applicants shall provide the following data to determine the effects of the proposal according to section 22-800(a): 
1.  A cross-section elevation view of the proposal, perpendicular to the watercourse, showing if the proposed development will obstruct flow; and 
2.  An analysis calculating the effects of this proposal on regional flood height. 
c.  The zoning administrator shall deny the permit application if the project will cause any increase in the flood elevations upstream or downstream, based on the data submitted for subsection (c)(1)b of this section. 
(2)  Structures. Structures accessory to permanent open space uses, or functionally dependent on a waterfront location may be allowed by permit if the structures comply with the following criteria: 
a.  Not designed for human habitation, does not have a high flood damage potential and is constructed to minimize flood damage; 
b.  Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; 
c.  Must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement; 
d.  Shall have a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area, and the bottom of all such openings being no higher than one foot above grade. The openings shall be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; and 
e.  It must not obstruct flow of floodwaters or cause any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the regional flood. 
(3)  Public utilities, streets and bridges may be allowed by permit, provided that: 
a.  Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood protection elevation; and 
b.  Construction meets the development standards of section 22-800(a). 
(4)  Fills or deposition of materials may be allowed by permit, if: 
a.  The requirements of section 22-800(a) are met; 
b.  No material is deposited in navigable waters unless a permit is issued by the Department pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 30 and a permit pursuant to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344 has been issued, if applicable, and all other requirements have been met; 
c.  The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by riprap, vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulkheading; and 
d.  The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. All uses not listed as permitted uses in subsection (b) of this section are prohibited, including the following uses: 
(1)  Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential, or those not associated with permanent open-space uses; 
(2)  Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, injurious to property, water quality or human, animal, plant, fish or other aquatic life; 
(3)  Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the adjoining districts; 
(4)  Any private or public sewage systems except portable latrines that are removed prior to flooding, and systems associated with recreational areas and department-approved campgrounds, that meet the applicable provisions of local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code SPS 383; 
(5)  All wells, whether public or private, which are used to obtain potable water, except those for recreational areas that meet the requirements of local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and 812; 
(6)  Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites; 
(7)  Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those permitted under Wis. Admin. Code § NR 110.15(3)(b); and 
(8)  Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service existing or proposed development located outside the floodway, which complies with the regulations for the floodplain area occupied. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.431, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-802. - FF Floodfringe District. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to all floodfringe areas shown on the floodplain zoning maps and those identified pursuant to section 22-804(4). 
(b)  Permitted uses. Any structure, land use, or development, including accessory structures and uses, is allowed within the Floodfringe District, provided that the standards contained in section 22-800 and subsection (c) of this section are met, that the use is not prohibited by this article or any other ordinance or local, state, or federal regulation and that all permits or certificates required under this article have been secured by the applicant. 
(c)  Standards for development in the floodfringe. All of the provisions of section 22-800 shall apply in addition to the following requirements according to the use requested. Any existing structure in the floodfringe must meet the requirements of section 22-834. 
(1)  Residential uses. Any structure, including a manufactured home, which is to be newly constructed, or moved into the floodfringe, shall meet or exceed the following standards. Any existing structure in the floodfringe must meet the requirements of section 22-834. 
a.  The elevation of the lowest floor shall be at or above the flood protection elevation on fill unless the requirements of 22-802(c)(1)b can be met. The fill shall be one foot or more above the regional flood elevation extending at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the structure. 
b.  The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional flood elevation if it is floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. No permit or variance shall allow any floor, basement or crawlway below the regional flood elevation. 
c.  Contiguous dry land access shall be provided from a structure to land outside of the floodplain, except as provided in subsection (c)(1)d of this section. 
d.  In developments where existing street or sewer line elevations make compliance with subsection (c)(1)c of this section impractical, the municipality may permit new development and substantial improvements where roads are below the regional flood elevation, if: 
1.  The municipality has written assurance from police, fire and emergency services that rescue and relief will be provided to the structure(s) by wheeled vehicles during a regional flood event; or 
2.  The municipality has a DNR-approved emergency evacuation plan. 
(2)  Accessory structures or uses. Accessory structures shall be constructed on fill with the lowest floor at or above the regional flood elevation. 
(3)  Commercial uses. Any commercial structure which is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered or moved into the floodfringe shall meet the requirements of subsection (c)(1) of this section. Subject to the requirements of subsection (c)(5) of this section, storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property. 
(4)  Manufacturing and industrial uses. Any manufacturing or industrial structure which is to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered or moved into the floodfringe shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the flood protection elevation or meet the floodproofing standards in section 22-849. Subject to the requirements of subsection (c)(5) of this section, storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property. 
(5)  Storage or processing of materials. Materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or injurious to property, water quality or human, animal, plant, fish or aquatic life, shall be stored at or above the flood protection elevation or floodproofed in compliance with section 22-849. Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that such materials will not enter the water body during flooding. 
(6)  Public utilities, streets and bridges. All utilities, streets and bridges shall be designed to be compatible with comprehensive floodplain development plans and: 
a.  When failure or interruption of public utilities, streets and bridges would endanger public health or safety or where such facilities are deemed essential to the orderly functioning of the area, construction or repair of such facilities shall only be permitted if they are designed to comply with section 22-849. 
b.  Minor or auxiliary roads or nonessential utilities may be constructed at lower elevations if they are designed to withstand flood forces to the regional flood elevation. 
(7)  Sewage systems, wells, solid waste sites. 
a.  All sewage disposal systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood water into the system, pursuant to section 22-849, to the flood protection elevation and meet the provisions of all local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code SPS 383. 
b.  All wells shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system, pursuant to section 22-849, to the flood protection elevation, and shall meet the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and 812. 
c.  Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is prohibited in floodfringe areas. 
(8)  Deposition of materials. Any deposited material must meet all the provisions of this article. 
(9)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall provide adequate surface drainage to minimize flood damage, and prepare, secure approval and file an evacuation plan, indicating vehicular access and escape routes, with local emergency management authorities. 
b.  In existing manufactured home parks, all new homes, replacement homes on existing pads, and substantially improved homes shall: 
1.  Have the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection elevation; and 
2.  Be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move laterally during a flood. 
c.  Outside of existing manufactured home parks, including new manufactured home parks and all single units outside of existing parks, all new, replacement and substantially improved manufactured homes, shall meet the residential development standards for the floodfringe in subsection (c)(1) of this section. 
(10)  Mobile recreational vehicles. All mobile recreational vehicles that are on site for 180 consecutive days or more or are not fully licensed and ready for highway use shall meet the elevation and anchoring requirements in section 22-802(a). A mobile recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it's on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.432, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-803. - Other floodplain districts. 
Other floodplain districts may be established under this article and reflected on the floodplain zoning map. These districts may include general floodplain districts and flood storage districts. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.433, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-804. - GFP General Floodplain District. 
(a)  Applicability. The provisions for this district shall apply to all floodplains mapped as A, AO or AH zones. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Pursuant to subsection (d) of this section, it shall be determined whether the proposed use is located within the floodway or floodfringe. Those uses permitted in sections 22-801 for floodways and 22-802 for floodfringe are allowed within the General Floodplain District, provided that the procedures of subsection (d) of this section, sections 22-839, 22-840 and 22-841 are met, and all permits or certificates required have been secured by the applicant. 
(c)  Standards for development. If the proposed use is located within a floodway, the provisions of section 22-801 shall apply. If the proposed use is located within the floodfringe, the provisions of section 22-802 shall apply. The rest of this article applies to all development. 
(1)  In AO/AH zones the structure's lowest floor must meet one of the conditions listed below whichever is higher: 
a.  At or above the flood protections elevation; or 
b.  Two feet above the highest adjacent grade around the structure; or 
c.  The depth as shown on the FIRM. 
(2)  In AO/AH zones, provide plans showing adequate drainage paths to guide floodwaters around structures. 
(d)  Procedures for determining floodway and floodfringe limits. Upon receiving an application for development within the general floodplain district, the zoning administrator shall: 
(1)  Require the applicant to submit, at the time of application, two copies of an aerial photograph, or a plan which accurately locates the proposed development with respect to the general floodplain district limits, channel of stream, existing floodplain developments, together with all pertinent information such as the nature of the proposal, legal description of the property, fill limits and elevations, building floor elevations and floodproofing measures; and the flood zone as shown on the FIRM. 
(2)  Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information deemed necessary by the department to evaluate the effects of the proposal upon flood height and flood flows, regional flood elevation and to determine floodway boundaries: 
a.  A hydrologic and hydraulic study as specified in section 22-840(c). 
b.  Plan (surface view) showing: elevations or contours of the ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and layout of all proposed and existing structures on the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply, and sanitary facilities; soil types and other pertinent information. 
c.  Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement, storage, water supply and sanitary facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.434, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-805. - Flood Storage District (FSD). 
The flood storage district delineates that portion of the floodplain where storage of floodwaters has been taken into account and is relied upon to reduce the regional flood discharge. The district protects the flood storage areas and assures that any development in the storage areas will not decrease the effective flood storage capacity which would cause higher flood elevations. 
(1)  Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to all areas within the FSD Flood Storage District, as shown in the official floodplain zoning maps. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Any use or development which occurs in a flood storage district must meet the applicability requirements in section 22-802(c). 
(3)  Standards for development in flood storage districts. 
a.  Development in flood storage district shall not cause an increase equal or greater than 0.00 of a foot in the height of the regional flood. 
b.  No development shall be allowed which removes flood storage volume unless an equal volume of storage as defined by the pre-development ground surface and the regional flood elevation shall be provided in the immediate area of the proposed development to compensate for the volume of storage which is lost, (compensatory storage). Excavation below the groundwater table is not considered to provide an equal volume of storage. 
c.  If compensatory storage cannot be provided, the area may not be developed unless the entire area zoned as flood storage district, on this waterway, is rezoned to the floodfringe district. This must include a revision to the floodplain study and map done for the waterway to revert to the higher regional flood discharge calculated without floodplain storage, as per section 22-851, Amendments, of this article. 
d.  No area may be removed from the flood storage district unless it can be shown that the area has been filled to the flood protection elevation and is contiguous to other lands lying outside of the floodplain. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.435, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Secs. 22-806—22-833. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES 
 
Sec. 22-834. - Nonconforming uses—General provisions. 
(a)  Applicability. If these standards conform with Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(h), they shall apply to all modifications or additions to any nonconforming use or structure and to the use of any structure or premises which was lawful before the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived or any amendment thereto. 
(b)  The lawful use of a structure, property, or its accessory use which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article, may be continued, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or structure shall be permitted unless they are made in conformity with the provisions of this article. For the purpose of this section, the words "modification" and "addition" shall include, but not be limited to, any alteration, addition, modification, structural repair, rebuilding or replacement of any such existing use, structure or accessory structure or use. Maintenance is not considered a modification; this includes painting, decorating, paneling and other nonstructural components; and the maintenance, repair or replacement of existing private sewage or water supply systems, or connections to public utilities. Any costs associated with the repair of a damaged structure are not considered maintenance. 
The construction of a deck that does not exceed 200 square feet and that is adjacent to the exterior wall of a principal structure is not an extension, modification or addition. The roof of the structure may extend over a portion of the deck in order to provide safe ingress and egress to the principal structure. 
(2)  If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, it is no longer permitted and any future use of the property, and any structure or building thereon, shall conform to the applicable requirements of this article. 
(3)  The municipality shall keep a record which lists all nonconforming uses and nonconforming structure, their present equalized assessed value, the cost of all modifications or additions which have been permitted, and the percentage of the structure's total current value of those modifications present. 
(4)  No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use, which over the life of the structure would equal or exceed 50 percent of its present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this article. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with section 22-802(c). The costs of elevating the lowest floor of a nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming use to the flood protection elevation are excluded from the 50 percent provisions of this subsection. 
(5)  No maintenance to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use, the cost of which would equal or exceed 50% of its present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this article. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with section 22-802(c)(1). 
(6)  If on a per event basis the total value of the work being done under (4) and (5) above equals or exceeds 50 percent of the present equalized assessed value the work shall not be permitted unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this article. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with section 22-802(c)(1). 
(7)  Except as provided in subsection (b)(8) of this section, if any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use is destroyed or is substantially damaged it cannot be replaced, reconstructed or rebuilt unless the use and structure meet the provisions of this article. For the purpose of this subsection, a structure is considered substantially damaged if the total cost to restore the structure to its pre-damaged condition equals or exceeds 50 percent of the structure's present equalized assessed value. 
(8)  For nonconforming buildings that are substantially damaged or destroyed by a nonflood disaster, the repair or reconstruction of any such nonconforming building shall be permitted in order to restore it to the size and use in effect prior to the damage event, provided that the minimum federal code requirements below are met and all required permits have been granted prior to the start of construction. 
a.  Residential structures. 
1.  Shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation using fill, pilings, columns, posts or perimeter walls. Perimeter walls must meet the requirements of subsection 22-849(b). 
2.  Shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy and shall be constructed with methods and materials resistant to flood damage. 
3.  Shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditional equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
4.  In A zones, obtain, review and utilize any flood data available from a federal, state or other source. 
5.  In AO zones with no elevations specified, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, meet the standards in section 22-804(c)(1). 
6.  In AO zones, shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from the structure. 
b.  Nonresidential structures. 
1.  Shall meet the requirements of section 22-834(b)(8)a.1, 2, 5, and 6. 
2.  Shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the regional flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall meet the standards in section 22-849(a) or (b). 
3.  In AO zones with no elevations specified, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, meet the standards in 22-804(c)(1). 
(9)  As requests are received for modifications or additions to nonconforming uses or nonconforming structures, a record shall be kept with the city which lists the nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures, their present equalized assessed value, the cost of those additions or modifications which have been permitted and the percentage of the structure's total current value those modifications represent. 
(10)  A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, the alteration will comply with section 22-801(c)(1), flood resistant materials are used, and construction practices and floodproofing methods that comply with section 22-849 are used. Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures shall be exempt from the development standards of section 22-834(b)(8)a if it is determined that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(11)  Any legal nonconforming use of property which does not involve the use of a structure and which existed at the time of the adoption or subsequent amendment of this article adopted under Wis. Stats. § 62.231 may be continued although such use does not conform with the provisions of this article. However, such nonconforming use may not be extended or increased. 
(12)  Uses which are nuisances under common law shall not be permitted to continue as nonconforming uses. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.441, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-835. - Floodway District. 
(a)  No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use in the Floodway District, unless such modification or addition: 
(1)  Has been granted a permit or variance which meets all ordinance requirements. 
(2)  Meets the requirements of section 22-834. 
(3)  Shall not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional flood height. 
(4)  Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed, pursuant to section 22-849, by means other than the use of fill, to the flood protection elevation; and 
(5)  If any part of the foundation below the flood protection elevation is enclosed, the following standards shall apply: 
a.  The enclosed areas shall be designed by a registered architect or engineer to allow for the efficient entry and exit of floodwaters without human intervention. A minimum of two openings must be provided with a minimum net area of at least one square inch for every one square foot of the enclosed area. The lowest part of the opening can be no more than 12 inches above the adjacent grade; 
b.  The parts of the foundation located below the flood protection elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant materials; 
c.  Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and 
d.  The use must be limited to parking, building access or limited storage. 
(b)  No new on-site sewage disposal system, or addition to an existing on-site sewage disposal system, except where an addition has been ordered by a government agency to correct a hazard to public health, shall be allowed in the Floodway District. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing on-site sewage disposal system in a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances, section 22-849(c) and Wis. Admin. Code SPS 383. 
(c)  No new well or modification to an existing well, used to obtain potable water shall be allowed in the Floodway District. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing well in the Floodway District shall meet the applicable requirements of this article, section 22-849(c) and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and NR 812. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.442, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-836. - Floodfringe District. 
(a)  No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use unless such modification or addition has been granted a permit or variance by the city and meets the requirements of section 22-802(c), except where subsection (b) of this section is applicable. 
(b)  Where compliance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section would result in unnecessary hardship, and only where the structure will not be used for human habitation or be associated with a high flood damage potential, the board of appeals, using the procedures established in sections 22-844 and 22-846, may grant a variance from those provisions of subsection (a) of this section for modifications or additions, using the criteria listed below. Modifications or additions which are protected to elevations lower than the flood protection elevation may be permitted if: 
(1)  No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for residential or commercial structures; 
(2)  Human lives are not endangered; 
(3)  Public facilities, such as water or sewer, shall not be installed; 
(4)  Flood depths shall not exceed two feet; 
(5)  Flood velocities shall not exceed two feet per second; and 
(6)  The structure shall not be used for storage of materials as described in section 22-802(c)(5). 
(c)  All new private sewage disposal systems, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a private sewage disposal system shall meet all the applicable provisions of all local ordinances, section 22-849(c) and Wis. Admin. Code SPS 383. 
(d)  All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a well shall meet the applicable provisions of this chapter, section 22-849(c) and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and 812. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.443, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-837. - Flood storage areas. 
No modifications or additions shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure in a flood storage area unless the standards outlined in section 22-805(3) are met. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.444, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-838. - Administration. 
Where a zoning administrator, planning agency or a board of adjustment/appeals has already been appointed to administer a zoning ordinance adopted under Wis. Stats. § 59.69, 59.692 or 62.23(7) these officials shall also administer this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.450, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-839. - Zoning administrator. 
(a)  Duties and powers. The zoning administrator is authorized to administer this chapter and shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  Advise applicants of the article provisions, assist in preparing permit applications and appeals, and ensure that the regional flood elevation for the proposed development is shown on all permit applications. 
(2)  Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with provisions of this article, and issue certificates of compliance where appropriate. 
(3)  Inspect and assess all damaged floodplain structures to determine if substantial damage to the structures has occurred. 
(4)  Keep records of all official actions such as: 
a.  All permits issued; inspections made, and work approved; 
b.  Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood elevations for; 
c.  Floodproofing certificates; 
d.  Water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and ordinances, nonconforming uses and structures including changes, appeals, variances and amendments; 
e.  All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain structures; and 
f.  List of nonconforming structures and uses. 
(5)  Submit copies of the following items to the department regional office: 
a.  Within ten days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on variances, appeals for map or text interpretations, and map or text amendments; 
b.  Copies of case-by-case analyses, and other required information including an annual summary of floodplain zoning actions taken; and 
c.  Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and all related correspondence concerning the assessments. 
(6)  Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this article to the municipal zoning agency and attorney for prosecution. Copies of the reports shall also be sent to the department regional office. 
(7)  Submit copies of amendments and biennial reports to the regional FEMA office. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.451, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-840. - Zoning permits. 
(a)  When required. Unless another section of this article specifically exempts certain types of development from this requirement, a zoning permit shall be obtained from the zoning administrator before any development, repair, modification or addition to an existing structure, as defined in section 22-853, including any change in the use of an existing building or structure, including sewer and water facilities, is initiated. 
(b)  Application. An application for a permit shall be made to the zoning administrator upon forms furnished and shall include the following information for the purpose of proper enforcement of these regulations: 
(1)  General information. 
a.  Name, address, and telephone number of applicant, property owner and contractor. 
b.  Legal description, proposed use and whether it is new construction or a modification. 
(2)  Site development plan. The site plan shall be drawn to scale and submitted as a part of the permit application form and shall contain: 
a.  Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot; 
b.  Location of the ordinary highwater mark of any abutting navigable waterways; 
c.  Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot lines and center line of all abutting streets or highways; 
d.  Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private water supply systems; 
e.  Location and elevation of existing or future access roads; 
f.  Location of floodplain and floodway limits on the property as determined from the official floodplain zoning maps; 
g.  The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and any fill using the vertical datum from the adopted study, either National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or North American Vertical Datum (NAVD); 
h.  Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in NGVD or NAVD at the location of the development and to determine whether or not the requirements of sections 22-800 through 22-803 are met; and 
i.  Data to determine if the proposed development will cause an obstruction to flow or an increase in regional flood height or discharge according to section 22-800(a). This may include any of the information noted in section 22-800(c)(1). 
(c)  Hydraulic and hydrologic studies to analyze development. All hydraulic and hydrologic studies shall be completed under the direct supervision of a professional engineer registered in the state. The study contractor shall be responsible for the technical adequacy of the study. All studies shall be reviewed and approved by the department. 
(1)  Zone A floodplains. 
a.  Hydrology. The appropriate methods shall be based on the standards in ch. NR 116.07(3), Wis. Admin. Code, Hydrologic analysis: Determination of regional flood discharge. 
b.  Hydraulic modeling. The regional flood elevation shall be based on the standards in ch. NR 116.07(4), Wis. Admin. Code, Hydraulic analysis: Determination of regional flood elevation, and the following: 
1.  Determination of the required limits of the hydraulic model shall be based on detailed study information for downstream structures (dam, bridge, culvert) to determine adequate starting WSEL for the study. 
2.  Channel sections must be surveyed. 
3.  Minimum four-foot contour data in the overbanks shall be used for the development of cross section overbank and floodplain mapping. 
4.  A maximum distance of 500 feet between cross sections is allowed in developed areas with additional intermediate cross sections required at transitions in channel bottom slope including a survey of the channel at each location. 
5.  The most current version of HEC RAS shall be used. 
6.  A survey of bridge and culvert openings and the top of road is required at each structure. 
7.  Additional cross sections are required at the downstream and upstream limits of the proposed development and any necessary intermediate locations based on the length of the reach if greater than 500 feet. 
8.  Standard accepted engineering practices shall be used when assigning parameters for the base model such as flow, Manning's N values, expansion and contraction coefficients or effective flow limits. The base model shall be calibrated to past flooding data such as high water marks to determine the reasonableness of the model results. If no historical data is available, adequate justification shall be provided for any parameters outside standard accepted engineering practices. 
9.  The model must extend past the upstream limit of the difference in the existing and proposed flood profiles in order to provide a tie-in to existing studies. The height difference between the proposed flood profile and the existing study profiles shall be no more than 0.00 feet. 
c.  Mapping. A work map of the reach studied shall be provided, showing all cross section locations, floodway/floodplain limits based on best available topographic data, geographic limits of the proposed development and whether the proposed development is located in the floodway. 
1.  If the proposed development is located outside of the floodway, then it is determined to have no impact on the regional flood elevation. 
2.  If any part of the proposed development is in the floodway, it must be added to the base model to show the difference between existing and proposed conditions. The study must ensure that all coefficients remain the same as in the existing model, unless adequate justification based on standard accepted engineering practices is provided. 
(2)  Zone AE Floodplains. 
a.  Hydrology. If the proposed hydrology will change the existing study, the appropriate method to be used shall be based on ch. NR 116.07(3), Wis. Admin. Code, Hydrologic analysis: Determination of regional flood discharge. 
b.  Hydraulic model. The regional flood elevation shall be based on the standards in ch. NR 116.07(4), Wis. Admin. Code, Hydraulic analysis: Determination of regional flood elevation, and the following: 
1.  Duplicate effective model. The effective model shall be reproduced to ensure correct transference of the model data and to allow integration of the revised data to provide a continuous FIS model upstream and downstream of the revised reach. If data from the effective model is available, models shall be generated that duplicate the FIS profiles and the elevations shown in the floodway data table in the FIS report to within 0.1 foot. 
2.  Corrected effective model. The corrected effective model shall not include any man-made physical changes since the effective model date, but shall import the model into the most current version of HEC-RAS for department review. 
3.  Existing (pre-project conditions) model. The existing model shall be required to support conclusions about the actual impacts of the project associated with the revised (post-project) model or to establish more up-to-date models on which to base the revised (post-project) model. 
4.  Revised (post-project conditions) model. The revised (post-project conditions) model shall incorporate the existing model and any proposed changes to the topography caused by the proposed development. This model shall reflect proposed conditions. 
5.  All changes to the duplicate effective model and subsequent models must be supported by certified topographic information, bridge plans, construction plans and survey notes. 
6.  Changes to the hydraulic models shall be limited to the stream reach for which the revision is being requested. Cross sections upstream and downstream of the revised reach shall be identical to those in the effective model and result in water surface elevations and topwidths computed by the revised models matching those in the effective model upstream and downstream of the revised reach as required. The effective model shall not be truncated. 
c.  Mapping. Maps and associated engineering data shall be submitted to the department for review which meet the following conditions: 
1.  Consistency between the revised hydraulic models, the revised floodplain and floodway delineations, the revised flood profiles, topographic work map, annotated FIRMs and/or flood boundary floodway maps (FBFMs), construction plans, bridge plans. 
2.  Certified topographic map of suitable scale, contour interval, and a planimetric map showing the applicable items. If a digital version of the map is available, it may be submitted in order that the FIRM may be more easily revised. 
3.  Annotated FIRM panel showing the revised one percent and two-tenths percent annual chance floodplains and floodway boundaries. 
4.  If an annotated FIRM and/or FBFM and digital mapping data (GIS or CADD) are used then all supporting documentation or metadata must be included with the data submission along with the Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) projection and state plan coordinate system in accordance with FEMA mapping specifications. 
5.  The revised floodplain boundaries shall tie into the effective floodplain boundaries. 
6.  All cross sections from the effective model shall be labeled in accordance with the effective map and a cross section lookup table shall be included to relate to the model input numbering scheme. 
7.  Both the current and proposed floodways shall be shown on the map. 
8.  The stream centerline, or profile baseline used to measure stream distances in the model shall be visible on the map. 
(d)  Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this article shall expire no more than 180 days after issuance. The permit may be extended for a maximum of 180 days for good and sufficient cause. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.452, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-841. - Certificate of compliance. 
(a)  Except where no zoning permit or conditional use permit is required, no land shall be occupied or used, and no building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified, repaired, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied, until a certificate of compliance is issued by the zoning administrator subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or premises or part thereof, and the proposed use, conform to the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the application for a permit. 
(3)  If all article provisions are met, the certificate of compliance shall be issued within ten days after written notification that the permitted work is completed. 
(4)  The applicant shall submit a certification signed by a registered professional engineer, architect, or registered land surveyor that the fill, lowest floor elevations, and floodproofing are in compliance with the permit issued. Floodproofing measures also require certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the requirements of section 22-849 are met. 
(b)  Upon written request from the owner, the zoning administrator shall issue a certificate of compliance for any building or premises existing at the time of adoption of this article, certifying after inspection, the extent and type of use made of the building or premises and whether or not such use conforms to the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Other permits. Prior to obtaining a floodplain development permit the applicant must secure all necessary permits from federal, state, and local agencies, including, but not limited to, those required by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.453, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-842. - Plan commission. 
(a)  The plan commission shall: 
(1)  Oversee the functions of the office of the zoning administrator; and 
(2)  Review and advise the governing body on all proposed amendments to this article, maps and text. 
(b)  The plan commission shall not: 
(1)  Grant variances to the terms of the article in place of action by the board of appeals; or 
(2)  Amend the text or zoning maps in place of official action by the common council. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.454, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-843. - Fees. 
The common council shall set fees for the following and include in the annual budget appendix fee schedule. 
(1)  Zoning permits. 
(2)  Certificates of compliance. 
(3)  Board of appeals. 
(4)  Re-zonings, including PDDs. 
(5)  Conditional use permits. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.455, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-844. - Board of appeals. 
The board of appeals, created under Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e) is hereby authorized or shall be appointed to act for the purposes of this article. The board shall exercise the powers conferred by Wisconsin Statutes and adopt rules for the conduct of their business as required by Wis. Stats. § 63.23(7)(e)3. The zoning administrator shall not be the secretary of the board. 
(1)  Powers and duties. The board of appeals shall: 
a.  Appeals. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this article; 
b.  Variances. Hear and decide, upon appeal, a variance from the ordinance standards; and 
c.  Boundary disputes. Hear and decide disputes concerning the district boundaries shown on the official floodplain zoning map. 
(2)  Appeals to the board. 
a.  Generally. Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the community affected by any order, requirement decision, or determination of the official whose decision is in question. Such appeals shall be taken within 60 days as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the official whose decision is in question, and with the board of appeals, a notice of appeal specifying the reasons for the appeal. The official whose decision is in question shall transmit to the board all the documents constituting the record concerning the matter appealed. 
b.  Notice and hearing. The board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing on the appeal or application. Public notice shall be provided by publishing the appropriate notice as required by state law with the notice specifying the date, time and place of the hearing and the matters to come before the board. Notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest. Written notice shall be given to the department regional office at least ten days prior to hearings. At the public hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The board shall resolve boundary disputes according to section 22-845; decide variance applications according to section 22-846; and/or decide appeals of permit denials according to section 22-848. 
c.  Decision. A final decision regarding the appeal or variance application shall be made as soon as practical. Copies of all decisions shall be submitted to the department regional office within ten days of the decision. The final disposition of an application to the board of appeals shall be in the form of a written resolution or order signed by the chairman and secretary of the board. Such resolution shall state the specific facts which are the basis of the determination and shall either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed, in while or in part, dismiss the application for lack of jurisdiction or prosecution, or grant the application. Such resolution shall also include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the hardship demonstrated by the applicant in the case of a variance, clearly stated in the recorded minutes of the board proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.456, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-845. - Boundary disputes. 
(a)  The following procedure shall be used by the board of appeals in hearing disputes concerning the floodplain district boundaries: 
(1)  Where a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate or detailed floodplain studies, the regional flood elevations or profiles for the point in question shall be the governing factor in locating the district boundary. If no regional flood elevations or profiles are available to the board, other available evidence may be examined; 
(2)  The person contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present arguments and technical evidence to the board of appeals; and 
(3)  Where it is determined that the district boundary is incorrectly mapped, the board should inform the zoning committee or person contesting the location of the boundary to petition the municipality for a map amendment according to section 22-851, Amendments. 
(b)  Where the flood profiles are based on established base flood elevations from a FIRM, FEMA must also approve any map amendment pursuant to section 22-851. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.457, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-846. - Variances. 
(a)  The board of appeals may, upon appeal, grant a variance from the standards of this article where an applicant convincingly demonstrates that: 
(1)  Literal enforcement of the article provisions will cause unnecessary hardship; 
(2)  The hardship is due to adoption of the floodplain article and special conditions unique to the property, and not common to a group of adjacent lots or premises (in such case the zoning ordinance or map must be amended); 
(3)  Such variance is not contrary to the public interest; and 
(4)  Such variance is consistent with the purpose of this article in section 22-785. 
(b)  In addition to the criteria in subsection (a) of this section, to quality for a variance under FEMA regulations, the following criteria must be met: 
(1)  The variance shall not cause any increase in the regional flood elevation; 
(2)  Variances can only be granted for lots that are less than one-half acre and are contiguous to existing structures constructed below the RFE; and 
(3)  Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, shall be the minimum relief necessary, shall not cause increased risks to public safety or nuisances, shall not increase costs for rescue and relief efforts and shall not be contrary to the purpose of the article. 
(c)  A variance shall not: 
(1)  Grant or increase any use of property prohibited in the zoning district; 
(2)  Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or loss; 
(3)  Be granted for a hardship which is self-created; 
(4)  Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the area; 
(5)  Allow actions without the amendments to this article or maps required in section 22-851, Amendments; and 
(6)  Allow any alteration of an historic structure, including its use, which would preclude its continued designation as an historic structure. 
(d)  When a floodplain variance is granted, the board shall notify the applicant in writing that it may increase risks to life and property and flood insurance premiums could increase up to $25.00 per $100.00 of coverage. A copy shall be maintained with the variance record. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.458, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-847. - Conditional use permits. 
(a)  Required; pertinent information furnished by applicant necessary to determine proposed use. Any use listed as a conditional use in this article shall be permitted only after an application has been submitted to the zoning administrator and a conditional use permit has been granted by the plan commission, following the procedures in subsection (c) of this section. To secure information upon which to base its determination, the plan commission may require the applicant to furnish, in addition to the information required for a zoning permit, other pertinent information which is necessary to determine if the proposed use is consistent with the purpose of this article. 
(b)  Conditions. Upon consideration of the permit application and the standards applicable to the permitted uses in this article, the plan commission shall attach such conditions to a conditional use permit, in addition to those required elsewhere in this article, as are necessary to further the purposes of this article as listed in section 22-785. Such conditions may include specifications for, without limitation because of specific enumeration: type of shore cover; erosion protection measures; increased side yard setbacks; specific sewage disposal and water supply facilities; landscaping and planting screens; period of operation; operational control; sureties; deed restrictions; location of piers, docks, parking areas and signs; and type construction. 
(c)  Hearing applications for conditional use permits. 
(1)  Notice and hearing. The plan commission shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing on the appeal or application. The plan commission shall give public notice by publishing a class 1 notice under Wis. Stats. ch. 985 specifying the date, time and place of the hearing and the matters to come before the board. Notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest. Written notice shall be given to the southern district office of the department at least ten days prior to hearings on proposed conditional uses. At the public hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(2)  Decision. A decision regarding the appeal or application shall be made as soon as practical. Copies of all decisions on conditional uses shall be submitted to the appropriate district office of the department within ten days after they are granted or denied. The final disposition of an application to the plan commission shall be in the form of a written resolution or order signed by the chairman and secretary of the commission. Such resolution shall state the specific facts which are the basis of the determination and shall either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed, in while or in part, dismiss the application for lack of jurisdiction or prosecution, or grant the application. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.459, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-848. - To review appeals of permit denials. 
(a)  The board of appeals shall review all data constituting the basis for the appeal of permit denial. This data may include: 
(1)  Permit application data listed in section 22-840; 
(2)  Floodway/floodfringe determination data in section 22-804(d); 
(3)  Data listed in section 22-801(c)(1)b where the applicant has not submitted this information to the zoning administrator; and 
(4)  Other data submitted with the application, or submitted to the board with the appeal. 
(b)  For appeals of all denied permits the board shall: 
(1)  Follow the procedures of section 22-844; 
(2)  Consider zoning agency recommendations; and 
(3)  Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal. 
(c)  For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation the board shall: 
(1)  Uphold the denial where the board agrees with the data showing an increase in flood elevation. Increases may only be allowed after amending the flood profile and map and all appropriate legal arrangements are made with all adversely affected property owners as per the requirements of section 22-851, Amendments. 
(2)  Grant the appeal where the board agrees that the data properly demonstrates that the project does not cause an increase provided no other reasons for denial exist. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.460, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-849. - Floodproofing standards for nonconforming structures or uses. 
(a)  No permit or variance shall be issued for a non-residential structure designed to be watertight below the regional flood elevation until the applicant submits a plan certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures will protect the structure or development to the flood protection elevation and submits a FEMA floodproofing certificate. 
(b)  For a structure designed to allow the entry of floodwaters, no permit or variance shall be issued until the applicant submits a plan either: 
(1)  Certified by registered professional engineer or architect; or 
(2)  Meets or exceeds the following standards: 
a.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exist of floodwaters. 
(c)  Floodproofing measures shall be designed, as appropriate, to: 
(1)  Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact forces, and other regional flood factors; 
(2)  Protect structures to the flood protection elevation; 
(3)  Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral movement; 
(4)  Minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters; and 
(5)  Minimize or eliminate discharges into flood waters. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.461, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-850. - Public information. 
(a)  Place marks on bridges or buildings or other markers may be set to show the depth of inundation during the regional flood at appropriate locations within the floodplain. 
(b)  All maps, engineering data and regulations shall be available be widely distributed. 
(c)  Real estate transfers should show what floodplain district any real property is in. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.462, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-851. - Amendments. 
Obstructions or increases may only be permitted if amendments are made to this article, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with subsection (1) of this section. 
In AE zones with a mapped floodway, no obstructions or increases shall be permitted unless the applicant receives a conditional letter of map revision from FEMA and amendments are made to this article, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with subsection (a) of this section. Any such alterations must be reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR. 
In A zones increases equal to or greater than 1.0 foot may only be permitted if the applicant receives a conditional letter of map revision from FEMA and amendments are made to this article, the official floodplain maps, floodway lines, and water surface profiles, in accordance with subsection (1) of this section. 
(1)  Generally. When amendments are required, the procedures in section 22-851 shall apply. Official amendments are required for any changes in the official floodway lines, water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps or text of the floodplain overlay zoning article. Article amendments may also be made upon petition of any interested party according to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23. Such petitions shall include all necessary data required by sections 22-804(d) and 22-840. The governing body may change or supplement the floodplain zoning district boundaries and this article in the manner outlines in subsection (2) of this section. Actions which require an amendment to the article and/or submittal of a letter of map change (LOMC) include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Any fill or floodway encroachment that obstructs flow causing any increase in the regional flood height; 
b.  Any change to the floodplain boundaries and/or watercourse alterations on the FIRM; 
c.  Any changes to any other officially adopted floodplain maps listed in 22-788(c); 
d.  Any floodplain fill which raises the elevation of the filled area to a height at or above the flood protection elevation and is contiguous to land lying outside the floodplain; 
e.  Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles and floodplain maps; 
f.  Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning subchapter text required by Wis. Admin. Code § NR 116.05 or otherwise required by law, or for changes by the city; and 
g.  All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway lines or to remove an area from the floodway or the floodfringe that is based on a base flood elevation from a FIRM requires prior approval by FEMA. 
(2)  Procedures. Article amendments may be made upon petition of any party according to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23. The petitions shall include all data required by sections 22-840 and 22-804(d). The land use permit shall not be issued until a letter of map revision is issued by FEMA for the proposed changes. 
a.  The proposed amendment shall be referred to the plan commission for a public hearing and recommendation to the common council. The amendment and notice of public hearing shall be submitted to the department regional office for review prior to the hearing. The amendment procedure shall comply with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23. 
b.  No amendments shall become effective until reviewed and approved by the department of natural resources. 
c.  All persons petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs flow causing any increase in the regional flood height, shall obtain flooding easements, or other appropriate legal arrangements from all adversely affected property owners and notify local units of government before the amendment can be approved by the common council. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.463, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-852. - Enforcement and penalties. 
Any violation of the provisions of this article by any person shall be unlawful and shall be referred to the municipal attorney who shall expeditiously prosecute all such violators. See forfeiture/bond/deposit schedule for penalties for any person, firm, association, or corporation who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offence. Every violation of this article is a public nuisance and the creation thereof may be enjoined and the maintenance thereof may be abated by action at suit of the municipality, the state, or any citizen thereof pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 87.30. Fines/penalties in the floodplain are limited to no more than $50.00/day/violation under Wis. Stats. § 87.30. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.464, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Sec. 22-853. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Unless specifically defined, words and phrases in this article shall have their common law meaning and shall be applied in accordance with their common usage. Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular. The term "may" is permissive; the term "shall" is mandatory and is not discretionary. 
A zones means those areas shown on the official floodplain zoning map which would be inundated by the regional flood. These areas may be numbered or unnumbered A zones. The A zones may or may not be reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a given area. 
AH zone. See "Area of shallow flooding." 
AO zone. See "Area of shallow flooding." 
Accessory structure or use means a facility, structure, building or use which is accessory or incidental to the principal use of a property, structure or building. 
Alteration means an enhancement, upgrading or substantial change or modifications other than an addition or repair to a dwelling or to electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating, air conditioning and other systems within a structure. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flood may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, as published by FEMA as part of a FIS and depicted on a FIRM. 
Basement means any enclosed area of a building having its floor subgrade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides. 
Building. See "Structure." 
Bulkhead line means a geographic line along a reach of navigable water that has been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the department pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 30.11, and which allows specified filling between the bulkhead line and the original ordinary highwater mark, except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this article. 
Campground means any parcel of land which is designed, maintained, intended or used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent overnight use by four or more camping units, or which is advertised or represented as a camping area. 
Camping unit means any portable device, no more than 400 square feet in area, used as a temporary shelter, including but not limited to a camping trailer, motor home, bus, van, pick-up truck, or tent that is fully licensed, if required, and ready for highway use. 
Certificate of compliance means a certification that construction and the use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this article. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct normal flow of water. 
Crawlways or crawl space means an enclosed area below the first usable floor of a building, generally less than five feet in height, used for access to plumbing and electrical utilities. 
Deck means an unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides, but has a permeable floor which allows the infiltration of precipitation. 
Department means the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
Development means any artificial change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures, the repair of any damaged structure or the improvement or renovation of any structure, regardless of percentage of damage or improvement; the placement of buildings or structures; subdivision layout and site preparation; mining, dredging, filling grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; the storage, deposition or extraction of materials or equipment; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities. 
Dry land access means a vehicular access route which is above the regional flood elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above regional flood elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles. 
Encroachment means any fill, structure, equipment, use or development in the floodway. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) means the federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by one of the following conditions: the overflow or rise of inland waters; the rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; the inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels along the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake Superior; or the sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly unusual event. 
Flood frequency means the probability of a flood occurrence which is determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a particular flood event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average, once in a specified number of years or as a percent chance of occurring in any given year. 
Flood hazard boundary map means a map designating approximate flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered A zones and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations. This map forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) until superseded by a flood insurance study and a flood insurance rate map. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means a map of a community on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the floodplain and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. This map can only be amended by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood insurance study means a technical engineering examination, evaluation, and determination of the local flood hazard areas. It provides maps designating those areas affected by the regional flood and provides both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations and may provide floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered and unnumbered A zones. Flood insurance rate maps, that accompany the flood insurance study, for the basis for both the regulatory and the insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program. 
Flood profile means a graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations of land surface elevations along a stream or river. 
Flood protection elevation means an elevation of two feet of freeboard above the water surface profile elevation designated for the regional flood. Also see "freeboard." 
Flood storage means those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters has been taken into account during analysis in reducing the regional flood discharge. 
Floodfringe means the portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway which is covered by floodwaters during the regional flood and associated with standing water rather than flowing water. 
Floodplain means land which has been or may be covered by floodwater during the regional flood. It includes the floodway and the floodfringe, and may include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory purposes. 
Floodplain island means a natural geologic land formation within the floodplain that is surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the regional flood. 
Floodplain management means policy and procedures to ensure wise use of floodplains, including mapping and engineering, mitigation, education, and administration and enforcement of floodplain regulations. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures, water and sanitary facilities and contents of buildings subject to flooding for the purpose of reducing or eliminating flood damage. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood discharge. 
Freeboard means a safety factor expressed in terms of a specified number of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for any factors that cause flood heights greater than those calculated, including ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and floodways, the effects of watershed urbanization, loss of flood storage areas due to development and aggregation of the river or stream bed. 
Habitable structure means any structure, or portion thereof used or designed for human habitation. 
Hearing notice means publication or posting meeting the requirements of Wis. Stats. ch. 985. For appeals, a class 1 notice, published once at least one week (seven days) before the hearing, is required. For all zoning ordinances and amendments, a class 2 notice, published twice, once each week consecutively, the last at least a week (seven days) before the hearing. Local ordinances or bylaws may require additional notice, exceeding these minimums. 
High flood damage potential means damage that could result from flooding that includes any danger to life or health or any significant economic loss to a structure or building and its contents. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register. 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district. 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior. 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program, as determined by the secretary of the interior, or by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 
Increase in regional flood height means a calculated upward rise in the regional flood elevation, greater than 0.00 foot, based on a comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions which is directly attributable to development in the floodplain but not attributable to manipulation of mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and contraction coefficients and discharge. 
Land use means any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real estate. Also see "Development." 
Lowest adjacent grade means the elevation of the lowest ground surface that touches any of the exterior walls of a building. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3. 
Maintenance means the act or process of restoring to original soundness, including redecorating, refinishing, non structural repairs, or the replacement of existing fixtures, systems or equipment with equivalent fixtures, systems or structures. 
Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes a mobile home but does not include a "mobile recreational vehicle." 
Mobile/manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mobile/manufactured home park or subdivision, existing means a parcel of land divided into two or more manufactures home lots for rent or sale, on which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots is completed before the effective date of this article. At a minimum, this would include the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Mobile/manufactured home park, expansion to existing means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed. This includes installation of utilities, construction of streets and either final site grading, or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Mobile recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is built on a single chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled, carried or permanently towable by a licensed, light-duty vehicle, is licensed for highway use if registration is required and is designed primarily not for use as permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. Manufactured homes that are towed or carried onto a parcel of land, but do not remain capable of being towed or carried, including park model homes, do not fall within the definition of "mobile recreational vehicles." 
Model, corrected effective means a hydraulic engineering model that corrects any errors that occur in the duplicate effective model, adds any additional cross sections to the duplicate effective model, or incorporates more detailed topographic information than that used in the current effective model. 
Model, duplicate effective means a copy of the hydraulic analysis used in the effective FIS and referred to as the effective model. 
Model, effective means the hydraulic engineering model that was used to produce the current effective flood insurance study. 
Model, existing (pre-project) means a modification of the duplicate effective model or corrected effective model to reflect any man-made modifications that have occurred within the floodplain since the date of the effective model but prior to the construction of the project for which the revision is being requested. If no modification has occurred since the date of the effective model, then this model would be identical to the corrected effective model or duplicate effective model. 
Model, revised (post-project) means a modification of the existing or pre-project conditions model, duplicate effective model or corrected effective model to reflect revised or post-project conditions. 
Municipality or municipal means the county, city or village governmental units enacting, administering and enforcing this zoning ordinance. 
NAVD or North American Vertical Datum means elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment. 
New construction means, for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain zoning regulations adopted by this community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For the purpose of determining flood insurance rates, it includes any structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
NGVD or National Geodetic Vertical Datum means elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment. 
Nonconforming structure means an existing lawful structure or building which is not in conformity with the dimensional or structural requirements of this article for the area of the floodplain which it occupies. For example, an existing residential structure in the floodfringe district is a conforming use. However, if the first floor is lower than the flood protection elevation, the structure is nonconforming. 
Nonconforming use means an existing lawful use or accessory use of a structure or building which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article for the area of the floodplain which it occupies, such as a residence in the floodway. 
Obstruction to flow means any development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters such that this development alone or together with any future development will cause an increase in regional flood height. 
Official floodplain zoning map means that map, adopted and made part of this chapter, as described in section 22-788, which has been approved by the department and FEMA. 
Open space use means those uses having a relatively low flood damage potential and not involving structures. 
Ordinary highwater mark means the point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic. 
Person means an individual, or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, municipality or state agency. 
Private sewage system means a sewage treatment and disposal system serving one structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field located on the same parcel as the structure. It also means an alternative sewage system approved by the department of safety and professional services, including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption field, a holding tank, a system serving more than one structure or a system located on a different parcel than the structure. 
Public utilities means those utilities using underground or overhead transmission lines such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and distribution and collection systems such as water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer. 
Reasonably safe from flooding means base floodwaters will not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the floodplain and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings. 
Regional flood means a flood determined to be representative of large floods known to have occurred in the state. A regional flood is a flood with a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and if depicted on the FIRM, the RFE is equivalent to the BFE. 
Start of construction means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundation or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For an alteration, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means any manmade object with form, shape and utility, either permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground, stream bed or lake bed, including, but not limited to, roofed and walled buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts. 
Subdivision has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 236.02(12) defined as a division of a lot, parcel or tract of land by the owner thereof or the owner's agent for the purpose of sale or of building development, where the act of division creates five or more parcels or building sites of 1½ acres each or less in areas; or five or more parcels or building sites of 1½ acres each or less in area are created by successive divisions within a period of five years. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial improvements regardless of the work performed. The term does not, however, include either any project for the improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Unnecessary hardship means where special conditions affecting a particular property which were not self-created have made strict conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of this article. 
Variance means an authorization by the board of adjustment or appeals for the construction or maintenance of a building or structure in a manner which is inconsistent with dimensional standards (not uses) contained in the floodplain zoning ordinance. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the floodplain zoning ordinance. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, floodproofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface profile means a graphical representation showing the elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along a reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile of the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas. 
Watershed means the entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a watercourse or body of water. 
Well means an excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring, drilling, driving or other methods, to obtain groundwater regardless of its intended use. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 22.470, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, § 1, 8-26-2014)  
Chapter 23 - SMARTCODE DISTRICT[1] 
Article 1 - General to All Plans 
Article 2 - Sector Plans 
Article 3 - New Community Scale Plans 
Article 4 - Infill Community Scale Plans 
Article 5 - Transect Zoning Regulations 
Article 6 - Definitions 
  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Note— The presence of a dagger (†) following a section title indicates that the section has been amended subsequent to the adoption of the Fitchburg Code. Please see the Table of Ordinances Amending Ch. 23 at the end of this chapter for a list of ordinances and sections amended. 
 
Table of Ordinances Amending Ch. 23 
The following table lists sections of Ch. 23 amended since the adoption of the Fitchburg Code, and indicates which ordinances amended those particular sections. For more information regarding particular ordinances, please see the Code Comparative Table following Ch. 74. 
Article and 
Section Number 	Ordinance 
Number 	Section of 
Ordinance 	Date of 
Adoption 
Art. 1, § 1.2 	2012-O-13 	1 	 9-25-2012 
	2013-O-06 	1 	 4-23-2013 
Art. 1, § 1.3 	2011-O-26 	1 	 1-24-2012 
Art. 1, § 1.4 	2011-O-26 	1 	 1-24-2012 
	2014-O-01 	1 	 1-28-2014 
Art. 1, § 1.7 	2019-O-13 	1 	 6-25-2019 
Art. 1, Table 1 	2012-O-13 	1 	 9-25-2012 
Art. 1, Table 2 	2011-O-03 	1, 2 	 3-22-2011 
	2011-O-26 	1 	 1-24-2012 
	2013-O-06 	1 	 4-23-2013 
	2015-O-12 	1 	 5-26-2015 
	2016-O-15 	1 	 5-10-2016 
	2017-O-05 	1 	 3-28-2017 
Art. 1, Table 2A 	2011-O-26 	1 	 1-24-2012 
Art. 3, § 3.4 	2014-O-07 	1 	 3-25-2014 
Art. 3, § 3.5 	2011-O-03 	3—5 	 3-22-2011 
	2013-O-09 	3 	 6-25-2013 
	2014-O-01 	2 	 1-28-2014 
	2016-O-15 	1 	 5-10-2016 
	2018-O-29 	1 	 9-11-2018 
Art. 3, § 3.7 	2011-O-03 	6 	 3-22-2011 
	2011-O-26 	1 	 1-24-2012 
	2012-O-13 	1 	 9-25-2012 
	2013-O-06 	1 	 4-23-2013 
	2013-O-09 	4 	 6-25-2013 
	2014-O-07 	2 	 3-25-2014 
	2016-O-27 	1 	10-25-2016 
	2016-O-15 	1 	 5-10-2016 
Art. 3, § 3.8 	2016-O-15 	1 	 5-10-2016 
Art. 3, § 3.10 	2011-O-03 	7 	 3-22-2011 
	2011-O-10 	1 	 5-24-2011 
Art. 3, Table 4 	2011-O-03 	8—12 	 3-22-2011 
	2011-O-26 	1 	 1-24-2012 
	2012-O-13 	1 	 9-25-2012 
	2013-O-06 	1 	 4-23-2013 
	2016-O-27 	1 	10-25-2016 
Art. 3, Table 4a 	2011-O-26 	1 	 1-24-2012 
	2014-O-36 	1 	11- 3-2014 
	2017-O-05 	1 	 3-28-2017 
Art. 3, Table 6 	2014-O-36 	6 	11- 3-2014 
Art. 3, Table 8 	2011-O-26 	1 	 1-24-2012 
	2018-O-29 	1 	 9-11-2018 
Art. 3, Table 9 	2011-O-03 	13, 14 	 3-22-2011 
	2011-O-26 	1 	 1-24-2012 
	2018-O-29 	1 	 9-11-2018 
Art. 3, Table 9A 	2011-O-26 	1 	 1-24-2012 
	2018-O-29 	1 	 9-11-2018 
Art. 4, § 4.1 	2011-O-26 	1 	 1-24-2012 
	2012-O-13 	1 	 9-25-2012 
	2016-O-15 	1 	 5-10-2016 
Art. 4, § 4.2 	2016-O-15 	1 	 5-10-2016 
Art. 4, § 4.4 	2016-O-15 	1 	 5-10-2016 
Art. 4, § 4.5 	2016-O-15 	1 (repealed) 	 5-10-2016 
Art. 4, § 4.7 	2016-O-15 	1 	 5-10-2016 
Art. 4, Table 12 	2011-O-26 	1 	 1-24-2012 
Art. 4, Table 13 	2011-O-26 	1 	 1-24-2012 
Art. 5, § 5.1 	2011-O-03 	15 	 3-22-2011 
	2014-O-36 	5 	11- 3-2014 
Art. 5, § 5.2 	2016-O-15 	1 	 5-10-2016 
Art. 5, § 5.4 	2012-O-13 	1 	 9-25-2012 
Art. 5, § 5.6 	2011-O-26 	1 	 1-24-2012 
	2012-O-13 	1 	 9-25-2012 
	2013-O-06 	1 	 4-23-2013 
	2013-O-19 	1 	 9-24-2013 
	2014-O-20 	1—3 	 6-24-2014 
	2015-O-12 	2, 3 	 5-26-2015 
	2016-O-15 	1 	 5-10-2016 
	2018-O-29 	1 	 9-11-2018 
	2018-O-37 	1 	10-23-2018 
	2019-O-15 	1 	 8-27-2019 
Art. 5, § 5.7 	2012-O-13 	1 	 9-25-2012 
	2013-O-25 	1 	10-22-2013 
	2016-O-15 	1 	 5-10-2016 
Art. 5, § 5.8 	2012-O-13 	1 	 9-25-2012 
	2016-O-15 	1 	 5-10-2016 
Art. 5, § 5.9 	2011-O-26 	1 	 1-24-2012 
	2012-O-13 	1 	 9-25-2012 
	2016-O-15 	1 	 5-10-2016 
Art. 5, § 5.10 	2011-O-26 	1 	 1-24-2012 
	2012-O-13 	1 	 9-25-2012 
	2013-O-06 	1 	 4-23-2013 
	2018-O-29 	1 	 9-11-2018 
Art. 5, § 5.11 	2012-O-13 	1 	 9-25-2012 
	2018-O-29 	1 	 9-11-2018 
Art. 5, § 5.12 	2012-O-13 	1 	 9-25-2012 
	2013-O-14 	1 	 8-27-2013 
	2014-O-07 	3, 4 	 3-25-2014 
	2018-O-05 	2 	 2-27-2018 
	2018-O-14 	1 	 4-24-2018 
Art. 5, § 5.13 	2012-O-13 	1 	 9-25-2012 
	2014-O-01 	3 	 1-28-2014 
	2014-O-13 	1, 2 	 5-27-2014 
	2014-O-20 	4 	 6-24-2014 
	2014-O-36 	2, 3 	11- 3-2014 
	2018-O-29 	1 	 9-11-2018 
Art. 5, § 5.14 	2012-O-13 	1 	 9-25-2012 
Art. 5, § 5.15 	2012-O-13 	1 	 9-25-2012 
	2018-O-29 	1 	 9-11-2018 
Art. 5, Table 14 	2011-O-03 	16 	 3-22-2011 
	2013-O-06 	1 	 4-23-2013 
	2018-O-29 	1 	 9-11-2018 
Art. 5, Table 16 	2013-O-06 	1 	 4-23-2013 
Art. 5, Table 18 	2012-O-13 	1 	 9-25-2012 
	2016-O-15 	1 (repealed) 	 5-10-2016 
Art. 5, Table 19 	2011-O-26 	1 	 1-24-2012 
	2016-O-15 	1 (repealed) 	 5-10-2016 
Art. 5, Table 19A 	2011-O-26 	1 	 1-24-2012 
	2012-O-13 	1 	 9-25-2012 
	2018-O-29 	1 	 9-11-2018 
Art. 5, Table 19B 	2011-O-26 	1 	 1-24-2012 
Art. 5, Table 19C 	2011-O-26 	1 	 1-24-2012 
Art. 5, Table 19D 	2011-O-26 	1 	 1-24-2012 
Art. 5, Table 20 	2011-O-26 	1 	 1-24-2012 
	2016-O-15 	1 (repealed) 	 5-10-2016 
Art. 5, Table 21 	2012-O-13 	1 	 9-25-2012 
	2015-O-12 	4 	 5-26-2015 
	2016-O-15 	1 	 5-10-2016 
	2018-O-05 	1 	 2-27-2018 
	2018-O-29 	1 	 9-11-2018 
Art. 5, Table 22 	2011-O-03 	17 	 3-22-2011 
	2012-O-13 	1 	 9-25-2012 
	2016-O-15 	1 	 5-10-2016 
Art. 5, Table 23 	2011-O-03 	17 	 3-22-2011 
	2012-O-13 	1 	 9-25-2012 
	2013-O-06 	1 	 4-23-2013 
	2015-O-12 	5 	 5-26-2015 
	2016-O-15 	1 	 5-10-2016 
Art. 5, Table 24 	2011-O-03 	18 	 3-22-2011 
	2012-O-13 	1 	 9-25-2012 
	2016-O-15 	1 	 5-10-2016 
Art. 5, Table 25 	2011-O-03 	18 	 3-22-2011 
	2012-O-13 	1 	 9-25-2012 
	2016-O-15 	1 	 5-10-2016 
Art. 5, Table 26 	2011-O-03 	19 	 3-22-2011 
	2012-O-13 	1 	 9-25-2012 
	2018-O-29 	1 	 9-11-2018 
Art. 5, Table 27 	2018-O-29 	1 	 9-11-2018 
Art. 6 	2011-O-03 	20 	 3-22-2011 
	2011-O-26 	1 	 1-24-2012 
	2012-O-13 	1 	 9-25-2012 
	2012-O-16 	1 	10-23-2012 
	2013-O-14 	1 	 8-27-2013 
	2014-O-07 	5 	 3-25-2014 
	2014-O-36 	4 	11- 3-2014 
	2016-O-15 	1 	 5-10-2016 
	2018-O-29 	1 	 9-11-2018 
	2019-O-13 	1 	 6-25-2019 
  
Chapter 24 - LAND DIVISION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Platting lands and recording and vacating plats, Wis. Stats. § 236.01 et seq.; local subdivision regulation, Wis. Stats. § 236.45; condominiums, Wis. Stats. § 703.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 24-1. - Introduction. 
(a)  Authority. These regulations are adopted under the authority granted by Wis. Stats. §§ 62.11(5), 62.23(6) and (7) and 236.45. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the division and development of land within the corporate limits of the city in order to promote the public health, safety, morals, prosperity, aesthetics and general welfare of the community; to lessen congestion in the streets and highways; to further the orderly layout and appropriate use of land; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds, and other public requirements; to facilitate the division of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land; to ensure adequate legal description and proper survey monumentation of subdivided land; to provide for the administration and enforcement of this chapter; and to provide penalties for its violation. 
(c)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or interfere with any existing easements, covenants, agreements, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to laws. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
(d)  Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the city and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. 
(e)  Common council. The authority to approve or object to preliminary plats, final plats and certified surveys is, to the extent necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter, vested in the common council upon recommendation from the plan commission. 
(f)  Severability. The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any provision of the chapter is invalid, or if its application to any person or circumstance is invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application. 
(g)  Title. This chapter shall be known as, referred to, and cited as the "land division ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 15.01, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 24-2. - General provisions. 
(a)  Jurisdiction. Jurisdiction of these regulations shall include all lands within the city. The provisions of this chapter as it applies to divisions of tracts of land into less than five parcels shall not apply to: 
(1)  Transfers of interests in land by will or pursuant to court order; 
(2)  Leases for a term not to exceed ten years, mortgages or easements; 
(3)  The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property if additional lots are not thereby created and the lots resulting are not reduced below the minimum sizes required by Wis. Stats. ch. 236 or any other applicable laws or ordinances. 
(b)  Compliance. No person shall divide any land located within the city which results in a land division, subdivision, or a replat as defined herein; no such land division, subdivision, or replat shall be entitled to record; and no street shall be laid out or improvements made to land without compliance with all requirements of this chapter and with: 
(1)  The provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 236; 
(2)  The rules of the state department of health and social services regulating lot size and lot elevation and of chapter 46 of the Dane County Code of Ordinances regulating lot size, lot elevation, soil permeability, etc., for private sewage systems where the land to be subdivided is not served by a public sewer and provisions for such service have not been made; 
(3)  The rules of the state department of transportation relating to safety of access and the preservation of the public interest and investment in the highway system if the land owned or controlled by the subdivider abuts on a state trunk highway or connecting street; 
(4)  The city comprehensive plan and any applicable ordinances, official maps and regulations; 
(5)  The rules of the state department of natural resources relating to wetlands, floodplains and erosion control. 
(c)  Contract and security for improvements. 
(1)  Contract. Before any final plat, certified survey map, comprehensive development plan, or replat in conjunction with a staging plan pursuant to subsection (j) of this section is inscribed by the clerk, the subdivider shall enter a contract with the city wherein the subdivider agrees to make and to install all required improvements within 18 months or, where staging is permitted, within four years of the date that the plat, or certified survey map is recorded. The plan commission may permit construction to be staged provided a staging plan pursuant to subsection (j) of this section has been approved. Where staging is permitted, the common council will accept the public improvements within designated parts of the subdivision, land division, or comprehensive development when they have been completed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and have passed the necessary inspections, even though the particular improvements may not have been completed within the remainder of the subdivision, land division, or comprehensive development. 
(2)  Security for performance required. 
a.  At the time the contract is entered, the subdivider shall furnish a bond, certificate of deposit, irrevocable letter of credit or certified check to the city in an amount equal to 100 percent of the estimated cost of all required improvements as determined by the city engineer, plus a 15 percent contingency (total 115 percent). Where staging is permitted, the amount of the security and the time it is furnished shall be determined in accordance with subsection (c)(2)b of this section. 
b.  Where staging is permitted, the subdivider shall deposit a bond, certificate of deposit, irrevocable letter of credit or certified check with the city at the time the contract is entered and upon completion of the first and each successive stage of construction. The security deposit shall be an amount equal to 100 percent of the estimated cost of improvements next required by the installation and construction schedule as determined by the city engineer plus a 15 percent contingency. Improvements constructed during the first stage and each successive stage of construction shall not be accepted nor shall any building permit be issued for construction within the completed area of the subdivision or comprehensive development until the security required for the next stage of construction has been posted with the city. 
c.  The security posted shall be in such form as is acceptable to the city attorney. When a certificate of deposit or certified check is posted as security, the instrument must be negotiable by the city. When a letter of credit is posted as security the city must be the beneficiary. 
d.  The security posted shall guarantee that all required improvements will be made and installed according to city specifications by the subdivider or its contractors not later than 18 months from the date that the plat is recorded or, where staging is permitted, that each stage will be completed by the date specified in the installation and completion schedule, and shall be used, applied, or released pursuant to section 24-12. 
(3)  Letter of agreement. Governmental units to which these bond and contract provisions apply may file, in lieu of said contract and bond, a letter from officers authorized to act on their behalf agreeing to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Dedication and reservation of land. 
(1)  Dedication of public ways. Whenever a tract of land being divided or subdivided embraces all or any part of street, drainageway or other public way which has been designated in the comprehensive plan, comprehensive park, open space, and recreation plan, or the official city map, said public way shall be made a part of the plat or survey map and dedicated by the subdivider in the locations and dimensions indicated on said plan or map. 
(2)  Dedication of parks, playgrounds, recreation and open spaces. 
a.  The subdivider/developer shall dedicate sufficient land area to provide adequate park, playground, recreation and open space to meet the needs to be created by and to be provided for the land development, land division or subdivision. At least 2,900 square feet of land shall be dedicated for each proposed residential dwelling unit within the land development, division, subdivision or comprehensive development. Where a definite commitment is made to the city of the subdivider/developer with respect to the number of dwelling units to be constructed on any parcel of land which has a zoning classification that permits multifamily use, the dedication shall be based on that number. Where no such commitment exists, the dedication shall be based upon the maximum number of dwelling units which the zoning classification of the parcel will permit. Park dedication requirements for land development, land division or subdivision, developments or projects using the SmartCode zoning district in chapter 23, shall provide the following required park dedication requirements: T-3 designated and special district lands: 2,900 square feet of land per dwelling unit; T-4 designated land shall be calculated taking the total net lot area within T-4 at six dwelling units per acre multiplied by 1,900 square feet per dwelling unit; T-5 designated land shall be calculated taking the total net lot area within T-5 at 12 dwelling units per acre multiplied by 1,000 square feet per dwelling unit. 
b.  Where, in the sole discretion of the park commission, there is no land suitable for parks within the proposed development area, land division or subdivision, the dedication of land required by subsection (d)(2)a of this section is not feasible, the dedication of land would not be compatible with the city comprehensive plan, or the park commission determines that a cash contribution will better serve the public interest, the park commission may require the subdivider/developer to pay a fee-in-lieu of making the required land dedication. 
c.  The city at its sole discretion may, acting upon a recommendation by the parks commission, identify lands outside of the development which it would accept as part of the parkland dedication requirements replacing all or part of the total dedication or fee-in-lieu of land dedication requirement. The city and subdivider may, by mutual consent, agree to an acre-to-acre or other equivalent basis. 
d.  Land zoned SmartCode under chapter 23 shall provide civic spaces as required through that chapter, and additional park land dedication as may be required by the parks commission as allowed under chapter 23. Where the total dedicated park acreage is less than that required in subsection (d)(2)a of this section, a fee-in-lieu of dedication for the difference shall be required pursuant to the city's adopted fee schedule. 
e.  The amount of any fee imposed pursuant to this subsection (d)(2) shall be a per-dwelling-unit fee as set forth in the annual budget appendix fee schedule. A fee shall be provided as noted in the annual budget appendix fee schedule for areas zoned SmartCode under chapter 23. 
f.  The park commission may, in its sole discretion, permit the subdivider/developer to satisfy the requirement of subsection (d)(2)a of this section by combining a land dedication with a fee payment. 
g.  The city shall place any fee collected pursuant to the provisions of this section in a separate account to be used for land acquisition and development of adequate park, playground, recreation and open space to meet the needs created by the land development, land division or subdivision. 
h.  Payment of land dedication fees shall be in a lump sum prior to the recording of a final plat or certified survey map or prior to the issuance of any building permit for a development where no plat or certified survey map is involved. Where no land division is involved the park commission may permit the developer to substitute land dedication for fees. However, where land outside the development is anticipated under section 24-2(d)(2)c, the subdivider may be allowed up to two years from the date of council action on the approving resolution to dedicate the land, provided that an acceptable security is posted to cover the estimated fee-in-lieu of dedication payment for the parkland deficit to be covered by land dedication outside of the development. If the land outside development is not or only partially provided, a fee-in-lieu of dedication payment shall be made at the level in effect for the year payment is made. 
(3)  Reservation of public sites and open spaces. In designing a land division, subdivision or comprehensive development, due consideration shall be given to the reservation of suitable sites of adequate area for future schools, parks, playgrounds, drainageways, and other public purposes. In the location of such, consideration shall be given to the preservation of scenic and historic sites, stands for fine trees, marshes, lakes and ponds, watercourses, watersheds, and ravines. The subdivider may be required to reserve such school, park, recreation and public use areas for a period not to exceed five years for acquisition by the city, or in the case of school areas by the school district, at undeveloped land costs. 
(e)  Survey monuments. Before final approval of any plat or certified survey map, the subdivider shall install survey monuments placed in accordance with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 236.15 and as may be required by the city engineer. The common council may waive the placing of monuments, required under Wis. Stats. § 236.15(1)(b), (c) and (d), for a reasonable time on condition that the subdivider execute a surety bond to ensure the placing of such monuments within the time required. 
(f)  Land suitability. No land shall be divided which the plan commission determines to be unsuitable for use by reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, adverse soil or rock formation, unfavorable topography, or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of the future residents of the proposed land division or of the community. The plan commission, in applying the provisions of this section, shall recite in writing the particular facts upon which it bases its conclusion that the land is not suitable for the proposed use and shall afford the subdivider an opportunity to be heard and to present evidence regarding such unsuitability. Therefore the plan commission may affirm, modify, or withdraw its determination of unsuitability. 
(g)  Outlots. No outlot in a subdivision or land division may be used as a building site, unless it is dedicated to the public for a specified public purpose, and it is in compliance with all restrictions imposed by Wis. Stats. ch. 236 and the provisions of this chapter. An outlot may be conveyed whether or not it may be used as a building site. When an outlot is created for a public purpose, the outlot shall be dedicated for that purpose. In certain situations, some outlots, such as, but not limited to, stormwater management facilities, a private transportation corridor (such as alleys) may be required by the public works director, due to their serving a part of a land division, subdivision, or land development, to be owned in common by the benefitting lots with maintenance and other agreements acceptable to the city engineer, city planner, and city attorney put in place. 
(h)  Violations. It shall be unlawful to build upon, divide, convey, record or monument any land in violation of this chapter or of state law; and no person, partnership, corporation, or legal entity of any sort shall be issued a building permit by the city authorizing the building on, or improvement of, any land division, subdivision, or replat within the jurisdiction of this chapter not of record as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived until the provisions and requirements of this chapter have been fully met. The city may institute appropriate action or proceedings to enjoin violations of this chapter or applicable state law. 
(i)  Penalties. See forfeitures schedule in chapter 70 for penalties for any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(j)  Staging. Where public improvements will not be completed within 18 months the subdivider shall prepare a staging plan, for approval by the plan commission, for any land division, subdivision, or land development. The phasing plan shall clearly delineate in map, tabular and text form the following: 
(1)  The number of phases. 
(2)  Specific public improvements, lots, outlots or other land to be improved or affected by each phase. 
(3)  For each phase, expected start of construction (month and year), duration (number of months), with a schedule of public improvement installation detailing grading, underground work, street work, and related amenities such as, but not limited to sidewalks, street lighting, and street trees. 
(4)  A review of other land division improvement areas currently active within the city with a discussion of how this project will be phased, in light of the other projects to meet the requirements of the comprehensive plan. 
(5)  Portions of a land division or subdivision that are not scheduled for public improvement installation within four years shall be platted as outlots. These outlots may be replatted at a later date. The initial preliminary plat, however, shall indicate all lots appropriate to intended uses, and indicate what areas are to be an outlot(s) for staging. The final plat shall provide the outlot(s) for staging. Except for land zoned SmartCode, under chapter 23, an approved preliminary plat shall be required prior to a final plat, to replat any outlot. 
(6)  Existing structures on outlots for future development shall be considered existing nonconforming. 
(7)  Parkland dedication and fees shall not be required for outlots created for staging purposes, but shall be required upon replat, zoning or development. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 15.02, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2012-O-06, § 1, 6-12-2012)  
Sec. 24-3. - Procedure. 
(a)  Preapplication. Prior to the filing of an application for the approval of a preliminary plat, or certified survey, the subdivider shall consult with the plan commission to obtain their advice and assistance, to be informed of the purpose and objectives of these regulations, consistency with the comprehensive plan, zoning to be used, and of any plan implementation devices, and to be otherwise assisted in planning the subdivision or land division. 
(b)  Preliminary plat review. 
(1)  Before submitting a final plat for approval, the subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat and a written application for approval, and shall file ten copies and one electronic copy in a format acceptable to the planning department of the plat and the application with the city clerk at four weeks prior to the meeting of the plan commission at which action is desired. The subdivider shall also forward a copy to the local electric and telephone utilities. When the subdivider expects the city to act as the transmitting authority in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 236.12, the application shall state that the transmittal responsibility lies with the city, shall contain a list of the other authorities to which the plat must be submitted, and shall be accompanied by such additional fees and copies of the plat as are necessary to be transmitted to such authorities. If a comprehensive development plan is required under subsection (f) of this section such plan shall have been approved by the common council prior to the filing of a preliminary plat. 
(2)  The preliminary plat shall cover the entire area owned or controlled by the subdivider even though only a small portion thereof is proposed for development at the time, and shall be prepared in accordance with this chapter. 
(3)  The clerk shall forward two copies of the preliminary plat to the plan commission which shall examine it for conformity with the requirements of this chapter and with the requirements of any other ordinances, statutes or administrative rules and regulations, and for compliance with the comprehensive plan. 
(4)  The plan commission shall recommend approval or conditional approval of the plat to the common council or shall reject the plat. If approval or conditional approval is recommended, the preliminary plat shall be referred to the common council for consideration. The common council shall then approve, conditionally approve, or reject the preliminary plat. One copy of the plat shall be returned to the subdivider, his/her surveyor, or engineer with the date and action endorsed thereon; and if approved conditionally or rejected, the conditions of approval or reasons for rejection shall be endorsed thereon or attached thereto. Unless the time is extended by written agreement between the subdivider and the common council, failure to complete the action herein required within 90 days of filing of the preliminary plat shall constitute an approval of the preliminary plat. 
(5)  Approval or conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall entitle the final plat to approval provided the final plat conforms substantially to the preliminary, including any conditions of that approval, conforms to any applicable local plans and ordinances, and is submitted within six months of the last required approval of the preliminary plat. 
(c)  Final plat review. 
(1)  The subdivider shall prepare and file ten copies and one electronic copy in a format acceptable to the planning department of the final plat together with a written application for approval with the city clerk within 36 months of the last required approval of the preliminary plat and at least four weeks prior to the meeting of the plan commission at which action is desired. When the subdivider expects the city to act as the transmitting authority in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 236.12, the application shall state that transmittal responsibilities lie with the city, shall contain a list of the other authorities to which the plat must be submitted, and shall be accompanied by such additional fees and copies of the plat as are necessary to be transmitted to such authorities. 
(2)  The clerk shall forward two copies of the plat to the plan commission. The plan commission shall examine it for conformity with the preliminary plat, with the requirements of this chapter, and with the requirements of any other ordinances, statutes or administrative rules and regulations which may be applicable to it. 
(3)  The plan commission shall recommend approval of the final plat to the common council or shall reject the plat. If approval is recommended, the final plat shall be referred to the common council for consideration. The common council shall then approve or reject the final plat. One copy of the plat shall then be returned to the subdivider, his/her surveyor, or engineer with the date and action endorsed thereon, and if approved conditionally or rejected, the conditions for approval or reasons for rejection shall be endorsed thereon or attached thereto. Unless the time is extended by written agreement between the subdivider and the plan commission or common council, failure to complete the action required herein within 60 days of filing the final plat shall constitute an approval of the final plat. 
(4)  The final plat shall be entitled to approval provided it conforms substantially to the preliminary plat as approved, including any conditions of that approval, and conforms with any applicable city plans and ordinances. If the final plat is not submitted within six months of the last required approval of the preliminary plat, the plan commission shall reject the final plat regardless of the prior action taken on the preliminary plat. 
(5)  The subdivider shall file a certified copy of the final plat with the clerk within ten days after it has been recorded. 
(d)  Replats. 
(1)  When it is proposed to replat a recorded subdivision, or part thereof, so as to change its boundaries or any part thereof, the person wishing to replat shall vacate or alter the recorded plat as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 236.40 through 236.44 and shall then proceed as specified in sections 24-3 through 24-7. 
(2)  Whenever a preliminary plat of a replat is filed, the plan commission shall schedule and hold a public hearing before it acts on the plat. Notices of the proposed replat and public hearing shall be mailed, at the subdivider's expense, to the owners of all properties within the limits of the exterior boundaries of the proposed replat and to the owners of all properties adjacent to the proposed replat. 
(3)  Replats conducted in areas zoned SmartCode, under chapter 23, shall not require a preliminary plat. 
(e)  Land divisions by certified survey. 
(1)  A certified survey map application may be filed with the city clerk four weeks prior to the desired plan commission meeting. Such certified survey map shall meet all of the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 236.34 and of this chapter, and may be utilized to create not more than four parcels or building sites. The plan commission may require a preliminary plat to be filed by a subdivider who is seeking approval of a certified survey map. When required, the preliminary plat must include the entire parcel of land owned or controlled by the subdivider. When a preliminary plat is not required, the certified survey map shall include the entire parcel owned by the subdivider/land divider. The subdivider/land divider shall comply with the requirements of sections 24-9 and 24-10 when a certified survey map is used unless a waiver to the requirements of section 24-9 has been granted pursuant to section 24-9(g). Upon approval by the common council a certification of the approval of the certified survey map by the common council shall be inscribed legibly on the face of the map. All outstanding special assessments shall be paid prior to approval unless determined otherwise by the common council. 
(2)  The applicant for a land division shall file ten copies and one electronic copy in a format acceptable to the planning department of a certified survey map and a written application for approval with the clerk. 
(3)  The clerk shall transmit copies of the map to the city engineer, the building inspector, and, when public sanitary sewers are not available, to the city or county health officer who shall review it for conformance with the provisions of this chapter, and any applicable master plans, ordinances, statutes, rules or regulations and submit their report and recommendations to the plan commission within 21 days from the date of transmission. 
(4)  The plan commission shall recommend approval of the map to the common council or shall reject the map. If approval is recommended, the map shall be referred to the common council for consideration. The common council shall then approve or reject the map. One copy of the map shall be returned to the subdivider with the date and action endorsed thereon; and if approved conditionally or rejected, the conditions of approval or reasons for rejection shall be endorsed thereon or attached thereto. Unless the time is extended by written agreement between the subdivider and the common council, failure to complete the action required herein within 90 days of the filing of the map shall constitute an approval of the map. 
(5)  The subdivider shall record the certified survey map with the register of deeds for the county after it has been approved, and shall file a certified copy of the recorded map with the clerk within ten days after the map is recorded. 
(6)  No building permits shall be issued and no improvements may be made until the approved certified survey map is recorded and agreement for subdivision improvements is signed and recorded. 
(7)  Where land outside the urban service area is subject to a land division, the common council, upon recommendation of the plan commission may waive the necessity of identifying land under the control of the subdivider that is on the opposite side of a road or railroad right-of-way from the area where the new lot is to be created, and provided that it is at least 35 acres not divided by a road or railroad right-of-way. The waiver shall be requested in writing, and made with the land division application. 
(f)  Comprehensive development plans. 
(1)  A comprehensive development plan shall be required upon any of the following: 
a.  The subdivider has a contiguous parcel of 35 acres or more of land under his/her control. The land may be in one or more parcels, including parcels only separated by roads, streets, highways or railroad rights-of-way, except where the road, street, highway, or railroad right-of-way has fragmented, at the edge of the parcel, creating an individual parcel that is less than eight acres in size. 
b.  When a rural cluster land development is proposed, a comprehensive development plan of the full rural land holdings shall be provided. 
c.  Where a land division or subdivision is 35 acres or less, but it is estimated that installation of public improvements will take more than four years. 
d.  The plan commission may require a comprehensive development plan for a project if it involves land less than 35 acres if the proposed land division, land development or subdivision is in a future urban growth area as identified in the comprehensive plan that has not been added to the urban service area. Projects proposed in a future urban growth area shall have preliminary review by the plan commission prior to submittal of any land division or preliminary plat to ascertain the commission intent. 
e.  A comprehensive development plan is not required for areas using SmartCode zoning under chapter 23. 
f.  A comprehensive development plan is not required for areas developed following the rural residential development criteria contained within the comprehensive plan, unless required by the plan commission. 
(2)  The subdivider shall file ten copies and one electronic copy in a format acceptable to the planning department of all exhibits hereinafter required together with a written application for approval with the clerk. 
(3)  The CDP and exhibits shall be reviewed by the plan commission staff. 
(4)  The plan commission shall recommend approval or conditional approval of the CDP to the common council or shall reject the CDP. If approval or conditional approval is recommended, the CDP shall be referred to the common council for consideration. The common council shall then approve, conditionally approve, or reject the CDP. One copy of the CDP shall be returned to the subdivider with the date and action endorsed thereon and if approved conditionally or rejected, the conditions of approval or reasons for rejection shall be endorsed thereon or attached thereto. Unless the time is extended by written agreement between the subdivider and the city, failure to complete the action required herein within 120 days of the filing of the CDP shall constitute an approval of CDP. 
(5)  The subdivider shall record the CDP, together with the exhibits, within three months after it has been approved by the common council and shall file a certified copy of the CDP with the clerk after it has been recorded. Unless recorded within the required time, the CDP approval shall be deemed withdrawn. 
(6)  No major change in a recorded CDP or its exhibits can be made without the approval of the common council. Any proposed change in the CDP or its exhibits shall be filed with the clerk. The plan commission shall determine whether the change is major and within 30 days of filing shall recommend approval or conditional approval of the change to the common council or shall reject the change. If approval or conditional approval is recommended, the proposed change shall be referred to the common council for consideration. The common council shall then approve, conditionally approve, or reject the proposed change within 15 days. Any approved major change to a CDP and its exhibits shall be recorded and the subdivider shall file a certified copy of the recorded instruments with the clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 15.03, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2018-O-36, § 1, 10-23-2018)  
Sec. 24-4. - Preliminary plat. 
(a)  Generally. A preliminary plat shall be required for all subdivisions and shall be based upon a survey by a land surveyor registered in this state. A preliminary plat shall be prepared on paper of good quality capable of clearly legible reproduction at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch and shall show correctly on its face the following information: 
(1)  Title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded. 
(2)  Location of proposed subdivision by government lot, quarter-quarter section, township, range, county, and state; and a location map showing the relationship between the plat and its surrounding area and existing streets. 
(3)  Date, scale and north point. 
(4)  A description of the material of which the corner marker is composed. 
(5)  Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider, surveyor, engineer, and the professional land planner involved in the plat preparation. 
(6)  Unless a comprehensive development plan has been previously approved and recorded therefor, the entire area contiguous to the proposed plat owned or controlled by the subdivider shall be included on the preliminary plat even though only a portion of said area is proposed for immediate development. When a CDP covering the area included in the proposed plat has previously been approved and recorded, the features and layout shown on the preliminary plat shall conform to the CDP and any derivative or discrepancy thereupon shall be approved by the plan commission and common council. 
(7)  The present zoning and any proposed zoning change for the plat and all lands adjacent thereto. 
(8)  Location and elevation of any land situated within a floodplain. 
(b)  Plat data. All preliminary plats shall show the following: 
(1)  Exact length and bearing of the exterior boundaries of the proposed subdivision referenced to a corner established in U.S. Public Land Survey and the total acreage encompassed thereby. 
(2)  Contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet where average slope is less than five percent or five feet where slope is five percent or greater. Elevations shall be marked on such contours based upon USGS North American Vertical Datum 1988 (NAVD88) where available and upon the best available datum in all other cases. 
(3)  Water elevations of adjoining lakes and streams at the date of the survey and approximate high and low water elevations, based upon or established by City of Madison datum where available and upon the best available data in all other cases. 
(4)  Location, right-of-way width and names of all existing streets, alleys or other public ways, easements, railroad and utility rights-of-way and all section and quarter section lines within the exterior boundaries of the plat or immediately adjacent thereto. 
(5)  Location and names of any adjacent subdivisions, parks and cemeteries, and owners of record of abutting unplatted lands. 
(6)  Type, width and elevation of any existing street pavements within the exterior boundaries of the plat or immediately adjacent thereto together with any legally established centerline elevations, based upon or established by the best available data. 
(7)  Location, size and invert elevation of any existing sanitary or storm sewers, culverts and drain pipes; the location of manholes, catchbasins, hydrants, power and telephone poles; and the location and size of any existing water and gas mains within the exterior boundaries of the plat or immediately adjacent thereto. If no sewers or water mains are located on or immediately adjacent to the tract, the nearest such sewers or water mains which might be extended to serve the tract shall be indicated by their direction and distance from the tract, size, and invert elevations. 
(8)  Locations of all existing property boundary lines, structures, wells, septic systems, drives, streams and watercourses, marshes, floodplains and flood storage areas, rock outcrops, wooded areas, railroad tracks and other similar significant features within the tract being subdivided or immediately adjacent thereto. 
(9)  Location, width, length, bearing and names of all proposed streets and public rights-of-way such as alleys and easements. 
(10)  Any proposed lake and stream improvement or relocation. 
(11)  Location and approximate dimensions of any sites to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds, drainageways, or other public use or which are to be used for group housing, shopping centers, church sites, or other nonpublic uses not requiring lotting. 
(12)  When a street is on a circular curve, the main chords of the right-of-way lines shall be drawn as dotted or dashed lines in their proper places. All curved lines shall show, either on the lines or in an adjoining table, the radius of the circle, the central angle subtended, the chord bearing, the chord length and the arc length for each segment. The tangent bearing shall be shown for each end of the main chord for all circular lines. When a circular curve of 30-foot radius or less is used to round off the intersection between two straight lines, it shall be tangent to both straight lines, and in such event, it is sufficient to show on the plat the radius of the curve and the tangent distances from the points of curvature to the point of intersection of the straight lines. 
(13)  Existing zoning on and adjacent to the proposed subdivision. 
(14)  Corporate limits lines. 
(15)  Any proposed lake and stream access with a small drawing clearly indicating the location of the proposed subdivision in relation to the access. 
(16)  Approximate dimensions of all lots and outlots together with proposed lot, outlot, and block numbers. 
(c)  Street plans and profiles. The subdivider shall provide street plans and profiles showing existing ground surface, proposed and established street grades, including extensions for a reasonable distance beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision when requested. All elevations shall be based upon USGS data, and plans and profiles shall meet the approval of the city engineer. 
(d)  Testing. 
(1)  Where sanitary sewers are not available the city engineer shall require that borings and soundings be made in specified areas to ascertain subsurface soil, rock and water conditions, including depth to bedrock and depth to groundwater table. 
(2)  Where sanitary sewers are unavailable, the soil and percolation tests required by Wis. Admin. Code § DHS 65.06 shall be performed and the results shall be submitted with the preliminary plat. After approval of the preliminary plat but prior to submitting an application for approval of the final plat, each individual lot shall be tested for percolation as specified in Wis. Admin. Code § DHS 62.20 and the results of such tests shall be submitted to the plan commission. 
(e)  Covenants. The plan commission may require submission of a draft of any protective covenants which the subdivider intends to record regulating land use in the proposed subdivision or otherwise protect the proposed development. 
(f)  Affidavit. The surveyor preparing the preliminary plat shall certify on the face of the plat that it is a correct representation of all existing land divisions and features and that he/she has fully complied with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 15.04, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 24-5. - Final plat. 
(a)  Generally. A final plat prepared by a land surveyor, registered in this state, shall be required for all subdivisions. It shall comply in all respects with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 236.20. 
(b)  Information required. The plat shall show correctly on its face, in addition to the information required by Wis. Stats. § 236.20 and section 24-4, the following: 
(1)  Exact length and bearing of the centerline of all streets. 
(2)  Exact street width along the line of any obliquely intersecting street. 
(3)  Railroad rights-of-way within and abutting the plat. 
(4)  Setbacks or building lines required by the city plan commission. 
(5)  All lands reserved for future public acquisition or reserved for the common use of property owners within the plat. 
(6)  Special restrictions required by the city plan commission relating to access control along public ways or to the provision of planting strips. 
(7)  The rural fire number assigned to each lot. 
(c)  Deed restrictions. The plan commission may require that deed restrictions be filed with the final plat. 
(d)  Survey accuracy. The accuracy of the final plat must be certified by the state department of development. 
(e)  Surveying and monumenting. All final plats shall meet all the surveying and monumenting requirements of Wis. Stats. § 236.15. 
(f)  Certificates. A final plat shall contain all the certificates required by Wis. Stats. § 236.21, and, in addition, the surveyor shall certify that he/she has fully complied with all the provisions of this chapter. 
(g)  Application for approval. The plat shall be accompanied by a written application for approval and, if they have not been previously submitted, by the plans, profiles and specifications required by sections 24-4(c) and 24-10(a) and by the results of the soil and percolation tests required by section 24-4(d). 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 15.05, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 24-6. - Certified survey map. 
(a)  Generally. A certified survey map prepared by a land surveyor registered in this state shall be required for all land divisions. It shall comply in all respects with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 236.34. 
(b)  Information required. The map shall show correctly on its face, in addition to the information required by Wis. Stats. § 236.34, the following: 
(1)  All existing buildings, septic systems, wells, watercourses, wetlands, floodplains and flood storage areas, wooded areas, rock outcrops, drainage ditches and other features pertinent to ensure proper division. 
(2)  Setbacks or building lines required by the city plan commission. 
(3)  All lands reserved for future acquisition. 
(4)  Date of the map. 
(5)  Graphic scale. 
(6)  Name and address of the owner, subdivider and surveyor. 
(c)  Certificates. 
(1)  The surveyor shall certify on the face of the map that he/she has fully complied with all the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  The following certificate of approval shall be typed, lettered or otherwise reproduced legibly on the face of the map: 
This certified survey, including any dedications shown thereon, has been duly filed with and approved by the common council of the city of Fitchburg, Dane County, Wisconsin. 
___________ City Clerk 	
 
(3)  Dedication. Dedication of streets and other public areas shall require the owner's and the mortgagee's, if any, certificate in substantially the same form as required by Wis. Stats. § 236.21(2)(a). 
(d)  Critical building locations. Any building or structure and its location on the lot shall be dimensioned to the nearest 0.1 foot where the location of such building or structure will be critical in relation to proposed property boundaries or to the zoning yard requirements. 
(e)  Dedications, testing, and improvements required. Any land division effectuated by a certified survey shall be subject to the provisions of section 24-2(d) concerning the reservation and dedication of land; and the provisions of sections 24-9, unless a waiver is granted to section 24-9 requirements pursuant to sections 24-9(g), and 24-10 concerning required improvements; and to the provisions of section 24-4(d) concerning borings, soundings, and percolation tests. In no case shall a new building site or new habitable building be allowed if sanitary service is required by a holding tank. 
(f)  Application for approval. The certified survey map shall be accompanied by a written application for approval. Where a change in zoning classification is being or will be requested in connection with the land division, a map showing the present zoning of the land and all lands adjacent thereto and the proposed zoning shall be submitted with the application for approval. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 15.06, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 24-7. - Comprehensive development plans. 
(a)  Requirements. Any comprehensive development plan shall include the following: 
(1)  A plan, drawn to a scale of one inch equals 200 feet which shows all lands under the control of the applicant which are contiguous or separated only by existing public roads or railroad rights-of-way. The plan shall show the information required by section 24-4(a) and (b) and all proposed collector and arterial streets, and approximate number and layout of lots. 
(2)  Identification of land uses consistent with the method used in the comprehensive plan future land use map. Provide the projected population broken down into single-family and multifamily units. In addition, provide residential density for each development area. For nonresidential areas provide intended floor area ratio, and building stories, or other measures of density as may be required. 
(3)  The multifamily dwelling units broken down into the number of units in each bedroom category on a percentage basis. 
(4)  Development schedule clearly indicating the time of completion for the proposed development and each phase thereof, if known. Discussion of how the development schedule will be in keeping with requirements of the comprehensive plan. 
(5)  A draft preliminary plat, meeting the requirements of this chapter for the portion proposed to be platted within 18 months from the date of submittal. 
(6)  Outlots proposed to be created for later replat to meet staging requirements of public improvements. 
(7)  Soil conditions, slope, current ground cover and environmental corridor areas. 
(8)  Proposed public lands, and any proposed public or private outlots, and their purpose. 
(9)  Sufficient information necessary to indicate compatibility with adjoining buildings and uses, drainage and transportation and utility connections. 
(10)  Any other information that may be required by the zoning administrator/city planner or plan commission to ascertain consistency with the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Design standards. The design standards set forth in section 24-8 shall apply to a comprehensive development plan. 
(c)  Dedications, testing, and improvements required. Comprehensive development plans shall be subject to the provisions of section 24-2(d) concerning the reservation and dedication of land; to the provisions of section 24-9 concerning required improvements; and to the provisions of section 24-4(d) concerning borings, soundings, and percolation tests. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 15.07, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 24-8. - Design standards. 
(a)  Street arrangement. Unless the area is subject to SmartCode zoning of chapter 23, street layouts shall conform to the arrangement, width and location indicated on any applicable official map, comprehensive plan or component neighborhood development plan. Streets, alleys or other roadways constructed in the SmartCode zoning district shall follow the regulations of chapter 23 and as allowed through plans approved under chapter 23. In areas for which such plans have not been completed, the street layout shall recognize the functional classification of the various types of streets and shall be developed and located in proper relation to existing and proposed streets, to the topography, to such natural features as streams and tree growth, to public convenience and safety, to the proposed use of the land to be served by such streets, and to the most advantageous development of adjoining areas. The land division or subdivision shall be designed so as to provide each lot with satisfactory access to a public street. 
(1)  Arterial streets shall be arranged so as to provide ready access to centers of employment, centers of governmental activity, community shopping areas, community recreation, and points beyond the boundaries of the community. They shall also be properly integrated with and related to the existing and proposed system of major streets and highways and shall be, insofar as practicable, continuous and in alignment with existing or planned streets with which they are to connect. 
(2)  Collector streets shall be arranged so as to provide ready collection of traffic from residential areas and conveyance of this traffic to the major street and highway system and shall be properly related to the mass transportation system, to special traffic generators such as schools, churches, shopping centers and other concentrations of population, and to the major streets into which they feed. 
(3)  Local streets shall be arranged to conform to the topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to permit the design of efficient storm and sanitary sewerage systems, and to require the minimum street area necessary to provide safe and convenient access to abutting property. 
(4)  Proposed streets shall extend to the boundary lines of the tract being subdivided unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions or unless, in the opinion of the plan commission, such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision or for the advantageous development of the adjacent tracts. Temporary turnarounds may be required where the street ends at the boundary of the subdivision. 
(5)  Whenever the proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to a major street or highway, adequate protection of residential properties, limitation of access and separation of through and local traffic shall be provided by reversed frontage, with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, or by the use of frontage streets. 
(6)  Stream or lake shores shall have 60 feet of public access platted to the low water mark at intervals of not more than one-half mile as required Wis. Stats. § 236.16(3). The city shall not be required to improve any lands provided for public access pursuant to this subsection. 
(7)  Reserve strips controlling access to streets or alleys are prohibited except where control of such strips is placed with the city under conditions approved by the plan commission. 
(8)  Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts for off-street loading and service access when required by the plan commission. When used, alleys shall not be less than 24 feet wide and shall be continuous through blocks. Dead-end alleys shall not be approved, and alleys shall not connect to a major thoroughfare. 
(9)  Cul-de-sacs shall be limited to generally no more than one cul-de-sac for every 50 lots in the land division. Cul-de-sacs location shall be related to natural environmental features or excessive topography. 
(b)  Street names and building numbers. 
(1)  Street names and building numbers shall be assigned in accordance with the numbering sequence in use by the city. 
(2)  Duplication of existing street names in the Madison Metropolitan area by similar word, spelling, or sound shall not be permitted. 
(3)  Where a street maintains the same general direction except for curvilinear changes for short distances, the same name shall continue for the entire length of the street. House numbering difficulties shall be considered the determining factor in considering whether a change of name is necessary due to curvilinear changes. 
(4)  A street name shall be changed when required to conform to the proposed or existing house numbering base. 
(5)  A name which is assigned to a street which is not presently a through street, due to intervening land over which the street extension is planned, shall be continued for the separate portions of the planned through street. 
(6)  The following designations shall be used only in the situations indicated: 
a.  Boulevard: A street with a divided pavement either existing or planned. If the divided pavement ends, but the street continues, the same street name and suffix shall continue. 
b.  Lane: A street, one block long, not ending in a cul-de-sac. 
c.  Circle: A cul-de-sac of nine lots or more. 
d.  Court: A cul-de-sac of eight lots or less. 
e.  Parkway: A street abutting a park or greenway or creek. 
f.  Way: A private street. 
(7)  The maximum number of street names at one intersection shall be three. 
(8)  Street names shall be assigned so that no two intersections have the same exact street names, except for loop streets approved as part of a land division. 
(9)  The name of any projection of a street shall remain unchanged even if the projection terminates in a cul-de-sac. 
(10)  The changing of a street name that does not duplicate an existing street name shall only be approved where such change will eliminate conflicts with other provisions of this section. 
(11)  Service roads and highways served by them shall have the same street name and designation. 
(12)  Approval of street names on a preliminary plat will not reserve the names nor shall the city be required to accept such names at the time of final platting. 
(13)  A minimum number of letters is desirable in a street name. The maximum number of letters, not including the prefix or suffix shall not exceed 12. 
(c)  Limited access highways and railroad rights-of-way. Unless the area is subject to SmartCode zoning of chapter 23, whenever the proposed subdivision, land division, or comprehensive development plan contains or is adjacent to a limited access highway or railroad right-of-way, the design shall provide the following treatment: 
(1)  In residential districts a buffer strip at least 30 feet in depth, in addition to the normal lot depth required, shall be provided adjacent to a railroad right-of-way or a limited access arterial street. The lot depth required, including such buffer strip, shall not be less than 150 feet. The strip shall be a part of the platted lots, but shall have the following restrictions lettered on the face of the plat: 
"This strip reserved for the planting of trees or shrubs by the owner; the building of structures hereon is prohibited, and the rear 30 feet of the strip shall not be counted as any required yard. Maintenance of this strip is a responsibility of the lot owner." 
(2)  Commercial and industrial districts shall have, on each side of the limited access highway or railroad, streets approximately parallel to and at a suitable distance from such highway or railroad for the appropriate use of the land between such streets and highway or railroad, but not less than 150 feet. 
(3)  Streets parallel to a limited access highway or railroad right-of-way shall, when intersecting a major street and highway or collector street which crosses said railroad or highway, be located at a minimum distance of 250 feet from said highway or railroad right-of-way. Such distance, where desirable and practicable, shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for the future separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients. 
(4)  The location of local streets immediately adjacent and parallel to railroad rights-of-way, and in residential areas immediately adjacent to arterial streets and highways and to railroad rights-of-way shall be avoided. 
(d)  Street design standards. 
(1)  Minimum right-of-way. The minimum right-of-way of all proposed streets and alleys shall be of the width specified by either the comprehensive plan or official map or if not so specified shall follow the provisions noted below. Land subject to SmartCode zoning under chapter 23 shall have right-of-way widths in accordance with that chapter. 
Type of Street 	R.O.W. Width 
Principal and primary arterials 	120 feet 
Standard arterial and collector streets 	80 feet 
Local streets 	66 feet 
Marginal access streets 	66 feet 
Alleys 	24 feet 
 
(2)  Cul-de-sac streets. 
a.  Streets designed to have one end permanently closed shall not exceed 600 feet in length, and which end shall be clearly visible from the intersection street. However, where feasible, a 20-foot-wide outlot with a shared use path shall be put in place to connect the cul-de-sac bulb to a through street or other public area in a manner approved by the plan commission. 
b.  Except as provided in section 24-8(d)(2)c, streets which are designed to have one end permanently closed shall terminate in a circular turnaround having a minimum right-of-way diameter of 120 feet, and a minimum outside curb diameter of 86 feet. The reverse curve on a cul-de-sac shall have a 50-foot minimum radius when the bulb is centered on the street. No offset bulb is allowed. 
c.  All streets which are designed to have one end permanently closed, in business, commercial, industrial and manufacturing areas, shall terminate in a circular turnaround having a minimum right-of-way diameter of 130 feet, and a minimum outside curb diameter of 96 feet. The reverse curve on a cul-de-sac shall have a 50-foot minimum radius when the bulb is centered on the street and a 100-foot minimum radius when the bulb is offset. 
(3)  Street grades. 
a.  Unless necessitated by exceptional topography and subject to the approval of the city engineer, the maximum street grades shall not exceed the following: 
1.  Arterial streets and highways: four percent. 
2.  Collector and local streets and alleys: eight percent. 
3.  Pedestrian ways: ten percent unless steps of acceptable design are provided. 
b.  The grade of any street shall in no case exceed ten percent or be less than 0.48 percent. 
c.  All changes in street grades shall provide sight distances as conditions require as determined by the city engineer. 
d.  Street grades shall be established wherever practicable in such a manner to avoid excessive grading, the promiscuous removal of ground cover and tree growth and general leveling of the topography. 
(4)  Radii of curvature. 
a.  When a continuous street centerline deflects at any one point by more than ten degrees, a circular curve shall be introduced having a radius of curvature on said centerline of not less than the following: 
1.  Arterial streets and highways: 450 feet. 
2.  Collector streets: 250 feet. 
3.  Local streets: 70 feet. 
b.  A tangent at least 150 feet in length shall be provided between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets, and 100 feet in length between reverse curves on local streets. 
c.  Subsections (d)(4)a and (d)(4)b of this section shall not apply to land subject to SmartCode zoning under chapter 23, except where required by the city engineer/director of public works to address SmartCode street connections with existing or non-SmartCode streets. 
(5)  Half streets. Where an existing dedicated or platted half street is adjacent to the tract being subdivided, the other half of the street shall be dedicated by the subdivider. Streets less than full width on the boundary of the tract being subdivided shall not be less than a width sufficient to produce a full pavement, a full terrace on the plat side and a reserve strip as determined by the plan commission. 
(e)  Street intersections. 
(1)  Streets shall intersect each other at as nearly right angles as topography and other limiting factors of good design permit. 
(2)  The number of streets converging at one intersection shall not be more than two. 
(3)  The number of intersections along principal, primary and standard arterials and collector streets shall be held to a minimum. Wherever practicable the distance between such intersections shall not be less than 1,200 feet. 
(4)  Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a minimum radius of 15 feet except that at all intersections along collector and arterial streets the radius shall be increased to 25 feet. The plan commission may require a larger radius where desirable. 
(5)  Local streets shall not necessarily continue across arterial or collector streets; but if the centerlines of such minor streets approach the major streets from opposite sides within 300 feet of each other, measured along the centerline of the arterial or collector street, then the location shall be so adjusted that the adjoinment across the major or collector street is continuous; and a jog is avoided. 
(6)  Whenever practicable, the distance between local street intersections shall be no less than 250 feet measured from centerline to centerline. 
(7)  The point of curve of the centerline of a curved street which intersects another street shall not be less than 15 feet, on the property side of the property line of the intersected street. 
(8)  Requirements of this subsection (e) shall not apply to land subject to SmartCode zoning under chapter 23. 
(f)  Blocks. 
(1)  The widths, lengths, and shapes of blocks shall be suited to the planned use of the land; zoning requirements; walkability; need for convenient access, control and safety of street traffic; and the limitations and opportunities of topography. 
(2)  Blocks in nonindustrial areas shall not be less than 500 feet nor more than 1,000 feet in length unless otherwise dictated by exceptional topography or other limiting design factors. 
(3)  Pedestrian ways of not less than ten feet in width may be required near the center and entirely across any block over 800 feet in length where deemed essential by the plan commission to provide adequate pedestrian circulation or access to schools, retail locations, churches, transportation facilities, parks and playgrounds, or other residential areas. 
(4)  Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of appropriate depth except where otherwise required to separate residential development from through traffic. Width of lots or parcels reserved or laid out for commercial or industrial use shall be adequate to provide for off-street service and parking required by the use contemplated and the area zoning restrictions for such use. 
(5)  All utility lines for electric power and telephone service shall be placed on mid-block easements along rear lot lines whenever carried on overhead poles. 
(6)  Blocks shall be arranged, to the extent feasible, so that streets form a grid-like pattern. 
(7)  Requirements of this subsection (f) shall not apply to land subject to SmartCode zoning under chapter 23. 
(g)  Lots. 
(1)  The size, shape, and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. The lots should be designed to provide an aesthetically pleasing building site and a proper architectural setting for the buildings contemplated. Except as may be provided by chapter 23, flag lots shall be prohibited, unless the common council approves a waiver, to be included as part of the approving resolution for such a lot, with a vote as required in this subsection (g). 
(2)  Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be prohibited except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from through traffic or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
(3)  Lot sizes shall conform to the area and width requirements prescribed for the zoning district in which the land is located except for lots situated in commercial or industrial districts, or for lots zoned Planned Development District, the dimensions and area of which shall be those deemed by the plan commission, in its sole discretion, to be appropriate for the proposed use of the land. Where land is subject to SmartCode zoning, lots shall conform to that approved through chapter 23. 
(4)  Residential lots to be served by private sewage disposal facilities shall comply with the requirements of the state department of health and social services and the state board of health. 
(5)  Every lot shall front or abut on a public street for a distance of at least 50 feet, except for the following: 
a.  Zero lot line projects created under chapter 22 in which case the zero lot line parcels shall front or abut on a public street for a distance of at least 30 feet. 
b.  Land zoned SmartCode under chapter 23, which shall follow the regulations provided by chapter 23. 
c.  Projects zoned Planned Development District on sites of 30 acres or more, which are subject to construction demolition and debris landfill; subject to ingress/egress maintenance agreements. 
d.  Projects zoned Planned Development District may allow lots that font or abut a public street for a distance of less than 50 feet. 
(6)  Side lot lines shall, as nearly as practicable, be at right angles to straight streets or radial to curved street lines. 
(7)  Lots shall follow municipal boundary lines rather than cross them whenever practicable. 
(8)  Corner lots shall have sufficient width to permit adequate building setbacks from side streets. 
(9)  Excessive depth in relation to width shall be avoided and a proportion of 2 to 1 shall be considered as a desirable ratio under normal conditions. This provision shall not apply to areas zoned SmartCode under chapter 23. 
(10)  Lot drainage patterns shall be indicated on the plat and shall take into account flow conditions from off-site as well as outflow on to downstream properties. Any drainage system shall be constructed and designed to handle the volume and velocity of the off-site stormwater. Downstream drainage easements shall be provided as required to properly handle the flow. 
(11)  Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial or industrial use shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated. 
(12)  Whenever a tract is subdivided into large parcels, such parcels shall be arranged and dimensioned as to allow the future division of any such parcel into normal lots in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(13)  Lands lying between the meander line and the water's edge and any otherwise unplattable lands which lie between a proposed subdivision and the water's edge shall be included as part of lots, outlots or public dedications in any plat abutting a lake or stream. 
(h)  Building setback lines. Where not adequately controlled by zoning regulations, building setback lines appropriate to the location and type of development contemplated shall be established as required by the plan commission. 
(i)  Utility and drainage easements. 
(1)  Adequate easements shall be provided and dedicated on each side of all rear lot lines, and on side lot lines where necessary, for the installation of storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water mains, electric lines, telephone and cable television communication lines. 
(2)  Easements for electric, telephone, gas, and cable television communication lines shall be noted as "Utility Easements" on the final plat or certified survey map. Prior to approval of the final plat or certified survey map, the concurrence of the electric and communications companies serving the area as to the location and width of the utility easements shall be noted on the final plat or certified survey map. 
(3)  All easements for storm and sanitary sewers, water mains, and pedestrian walks, and other public purposes shall be noted on the plat or certified survey as "Public Easement for" followed by reference to the use or uses for which they are intended. 
(4)  Where the electric or communications facilities or both are to be installed underground, a plat restriction shall be recorded with the final plat or certified survey map stating that the final grade established by the subdivider on the utility easements shall not be altered by more than six inches by the subdivider, his/her agent, or by subsequent owners of the lots on which such utility easements are located, except with written consent of the utility or utilities involved. The purpose of this restriction shall be to notify initial and future lot owners of the underground facilities at the time of purchase and to establish responsibility in the event of damage to such facilities or to the need to alter such facilities. When the utility company uses a service application, said application should also notify the initial and subsequent lot owners of their responsibility regarding such underground facilities. 
(5)  Drainage easement. Where a land division, subdivision or comprehensive development plan is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway. channel or stream, an adequate drainageway or easement shall be provided as required by the plan commission. The location, width, alignment and improvement of such drainageway or easement shall be subject to the approval of the plan commission and parallel streets or parkways may be required in connection therewith. Wherever possible, the stormwater drainage shall be maintained by landscaped open channels of adequate size and grade to hydraulically accommodate maximum potential volumes of flow, these sizes and design details to be subject to review and approval by the city engineer and plan commission. Where feasible, drainage easements should substantially maintain existing water flow patterns onto neighboring lands. If outflow is different than existing patterns the developer/subdivider shall provide all necessary easements and facilities to transport the water. 
(j)  Electromagnetic radiation fields. Consideration shall be given to the layout of the land division such that no residential structure or place of employment shall be located within 50 yards of a 69,000-volt or greater transmission line. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 15.08, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2013-O-09, § 1, 6-25-2013; Ord. No. 2018-O-06, § 1, 2-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-O-26 , §§ 1—3, 8-27-2019)  
Sec. 24-9. - Required improvements. 
(a)  Streets. Standard street improvements, including connector and feeder streets and intersections where necessary to safely and efficiently carry the additional traffic anticipated from full development of the subdivision shall be constructed, upgraded or rebuilt for all subdivisions and, where required, in any land division. 
(b)  Sanitary sewers and water mains. 
(1)  Within urban service area. Where the development is within an urban service area and public utilities are available, sanitary sewers and water mains and all required appurtenances, including, when required by the board of public works, interceptors, force mains, lift stations, booster pumps, wells, and water main loops, shall be installed in all subdivisions and, where required, in any land division, in accordance with the plans approved and permit issued by the board of public works. Where the development is within the urban service area and public utilities are not available, sanitary sewers, water mains and all appurtenances necessary to extend and provide effective, efficient, safe and portable public water and sewer service to the development, as determined by the city engineer and approved by board of public works, shall be installed at the cost of the subdivider or developer. Costs of extensions of water and sewer services through undeveloped lands shall be recorded as special assessments against the benefitted properties and collected from developers or customers upon attachment to the system within 20 years of completion of construction of the improvements. 
(2)  Outside urban service area. Except for Rural Cluster zoning, no subdivision or multifamily development shall be approved for lands outside of an urban service area. 
(c)  Water supply system. 
(1)  Where a municipal water supply is not available, a closed loop water supply and distribution system capable of serving the entire subdivision designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 111, which regulations and any subsequent amendments thereto are incorporated herein and adopted by reference, shall be installed in all subdivisions notwithstanding the fact that the number of service connections may be less than 15. 
(2)  Prior to commencing construction of a water supply system, the subdivider shall obtain a permit from the board of public works and submit the proposed plans, specifications, construction schedule, and contract to the city engineer for review and approval. 
(d)  Storm sewers and stormwater drainage facilities. 
(1)  Storm sewers and all necessary stormwater transportation, detention or retention facilities to serve the plat as determined by the city engineer, shall be constructed or caused to be constructed, within or without the plat, by the subdivider/developer. 
(2)  Ditches shall be constructed where required by the plan commission. 
a.  Roadside ditches shall not exceed ten percent of grade nor have less than a one percent grade. The maximum single ditch capacity for a five-year intensity storm shall be not more than the values tabulated as follows: 
Ditch Grade (%) 	Q (c.f.s) 
1 	2.34 
2 	3.78 
3 	4.14 
4 	4.86 
5 	5.22 
6 	5.76 
7 	6.30 
8 	6.84 
9 	7.20 
10 	7.74 
 
b.  Ditches shall be restored with six-inch topsoil, fertilizing, and anchored sodding in accordance with the current standard specifications for road and bridge construction, state department of transportation. All sod shall be free of sedges, quackgrass and bentgrass. 
c.  Where ditches are utilized, concrete curb and gutter shall not be required and streets shall be constructed as indicated in figure 3. The thickness of the pavement shall be determined and prescribed by the city Engineer in accordance with the functional classification of the proposed street and soil subgrade data available. Any soil subgrade data required by the city engineer shall be obtained by the developer's soils engineer and furnished to the city engineer without cost. 
(3)  At the time of submittal to the plan commission of the comprehensive development plan, preliminary plat or plans for any condominium, group housing project or other development, the developer/subdivider shall submit a study of the drainage basin or sub-basin in which the plat or project is located showing the proposed design and routing of storm sewer and stormwater management facilities, such as detention ponds, retention ponds, greenways and/or other green infrastructure facilities necessary to provide adequate drainage, infiltration, evapotranspiration, or collection of stormwater to and from the plat or development if such a study has not already been previously prepared by the city engineer. If such study or any previous study or studies as approved by the city engineer determine that it is necessary to increase the capacity of stormwater facilities which are to be constructed within the plat or project to enable them to serve the entire basin or sub-basin of which the plat or development is a part, the developer or subdivider shall construct such facilities in accordance with a plan and specifications approved by the city engineer. The city engineer shall determine the incremental portion of the estimated cost of constructing the required storm sewers and stormwater management facilities which is attributable to future development in the basis or sub-basin on lands not owned or controlled by the subdivider/developer. The developer or subdivider shall be entitled to recover any portion of the costs of stormwater facilities attributable to future development as future developments occur from area changes levied by the city against developers and subdividers. Area changes shall be subject to adjustment based upon the Engineering News-Record construction price index using the year that the area charges for the drainage basin or sub-basin were established as the base year. A copy of the construction price index shall be kept on file at the office of the city engineer and made available to the public for inspection and copying upon request. 
(4)  The developer/subdivider shall pay any outstanding area charges levied pursuant to subsection (d)(3) or (5) of this section before the final plat is inscribed by the city clerk or before any building permit is issued. 
(5)  Where a study completed under subsection (d)(3) of this section determines that it is not necessary to increase the capacity of the facilities to be constructed in the plat or project to enable them to serve the entire basin or subbasin but that the stormwater generated from the plat or project will necessitate future stormwater improvements to lands outside of the plat or project, the city engineer shall determine what portion of the estimated cost of constructing the required storm sewers and stormwater drainage facilities outside the plat or project is attributable to the plat or project and the developer shall pay a stormwater charge in such amount prior to inscribing of the final plat by the city clerk. 
(e)  Improvements to boundary lines. All required street, sidewalk, sanitary sewer, water main, and storm sewer improvements shall be installed to the boundary line of the subdivision or land division unless the topography or other physical conditions make it impossible to do so. 
(f)  Partition fences. When the land included in the plat or certified survey map abuts upon or is adjacent to land used for farming or grazing purposes, the subdivider may be required to erect, keep and maintain partition fences, satisfying the requirements of the state law for a legal and sufficient fence, between such land and the adjacent land. When partition fences are required, a covenant binding the subdivider, its grantees, heirs, successors, and assigns to erect and maintain such fences, without cost to the adjoining property owners, so long as the land is used for farming or grazing purposes shall be included upon the face of the final plat or certified survey map. 
(g)  Waiver to section requirements. 
(1)  Where, in the judgment of the common council, it would be inappropriate to apply the provisions of this section to a land division outside the urban service area because exceptional or undue hardship would result, the common council on recommendation of the plan commission may, subject to the following provisions, waive or modify the requirements of this section to the extent deemed just and proper. 
(2)  Such relief will be granted only where it will not be detrimental to the public good, impair the intent and purpose of this chapter, or impair the desirable general development of the community in accordance with the comprehensive plan. An affirmative vote of six members of the common council shall be required to grant any waiver or modification. 
(3)  Any waiver which is granted pursuant to this section shall be made in writing, shall state the reasons which justified it, and shall be filed with the records relating to the land division. 
(4)  The waiver allowed by this subsection may not be granted to subdivisions. 
(h)  Sidewalks. 
(1)  Sidewalks shall be installed to city specifications on all streets within the land division, except for: 
a.  Cul-de-sacs where such cul-de-sac has no dedicated land or easement for a recreation path or walkway. 
b.  Certified survey maps where the upgrading or installation of the streets within such certified survey map are not required to meet full city standards (e.g., curb and gutter) by the common council at the time of approval, or where there is no existing sidewalk system. 
(2)  For cul-de-sacs and for certified survey maps located in the urban service area, all driveways, unless exempted by the common council, shall contain a sidewalk cross-section and have all terraces graded to city specifications. 
(3)  For all lots not required by subsection (h)(1)a and (1)b of this section to have sidewalk, the land divider shall file with the city clerk, prior to recording of the plat or certified survey map, signed waivers of notice, hearing and right to contest future assessments for sidewalks under Wis. Stats. § 66.60 or 66.615 and this Code for such affected lots. Such waivers shall be recorded at the expense of the land divider. 
(4)  As used in subsection (i) of this section, street frontage shall include any and all improvements placed in the public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, the street, curb and gutter and sidewalk improvements. 
(5)  Areas zoned to the SmartCode District under chapter 23 shall not be subject to this section, but instead shall provide sidewalks in accordance with the SmartCode District, chapter 23. 
(i)  Street frontage for dedicated parkland. 
(1)  Street frontage for dedicated parklands shall be provided and paid for by the developer or subdivider in the amount of 150 lineal feet of frontage or in accord with the following, whichever is greater. 
a.  For development projects or land divisions of less than 80 dwelling units, the developer or subdivider shall provide frontage in accord with the following table: 
Single-family residential 	6.0 lineal feet per dwelling unit 
Two-family residential 	3.0 lineal feet per dwelling unit 
Multifamily 	0.75 lineal feet per dwelling unit 
 
b.  For development projects or land divisions of 80 or more dwelling units, lineal street frontage shall be provided in accord with the following: 
Single-family 	Square root of the square footage required to be dedicated 
Two-family 	Square root of the square footage required to be dedicated with this factor multiplied by 0.50 
Multifamily 	Square root of the square footage required to be dedicated with this factor then multiplied by 0.13 
 
(2)  The council, upon receiving a recommendation from the parks commission and plan commission, shall have the authority to allow alternative dimensions for frontages and the park if it can be found that the objectives of access and visibility can be fulfilled. 
(3)  In calculating the required frontage for multifamily residential projects the maximum number of two bedroom units allowed under the zoning ordinance shall be used unless a different number is committed to by agreement with the city or by city approved deed restriction. 
(4)  Areas zoned to the SmartCode District, and which meet the minimum acreage for the specific community unit type in chapter 23 shall not be subject to this section, but instead shall provide and install street frontage as required for all civic or open space lands through the approved regulating plan. For situations where the community unit type is less than the required minimum size in chapter 23, the above regulations of this subsection (i) shall apply. 
(j)  Street trees. 
(1)  The subdivider/developer of any land division requiring public street improvements shall, prior to installation of any public improvements, prepare a street tree planting plan to be approved by the city engineer. The tree planting plan shall, at a minimum, provide one street tree for every lot, or for every 80 feet of street frontage (whichever produces the greater number of trees), with the trees being a minimum of two-inch caliper. 
(2)  The subdivider/developer shall notice the existence of the planting plan to lot owners by deed restriction and through other measures the developer may deem appropriate. 
(3)  Upon substantial installation and completion of homes and yards within any phase of the improvements for the plat or certified survey map (CSM), the developer in consultation with the city engineer shall cause the installation of the street trees. The final tree location and species, which shall be approved by the city engineer, shall recognize existing trees, driveways, utility facilities, streetlights, signs and other similar features. The trees shall be guaranteed by the developer for at least one year from the date of planting. If less than 50 percent of the original canopy survives, the city engineer may recommend replacement. 
(4)  Upon acceptance of the last phase of subdivision improvements (or where no phasing, the acceptance of the improvements), the developer shall post a letter of credit, or other acceptable measures of security equal to the estimated cost of the remaining street trees to be installed as a guarantee to the city that the developer will undertake such improvements. 
(5)  Where the upgrading or installation of a street under a CSM or plat is not required to meet full city standards by the common council at the time of approval, the street trees need not be installed. However, the developer/subdivider shall, prior to signing the CSM or plat, provide signed waivers of notice, hearing, and right to contest future assessments for street trees under Wis. Stats. § 66.60 or 66.615 and this Code for all such affected lots. Such waivers shall be recorded. 
(6)  In regard to section 24-16, it is the intent to require street trees along public or private streets at a minimum level or number noted in subsection (j)(1) of this section. However, such trees may be located in a more varied and nonlinear manner that would complement the proposed development. The planting locations and species are to be determined at the time of city approvals for the specific implementation plan (under PDD zoning) or the conditional use. Agreements or conditions shall provide for proper installation of the street trees. 
(7)  Subdivider/developer shall reimburse the city for all costs incurred by the city to institute these street tree requirements, including any consulting costs incurred in review of the tree plan. 
(8)  Areas zoned to the SmartCode District shall not be subject to this section, but instead shall provide street trees as required by the SmartCode District, chapter 23. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 15.09, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2012-O-18, § 3, 12-11-2012; Ord. No. 2014-O-06, § 1, 3-25-2014; Ord. No. 2018-O-38, § 1, 11-27-2018)  
Sec. 24-10. - Required improvements procedure. 
(a)  Plans and construction specifications. Prior to commencing construction of any required improvement, the subdivider shall prepare construction plans and specifications and submit them to the city engineer for review and approval. The city engineer may require the submission of the following plans and accompanying construction specifications before authorizing construction or installation of the improvements: 
(1)  Street plans and profiles showing existing and proposed grades, elevations and cross sections of required improvements. 
(2)  Sanitary sewer plans and profiles showing the locations, grades, sizes, elevations and materials of required facilities. 
(3)  Storm sewer plans and profiles showing the locations, grades, sizes, cross sections, elevations and materials of required facilities. 
(4)  Plans and specifications for any required water supply system. 
(5)  Water main plans and profiles showing the locations, sizes, elevations and materials of required facilities. 
(6)  Plans and specifications for all utilities and underground facilities. 
(7)  Planting plans showing the locations, age and species of any required street trees. 
(8)  Such additional special plans or information as may be required by the city engineer. 
(b)  Private contracts. The developer shall engage one general contractor whose qualifications have been approved by the city engineer for each major phase of construction (grading, utilities, streets) or one general contractor for a contract which includes more than one phase of construction. No private contract shall be awarded until all bids have been reviewed by the city engineer. 
(c)  Scheduling. The construction schedule for all required improvements shall be approved by the city engineer. Construction cannot be commenced on any phase of construction until all approvals and conditional requirements are satisfied and a copy of the private contract has been filed with and approved by the council. In addition, a preconstruction meeting shall be held prior to commencement of any work. 
(d)  Street grading. 
(1)  The developer shall furnish standard drawings which indicate the existing and proposed grades of streets shown on the plat, and after review of design engineering work on the streets and approval of street grades by the city engineer, the subdivider shall grade or cause to be graded the full width of the right-of-way of the streets proposed to be dedicated, including the vision clearance triangle on corner lots. In those cases where existing street right-of-way is made a part of the subdivider's plat or abuts the plat, he/she shall grade or cause to be graded that portion of the right-of-way between the existing pavement and the property line. The bed for the roadways in the street right-of-way shall be graded to subgrade elevation. The city engineer shall approve all grading within rights-of-way and said grading shall extend for a sufficient distance beyond the right-of-way to ensure that the established grade will be preserved. The grading of rights-of-way for principal and primary arterials shall only be required where necessary to provide access to the streets or lots in the plat. Lots which abut principal and primary arterials shall be graded to proposed street grade or to a grade approved by the city engineer prior to the sale of affected properties. 
(2)  The developer shall engage a registered engineer to set sub-base grade in accordance with approved centerline grade and cross section; and to set grades necessary to comply with other grading requirements, including vision clearance on corner lots, centerline and lot line grades for greenways, terrace grading for abutting streets and other required grades. The grading program shall consist of the following elements: 
a.  The stripping and removal of all topsoil, debris and vegetation within the road bed. 
b.  Grading of full street rights-of-way to a tolerance of zero to 0.5 feet below proposed centerline grade. Fill sections shall be constructed of approved materials, which do not include topsoil, debris, or vegetation. 
c.  Grading beyond right-of-way to ensure that the established grade will be preserved. Slopes shall be 1:1 for cut sections and 2:1 or less for fill sections. 
d.  Grading of vision clearance triangle on corner lots (maximum embankment of three feet above curb elevation within a triangle formed by two intersection street lines or their projections and a line joining points on such street lines located 25 feet from the street intersection). 
e.  Where a public greenway is included in the land division or subdivision, the subdivider shall provide for an acceptable continuous drainageway in the greenway as determined by the city engineer. 
f.  All additional plat grading, where applicable, lot abutting greenways, terraces of streets abutting plat, public easements for sanitary sewer and sidewalk, and other requirements of ordinances and special conditions of plat approval. 
g.  Compliance with chapter 30, article II, erosion control and stormwater management. 
(e)  Utilities and underground facilities. 
(1)  Upon approval of the subgrading and erection of barricades, the developer shall install the water mains, storm and sanitary sewers, and other utilities. Prior to commencing construction of any required utilities, the subdivider shall submit the construction schedule, plans, and specifications therefor, to the city engineer for review and approval and shall furnish proof that such arrangements as may be required under applicable rates and rules filed with the state public service commission have been made with the owner or owners of the utility lines or services for placing their respective facilities underground. 
(2)  All new electric distribution lines (excluding lines of 12,000 volts or more), all new telephone lines from which lots are individually served, all new telegraph lines, television cables and services, installed within a newly platted area shall be underground unless the plan commission shall specifically find after study that: 
a.  Location, topography, soil, water table, solid rock, boulders, stands of trees, hedges or other physical conditions would make underground installation unreasonable or impracticable; or 
b.  The lots to be served by said facilities can be served directly from existing overhead facilities. 
(3)  Associated equipment and facilities which are appurtenant to underground electric and communications systems, such as but not limited to, substations, pad-mounted transformers, pad-mounted sectionalizing switches and above-grade pedestal-mounted terminal boxes may be located above ground. 
(4)  Temporary overhead facilities may be installed to serve a construction site or where necessary because of severe weather conditions. In the latter case, within a reasonable time after weather conditions have moderated or upon completion of installation of permanent underground facilities, such temporary facilities shall be replaced by underground facilities and the temporary facilities removed unless an exception is granted by the plan commission. 
(5)  Where the electric and communications facilities are to be installed underground, the utility easements shall be graded to within six inches of final grade by the subdivider, prior to the installation of such facilities, and earth fill, piles or mounds of dirt shall not be stored on such easement areas. Utility facilities when installed on utility easements whether overhead or underground shall not disturb any monumentation in the plat. 
(6)  Mechanical compaction of all underground utility ditches or trenches situated within the street right-of-way is required. 
(7)  Ornamental streetlights as prescribed by the city engineer shall be installed at locations identified in the subdivision contract. SmartCode zoned areas shall provide streetlights as allowed and approved under chapter 23. 
(f)  Greenways. Where greenways are included within the land division or subdivision: 
(1)  The subdivider shall be responsible for an acceptable continuous drainageway through the proposed plat as determined by the city engineer. The subdivider shall furnish the city engineer with a plan outlining the greenway boundaries and location of existing drainageways, if any. In addition, the subdivider shall furnish to the city engineer a set of cross sections (on 50-foot stations) of the greenway oriented upon a base line as prescribed by the city engineer. Where a natural drainageway exists which has acceptable hydraulic capacities including alignment and grade as determined by the city engineer, construction will not be required and the existing natural growth shall be preserved. Where such natural growth is not preserved by action of the subdivider or subdivider's agent, he or she shall be responsible for repairing the disturbed areas by sodding. However, in certain locations, as determined by the city engineer, where the hydraulic capacities including alignment and grade are not acceptable, such alignment, grade and slopes shall be improved by the subdivider to the interim minimum requirements of a ten-foot wide ditch bottom with four to one side slopes, all to be sodded. 
(2)  The subdivider shall install permanent pipes or culverts at a grade designated by the city engineer under all streets crossing a greenway or drainageway. Said installation shall be in accordance with the standard specifications for road and bridge construction of the state department of transportation. All costs of the installation shall be the responsibility of the subdivider. The permanent pipe or culvert shall not be installed previous to the installation of the sanitary sewer on a street crossing a greenway unless done pursuant to written agreement between the city and the subdivider. Culverts required across intersections for temporary street drainage, shall be furnished and installed by the developer at his or her expense. All temporary culverts installed by the developer shall be completely removed when the streets are constructed to standards and the area restored to as near to original condition as possible as determined by the city engineer. 
(3)  All ditching and culvert installation shall be done in strict accordance with grades approved by the city engineer. The subdivider's engineer shall be responsible for setting the required grades in the field for construction purposes. 
(4)  In order to ensure proper drainage, the ground elevation along any lot line common with the boundary of a greenway shall not be less than four feet above the flowline of the greenway, or where designated to an elevation established by the city engineer, prior to the sale of affected properties. The flowline grade shall be established by the city engineer. All lot grading and building elevations shall provide for positive drainage. Grading or filling within the greenway limit is prohibited except as authorized by the city engineer. 
(g)  Street construction. 
(1)  Generally. After completion of the underground utilities and approval thereof, the streets shall be constructed. 
(2)  Standard street improvements. 
a.  Standard street improvements shall include concrete curb and gutter, bituminous base course and bituminous surface course; and when required by the plan commission ornamental streetlights, pedestrian walkways, and curb ramping as required by Wis. Stats. § 66.616 for all streets in the plat and all connector and feeder streets and intersections serving the plat. 
b.  The construction of standard street improvements can begin only when the construction of underground utilities, including mechanical compaction and compaction tests, has been approved by the city engineer. 
c.  The developer/subdivider's engineer shall determine and prescribe the thickness of the pavement in accordance with the functional classification of the proposed street and soil subgrade data subject to the approval of the city engineer. In no case shall the thickness of asphalt be less than four inches on 12 inches of stone. The first 2¼ inches of asphalt shall be applied in the initial construction phase, with the final 1¾ inches applied approximately one year after the completion of the initial 2¼-inch paving. 
d.  Upon written approval by the city engineer, the developer may proceed with the construction of the standard street improvements. Standard street improvements shall be installed to the boundary line of the subdivision unless the street culminates in a cul-de-sac, the topography or other physical conditions make it impossible to do so. Streets, roadways, and alleys constructed in areas zoned SmartCode, under chapter 23 shall follow the prescribed street type in the approved regulating plan. 
1.  Streets shall be constructed in accordance with the city standard specifications for public works construction, latest edition on file with the city engineer's office. Local streets shall be constructed to a width of 32 feet between face of curb and face of curb. However, a greater width may be required by the city engineer where necessary to ensure uniformity to an existing street due to or based on anticipated traffic or land use (e.g., 36-foot-wide streets for duplex or multifamily lots). A lesser road width may be approved but only where necessary to ensure uniformity of street width connection to an existing street. 
2.  The roadway width for collector and arterial streets shall be as prescribed by the city engineer based upon anticipated land use, traffic volume, and any applicable federal, state or county requirements. 
e.  Driveways. 
1.  Driveway regulations as identified in chapter 27, article IV, driveways and street access, shall be complied with. 
2.  Where street improvements do not include curbs and gutters driveways shall have a culvert at the ditch line, the diameter of which shall be as specified by the city engineer. 
3.  No accessway to a street or highway shall be established or constructed until all required driveway and access permits have been obtained by the subdivider. 
f.  Walkways. 
1.  Surfaces. The surface of walkways shall possess stability and firmness, be relatively smooth in texture, and have a nonslip surface. 
2.  Drainage structures. Drainage structures should be placed flush with the surface on which they occur, and grates having narrow parallel bars or patterns with openings larger than three-quarter inch should not be used. Drainage structures should not be located between a curb ramp and the corner of a street or immediately downgrade from a curb ramp. 
3.  Lighting. Lighting along walkways shall vary from one-half to five footcandles, depending on the intensity of pedestrian use, hazards present, and relative need for personal safety. 
4.  Ramps. Steps and stepped ramps shall be avoided if possible in order to facilitate servicing with wheeled vehicles. To facilitate movement over low barriers, a ramp should be installed. Surfaces should be nonslip but not corrugated. 
5.  Wheel stops. Wheel stops shall be installed where wheeled vehicles may roll into a hazardous area. They should be two inches to three inches high, six feet wide, and should have breaks in them every five feet to ten feet to allow for water drainage off of the walk. 
(h)  Erosion control. Erosion control measures shall comply with chapter 30, article II, erosion control and stormwater management. 
(i)  Inspection. Prior to commencing any work within the subdivision, the subdivider shall make arrangements with the city engineer to provide for adequate inspection. The city engineer shall inspect and approve all completed work prior to the city's acceptance of the improvements or any release of the security deposited pursuant to section 24-2(c). 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 15.10, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 24-11. - Acceptance of improvements. 
After all required improvements have been installed, except for the final 1¾ inches of asphalt surface layer, the subdivider shall notify the city engineer, in writing, that the work is complete and ready for final inspection; and shall file lien waivers or affidavits, in a form acceptable to the city and approved by the city attorney, evidencing that there are no claims, actions, or demands for damages, based upon contract or tort arising out of or in any way related to the project and that no monies are owed to any surveyor, mechanic, contractor, subcontractor, materialman, or laborer after all required improvements have been installed. The city engineer shall inspect the improvements and forward a letter to the subdivider indicating their approval or disapproval. After the improvements have been approved by the city engineer, the clerk will prepare a final billing for engineering, inspection, and legal fees and submit it to the subdivider for payment. When the engineering, inspection, and legal fees have been paid and when the necessary lien waivers and affidavits have been filed, a resolution conditionally accepting the project shall be presented to the common council for action. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 15.11, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 24-12. - Release of security. 
(a)  The security furnished pursuant to section 24-2(c) shall remain in full force for a period of one year after the completion of the required improvements and acceptance by the common council unless partially released as hereinafter provided. The security shall be held to guarantee the work performed pursuant to private contracts against defects in workmanship and materials. If any defect appears during the period of the guarantee, the subdivider or its contractor shall, at its expense, install replacements or perform acceptable repairs. In the event that the subdivider fails to install the replacement or perform the repairs, the city may do so and deduct the cost thereof from the security deposit. Unless defects have appeared and have not been repaired, the city will release the security to the subdivider upon expiration of the one year guarantee period. 
(b)  The city engineer may upon acceptance of the improvements release up to 85 percent of the security pursuant to section 24-2(c) when: 
(1)  An application for partial release of security has been filed with the city engineer. The engineer shall have 30 days in which to approve or deny the request. 
(2)  The reduced security deposit will be sufficient to guarantee against defects in material and workmanship. 
(c)  A bond or letter of credit shall be posted upon completion of the final 1½-inch asphalt surface layer as required by section 24-10(g)(2)c to cover the cost of such work plus 15 percent. This letter of credit shall last for one year from the date of the city engineer's written acknowledgment that the 1½-inch asphalt surface layer has been properly accomplished. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 15.12, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2013-O-17, § 1, 8-7-2013)  
Sec. 24-13. - Signing of certificate. 
After entering the contract to provide all required improvements; after posting the security required by section 24-2(c); after payment of any fee imposed pursuant to section 24-2(d)(2); after payment of any area charges for storm sewer and stormwater drainage facilities; after payment of all outstanding charges due against the lands for local sewers, interceptors, force mains, and lift stations previously installed by the city, Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District or any other sewerage district; after payment for water system improvements; after payment of all required park dedication and park improvement fees; and after the subdivider has met all other requirements, the clerk shall execute the certificate inscribed upon the face of the plat or certified survey attesting to the approval thereof and return it to the subdivider for recording. The subdivider shall provide three copies of the recorded plat, restrictions, waiver of any other documents required by the city that relate to the plat to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 15.13, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 24-14. - Building permits. 
(a)  Building permits. Except as provided in subsections (b) and (f) of this section, building permits shall not be issued for construction on a parcel created by any division, subdivision, or comprehensive development of land until all public safety improvements have been made and installed and have been inspected and approved by the city engineer, in consultation with the fire chief and police chief and until all other required improvements have been substantially completed as defined in Wis. Stats. § 236.13(2)(am)2. Prior to issuing any building permit, other than as provided in subsection (b) of this section, all fees and charges due to the city shall have been paid by the subdivider. 
(b)  Major construction building permits. The plan commission may authorize the issuance of building permits for major construction projects if, in the opinion of the plan commission, the proposed building is a major undertaking such that under normal construction circumstances and pacing, construction would be expected to last approximately seven months and the commission finds and determines that: 
(1)  Sufficient water service exists, in the opinion of the fire chief, so that proper fire service can be provided; 
(2)  The subdivider provides and maintains temporary roads that meet at a minimum the requirements of the fire department and are sufficient to permit access by emergency vehicles; 
(3)  All required fees have been paid and proper security posted, and barricades provided. 
(c)  Indemnification required for all permits. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the subdivider or developer shall provide an agreement to be recorded whereby the subdivider agrees to indemnify and save the city harmless from any and all claims, actions, demands, or judgments for personal injuries or property damages, together with the actual expenses incurred in connection therewith, arising out of or in any way related to the issuance of such building permits, or construction within the subdivision including any such claim, action, demand or judgment premised upon the negligence of the city or any of its officers, agents, servants, or employees. 
(d)  Consequence of violation. No building permit shall be issued for construction on any site created in violation of the requirements of this chapter. 
(e)  Occupancy requirements. The building owner shall agree in a written affidavit that occupancy shall not occur, nor shall occupancy permits be issued, prior to the completion, inspection and acceptance of all required improvements. 
(f)  Early start permits. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 236.13(2)(am)3.c., upon application signed by the subdivider, and subject to the requirements below, the zoning administrator may authorize the issuance of early start permits if all public improvements related to public safety are complete and the subdivider has posted the necessary security required 24-2(c)(2). 
(1)  The early start permit may authorize only site grading, utilities, footings, and foundation installation. Other noncombustible construction, such as steel, may be authorized only if no heat source is required for construction. Combustible building materials shall not be stored on site. Material stockpiling shall not occur in any easement areas. 
(2)  The public improvements related to public safety may be deemed to be complete only if all of the following conditions have been met: 
a.  The subdivider shall provide and at all times maintain adequate road access for public safety, including a minimum of road base course, that meets the requirements of the fire department and accommodates the weight, width, and turning radius of the fire apparatus, and is sufficient to permit access by emergency vehicles. 
b.  The subdivider's engineer has assigned the top of foundation wall elevation. After completion of foundation and prior to and as condition of issuance of any additional building permits for vertical construction, the subdivider's or builder's engineer shall certify with their professional license stamp that the top of foundation wall elevation has been constructed in accordance with the approved subdivision plat drainage plan. 
c.  Erosion control for each applicable building site has been designed and installed. 
d.  Lot corner monuments have been installed for each applicable site. 
e.  Street name signs have been installed, and reflective address plates are present at the building site. 
(3)  All fees and charges due to the city, including, but not limited to, park fees and impact fees, shall be paid, proper security posted, and barricades provided, prior to the issuance of any permit including early start permit for construction of foundations and other noncombustible structure. 
(4)  All activities within the plat or CSM shall conform to all requirements of the latest edition to the City of Fitchburg Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 15.14, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2019-O-29 , § 1, 8-27-2019)  
Sec. 24-15. - Fees. 
(a)  Generally. The subdivider shall pay the city all fees hereinafter required and at the times specified. 
(b)  Preliminary plat, final plat, comprehensive development plan and contract fees. 
(1)  The subdivider shall pay an application fee as set forth in the annual budget appendix fee schedule to the city treasurer at the time the application for approval is filed. 
(2)  In addition to the above fees, the subdivider shall pay all engineering, inspection, consulting and legal fees incurred by the city for services performed by or on behalf of the city in conjunction with the design, inspection and review of any preliminary plat, final plat, comprehensive development plan, or contract, to ensure that the construction of the required improvements in compliance with the plans, specifications and ordinances of the city or any other governmental authority. Engineering, inspection, consulting, and legal fees shall be the actual cost of the city. Such fees may be billed monthly, or upon completion of the project as determined by the city council. It is intended that the application fee provided for in subsection (b)(1) of this section will sufficiently reimburse the cost of city staff time and expenditures. 
(3)  Payment guarantee. To guarantee payment of the engineering, inspection, consulting and attorneys fees required in subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section, the subdivider shall deposit a fee as set forth in the annual budget appendix fee schedule with the city treasurer at the time that the application for approval is first filed. If the required fees are paid timely, the deposit will be refunded at the time that the final plat is approved by the common council or 30 days after the preliminary plat or final plat is rejected. In the event that the subdivider fails to pay such required fees within 14 days of the time when the city submits its bill therefor, the city may deduct the amount of such fees from the security deposit. 
(c)  Certified survey fees. 
(1)  The subdivider shall pay an application fee as set forth in the annual budget appendix fee schedule to the city treasurer at the time the application for approval for any certified survey is filed. 
(2)  The subdivider shall pay all consulting and legal fees incurred by the city for services performed by or on behalf of the city in conjunction with the design, inspection and review of any certified survey to ensure that the construction of the required improvements is in compliance with the plans, specifications and ordinances of the city or any other governmental authority. Consulting and legal fees shall be the actual cost to the city. Such fees may be billed monthly or upon completion of the project as determined by the common council. It is intended that the application fee set forth in subsection (c)(1) of this section will cover all city staff time and expenditures and all consulting fees and expenditures for the city engineer. 
(d)  Parkland improvement fees. 
(1)  The developer or subdivider shall pay prior to signing the final plat or survey, or in the case of a multifamily housing development, the developer shall pay, prior to issuance of a zoning permit a parkland improvement fee as set forth in the annual budget appendix fee schedule. The collected fees shall be utilized to construct park facilities for the plat, survey or development. The park commission shall give priority to establishing the proper neighborhood park facilities according to the plan for parks and open spaces and the generally accepted standards prior to expenditure for facilities in area or community parks. The collected fee shall go into special segregated funds. 
(2)  In a neighborhood park the facilities shall be substantially constructed to the extent practicable within one year of acceptance of improvements of the final phase of the plat, or survey, or issuance of a certificate of completion of a multifamily project's last building. However, facilities adequate to serve the development's growing population shall be constructed within three years of the acceptance date of the first phase of improvements or the first certificate of completion. 
(3)  In the case of expenditures for area and community parks the money shall be expended within six years of acceptance of improvements of the final phase of the plat, or survey, or issuance of a certificate of completion of a multifamily project's last building on those facilities that are proper for area and community parks. The funds shall not be expended on neighborhood park facilities in an area or community park, unless such area or community park serves the developments neighborhood park needs. 
(4)  Facility as used in this subsection (d). The term "facilities" as used in this subsection (d) means recreational equipment and structures, and the related support service infrastructure; it also includes grading, seeding and landscaping. 
(5)  Parkland improvement fee schedule. 
Single-family residential: 	As set forth in the annual budget appendix fee schedule 
Two-family residential: 	As set forth in the annual budget appendix fee schedule 
Multifamily residential: 	As set forth in the annual budget appendix fee schedule 
 
The fee shall be adjusted as set forth in the annual budget appendix fee schedule. 
(6)  This fee shall be above and beyond the land dedication or payment-in-lieu of dedication as required under section 24-2(d)(2). 
(e)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 15.15, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2013-O-09, § 2, 6-25-2013; Ord. No. 2018-O-38, § 2, 11-27-2018)  
Sec. 24-16. - Administrative. 
(a)  Appeals of administrative decisions under this chapter may be made to the zoning board of appeals following the procedure in section 22-643. 
(b)  Requests for variances to the city's zoning and land division regulations may be filed to the zoning board of appeals by any party having interest in the property. Following notice to property owners within 300 feet, and public hearing and other investigations as necessary, including a possible plan commission recommendation, the board shall decide the matter based on the following standards: 
(1)  No variance shall be granted that would have the effect of allowing a land division or use of property that would violate state law, administrative rules, the comprehensive plan, or other ordinances of the city. 
(2)  The variance shall not be contrary to the public interest and is to offset an ordinance requirement where owing to a unique or peculiar condition literal enforcement would pose practical difficulty to the owner. 
(3)  Public service capability, and ingress and egress are provided to the property, and they are not compromised from what otherwise would have been the case had the requirement been complied with. 
(4)  The applicant shall show that there is no other feasible alternative to meet the regulation. 
(5)  The variance would continue to allow for a reasonable lot arrangement, and for an appropriate use of the lot in accord with approved plans. The variance shall not cause a lot configuration that would be out of character with the neighborhood. 
(6)  The board may impose such conditions as it deems appropriate to mitigate the variance requested. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 15.16, 10-12-2010)  
Sec. 24-17. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Assessor means the assessor for the City of Fitchburg. 
Certified survey map means a drawing meeting all of the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 236.34 which is the map or plan of record for a land division. 
City means the City of Fitchburg, Dane County, Wisconsin. 
Clerk means the Fitchburg city clerk. 
Cluster development means a development pattern and technique wherein structures are arranged in closely related groups to enable building at higher densities in certain areas while preserving natural features in others. A cluster development would normally incorporate private common open space areas and give emphasis to the pedestrian as opposed to the automobile in its design. The development might also contain owner-occupied row housing with privately owned common property comprising a major element of the development. 
Common council means the common council of the City of Fitchburg. 
Community unit type. See chapter 23 definition. 
Comprehensive development plan (CDP) means a development and site plan for land under the control of a subdivider that better defines land use and its relationship to the proposed land division. 
Comprehensive plan means a plan adopted pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 62.23 and 66.1001, in this case the City of Fitchburg comprehensive plan. 
Extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction means the unincorporated area in which the common council has the legal right to approve plats in accordance with Wis. Stats. ch. 236. Whenever the extraterritorial powers of the city shall overlap with those of another city or village, the jurisdiction over said overlapping area shall be divided on a line all points of which are equidistant from the boundaries of each municipality so that not more than one municipality shall exercise extraterritorial power over any area. 
Final plat means the map or plan of record of a subdivision and any accompanying material as described in section 24-6. 
Flag lot means a lot usually providing a minimum width at the street that goes back from the street a certain distance to form a stem and then widens out to form a wider area, with the wider area being representative of a flag. 
Greenway means an open area of land, the primary purpose of which is to carry stormwater on the ground surface in lieu of an enclosed storm sewer. Greenways may serve multiple purposes in addition to their principal use including, but not limited to, vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian traffic, sanitary sewers, water mains, storm sewers, stormwater retention basis, park development and other related uses. 
Green infrastructure means an array of technologies, approaches, and practices that use existing natural systems, or systems engineered to mimic natural processes, to enhance environmental quality and provide services, such as reduced stormwater volume and flow, enhanced water quality, and landscape amenity features. Green infrastructure design features include but are not limited to: green roofs, rain gardens, bioswales, tree trenches, infiltration trenches, pervious pavement systems, native plantings, constructed wetlands and rainwater harvesting systems. 
Land development means the improvement of land into building sites, with related facilities, to facilitate the construction of buildings. 
Land division means a division of a parcel of land where the act of division creates less than five lots, parcels or building sites. 
Official map means a map indicating the location, width, and extent of existing and proposed streets, highways, parkways, historic districts, parks and playgrounds as set forth in this Code. 
Outlot means a parcel of land, other than a lot or block so designated on a plat or certified survey map. 
Parcel means contiguous lands under the control of a subdivider whether or not separated by streets, highways, or railroad rights-of-way. 
Park commission means the park commission of the City of Fitchburg. 
Plan commission means the plan commission of the City of Fitchburg. 
Preliminary plat means a map showing the salient features of a proposed subdivision or land division, as described in section 24-4, submitted to the city for purpose of preliminary consideration prior to all final plats and, when required, prior to all land divisions. 
Public way means any public road, street, highway, walkway, drainageway, or part thereof. 
Regulating plan. See definition in chapter 23. 
Replat means the process of changing, or the map or plat which changes, the boundaries of a recorded subdivision plat or a part thereof. The division of a block, lot or outlot within a recorded subdivision plat without changing the exterior boundaries of said block, lot or outlot is not a replat but is a land division. 
Residential dwelling unit means a single-family dwelling or that part of a duplex, apartment, or other multiple-family dwelling occupied by one family or one distinct set of inhabitants. 
Street means a public way for pedestrian and vehicular traffic, including but not limited to highways, thoroughfares, parkways, throughways, roads, avenues, boulevards, lanes, and places. 
(1)  Arterial streets and highways. Those streets which provide rapid movement of concentrated volumes of traffic over relatively long distances. They provide principally for movement of persons and goods between high activity areas. 
a.  Principal arterials. Those streets serving the major interstate corridors and corridors which connect major cities and regions. These routes provide the highest level of mobility and form a continuous system with constant operating conditions under a high degree of access control. 
b.  Primary arterials. Those streets serving long trips between important cities and the major intracommunity corridors within the metropolitan area. These routes provide a high level of mobility and constant operating conditions with only occasional minor restrictions. 
c.  Standard arterials. Those streets which more commonly provide for intermediate length trips, thus serving through traffic movement in trade areas or feeding traffic to the principal and primary arterial streets from lower order activity areas not served by such routes. 
(2)  Collector streets. Those streets which provide moderate speed movement of persons and goods within large areas. They are basically local streets which usually, because of more directness of routing and higher capacity than other local streets, receive higher volumes of traffic to be distributed from or collected toward nearby arterial streets. The dual purpose streets of the collector family are also subclassified into two subclasses, namely connectors and distributors. 
a.  Connector streets. Those streets which perform a semi-arterial function as well as serving as distribution and land access streets. 
b.  Distributor streets. Those streets which perform the function of gathering and distributing traffic from and to the local streets adjacent lands. 
(3)  Local streets. Those streets which are designed for low speeds and volumes and are to provide access from low-generation land activities to the collector and arterial systems. 
(4)  Marginal access streets. Those streets which are parallel and adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
(5)  Alleys. Those streets which are a secondary means of access for vehicular service to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
Structure means anything which has the capacity to contain, used for the occupation or shelter of man or animal or for the storage, receiving, retaining or confining of personal property, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having permanent location on the ground. The term does not include the facilities and appurtenances of public utilities other than buildings. 
Subdivider means any person which divides or proposes to divide land in any manner which results in a land division or subdivision. 
Subdivision means the division of a lot, parcel or tract of land where the act of division: 
(1)  Creates five or more lots, parcels or building sites; or 
(2)  Creates five or more lots, parcels or building sites by successive divisions within a period of five years. 
Urban service area means that portion of the city which has been designated by the capital area regional planning commission and the state department of natural resources as the area to which municipal services required in urban areas, including but not limited to, sanitary and storm sewers, water supply and distribution systems, streets and highways, shall be first provided. 
Water supply system means any facilities installed or constructed to obtain, store, treat, or convey water for human consumption or domestic use. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-09, § 15.17, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-O-06, § 1, 3-25-2014)  
Sec. 24-18. - Appeal. 
Any developer upon whom a park improvement fee or fee in lieu of land dedication is imposed under this chapter or under chapter 22 section 647 shall have the right to contest the amount, collection, or use of the impact fee to the city council, provided that the developer files a written notice of appeal in the city clerk's office within 15 days of the filing of an application for a building permit upon which the impact fee is imposed. Such notice of appeal shall be entitled "Notice of Appeal of Park Fee" and shall state the developer's name, address, telephone number, and legal description of the land development upon which the fee is imposed, and a statement of the nature of and reasons for the appeal. The city clerk shall schedule the appeal for consideration by the city council at a regular meeting as soon as reasonably practicable under the circumstances and shall notify the developer of the time, date and place of such meeting, in writing, by regular mail, deposited in the mail no later than at least three days before the date of such meeting. Upon review of such appeal, the city council may adjust the amount, collection or use of the impact fee upon just and reasonable cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-38, § 3, 11-27-2018)  
Chapter 25 - ARCHITECTURAL CONTROL 
 
Sec. 25-1. - Architectural control commission approval required. 
The city has created the Fitchburg Architectural Control Commission as provided in section 6-210. Except as provided below, the commission shall examine all applications for building permits required under the Code and, after review of the site plans for the proposed structure, addition or alteration, to determine whether or not a certificate of compliance shall be granted. The zoning administrator or building inspector is hereby authorized to provide architectural control for the following building permits, as interpreted by the zoning administrator or building inspector: 
(1)  Building permits for single-family and two-family dwelling units. 
(2)  Building permits for the minor replacement, repair or alteration of commercial or multi-family dwelling unit projects. 
(3)  Building permits for agricultural buildings. 
If the zoning administrator or building inspector chooses not to approve the application, the application shall be forwarded to the plan commission. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, §§ 13.01, 13.02; Ord. No. 2013-O-23, § 1, 9-24-2013)  
Sec. 25-2. - Standards for issuance of certificate of compliance. 
A certificate of compliance shall be granted if and only if the architectural control commission shall, by a majority vote, find that the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  That the proposed structure, addition, or alteration will, based upon the submitted plans and specifications, comply with all applicable building and zoning ordinances; 
(2)  That the proposed structure, addition, or alteration will conform to the general development of the zoning district within which it is to be erected and with the character of the district as established by the city's development plan; 
(3)  That the exterior architectural appeal, including landscaping, and the functional plan of the proposed structure, addition, or alteration will not, when erected, be so at variance with or so similar to, the exterior architectural appeal and functional plan of structures already constructed or in the course of construction in the immediate neighborhood, or at variance with the character of the district established by the city's development plan, or any amendments or supplements, thereto, so as to cause substantial depreciation in the property values within said neighborhood or applicable district; and 
(4)  That the exterior architectural appeal and functional plan of the proposed structure, addition, or alteration will not, within the discretionary judgment of the commission, be contrary to generally accepted design standards or to the underlying aesthetic values of the community, or in any manner contribute to decay or blight within the community. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 13.03)  
Sec. 25-3. - Certificate required for issuance of building permit. 
(a)  No building permit shall be issued by the building inspector unless and until the commission has granted a certificate that the proposed structure, addition, or alteration complies with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Where the commission fails to complete the action required herein within 21 days of the filing of the application for a building permit, the proposed structure, addition or alteration shall be deemed to be in compliance with this chapter and the building inspector shall issue a building permit if the proposed structure, addition, or alteration satisfies all other requirements of this Code and any other law or regulation applicable thereto. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 13.04)  
Sec. 25-4. - Notice of rejection. 
If the architectural control commission determines that the proposed structure does not comply with the requirements of this chapter, it shall reject the application and give written notice of the rejection and reasons therefore to the applicant and the building inspector. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 13.05)  
Sec. 25-5. - Appeal. 
A rejection of an application for a building permit may be appealed to the in accordance with the procedures provided in chapter 22. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 13.06)  
Chapter 26 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Town zoning authority if exercising village powers, Wis. Stats. § 60.62; comprehensive municipal planning, Wis. Stats. § 66.1001; city planning, Wis. Stats. § 62.23; village planning, Wis. Stats. § 61.35; regulation of outdoor advertising, Wis. Stats. § 84.30; regulation of highway signs, Wis. Stats. § 86.19; advertising in highways prohibited in certain locations, Wis. Stats. § 86.191; specific information signs, Wis. Stats. § 86.195; tourist-oriented directional signs, Wis. Stats. § 86.196. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards to safeguard life, health and property, to eliminate hazards to pedestrians and motorists brought about by distracting sign displays, to preserve and improve the appearance of the city and to promote the public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, area, number, construction, location and installation of all signs referred to in this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.01)  
Sec. 26-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Detached sign means any sign not supported by or attached to any building or structure, but attached to or resting on the ground. 
Directory sign means a sign not exceeding 90 square feet in area, which gives direction to a business, commodity, service or entertainment at a specific location or premises other than the location or premises at which the sign is located. 
Facade means any separate face of a building, including parapet walls, and roof surfaces or any part of a building which encloses or covers usable space. Where separate faces are oriented in the same direction, or in the direction within 45 degrees of one another, they are to be considered as part of a single facade. 
Farm sign means any on-premises sign in an agricultural district identifying the name of the owner or name of a farm or the farm produce available thereon. 
Flashing sign means a sign where any part is varied in brightness, color or message at intervals more frequently than one every two minutes. 
Flat sign means any sign the back of which is attached flat against any part of a building or structure and which does not extend outward more than six inches, or any sign painted upon any building or structure, or upon a window thereof. 
Home occupation has the meaning set forth in section 22-651. 
Illuminated sign means any sign lighted by electricity or any other source of power, or illuminated in any manner. 
Nonconforming sign means any sign which was in existence and displayed on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, but which does not conform to the requirements and limitations hereof; or any sign which was lawfully in existence and displayed on the effective date of any amendment to this chapter, but which does not conform to the requirements and limitations hereof; or any sign which was lawfully in existence and displayed on the effective date of any amendment to this chapter, but which does not conform to such amendment. 
On-site business sign means a sign that is permanently attached to the ground or a building, or building interior such that it is visible to the outside, which is used for identification purposes, which directs attention to a business or a profession conducted upon the premises at which the sign is located, and which may also refer to goods or services produced, offered for sale or obtained at such premises. 
Portable sign means a sign which is not permanently attached to the ground or a building, or designed to be permanently attached to the ground or a building. 
Projecting sign means any sign attached to any part of a building, marquee or structure and which extends outward more than six inches. Canopies and awnings shall not be considered projecting signs if they do not contain advertising or identification; if so, such canopies and awnings shall constitute projecting signs. 
Sign means any medium, including its structure and component parts, which is used or intended to be used to attract attention for identification, noncommercial expression, announcement or advertising purposes. 
Temporary sign means a sign, of any type, not exceeding 16 square feet in area, and for which the applicant for a permit states in writing that it shall not be displayed for a period of more than 45 days. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.02; Ord. No. 2014-O-24, § 4, 7-22-2014)  
Sec. 26-3. - Variances. 
It is recognized that circumstances may exist from time to time where strict application of the size, location and type of sign standards or other regulations herein specified for the various zoning districts may work a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship on the applicant for a sign permit or deprive the sign owner of rights under the First, Fifth or 14th Amendments to the United States Constitution. Variations from the standards may be granted by the city board of zoning appeals where it determines, after notice and hearing as provided in section 22-1 and the rules of procedure adopted thereunder that such extenuating circumstances exist. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.07)  
Sec. 26-4. - Exempt signs. 
The following signs are exempt from the provisions of this chapter, to the extent specified in this section and except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Traffic signs. Any sign which is required or authorized by any law, statute or ordinance, is designed to identify any public area or installation or which gives notice of danger in connection with a public project or hazard, including any traffic control device which bears a code number issued by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation as required by Wis. Stats. § 86.19(5). 
(2)  Commemorative signs. Any sign in the nature of a cornerstone or commemorative or historical tablet erected by a public or nonprofit body or organization. 
(3)  Public service signs. Any public service sign erected by a nonprofit community group or civic organization (i.e., Kiwanis, Lions, etc.) which primarily promotes items of general interest to the community, and which has been in existence in the city for at least six months. Such signs shall not exceed four square feet. 
(4)  Auxiliary signs. Any sign which identifies or gives direction to parts of a site or building such as, but not limited to, entrances or exits, addresses of buildings, designation of parking areas, or which provides secondary information such as price, hours of operation, warnings or directories. Such signs shall not exceed 16 square feet and do not count as part of the total signage for a site or business. Corporate campus developments on industrially zoned lands that exceed 80 acres in contiguous common ownership may erect auxiliary signs which may exceed 16 square feet but are no more than 40 square feet. 
(5)  Decorative holiday signs. Except as provided in section 26-85, any sign in the nature of a decoration, incidentally and customarily associated with any national, state or local holiday or commemorative day; or any civic festival, fair or similar gathering for a period of not more than 30 days in any year, provided such sign shall not differ substantially from the requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(6)  Window display signs. Any temporary sign in a display window of a business establishment which is incorporated into a display of merchandise or a display relating to services offered on the premises. This exemption is not intended to include permanently attached on-site business or business/service identification signs. 
(7)  Political signs and posters. Any public election or referenda sign may be displayed during an election campaign period. In a residential district such signs may not exceed 11 square feet. A political sign may not have an electrical, mechanical or audio auxiliary which is determined to be a public nuisance under city ordinance chapter 14, pertaining to offenses against public policy. No political sign shall be placed so as to jeopardize traffic or pedestrian safety. Persons or committees authorizing the distribution or posting of campaign materials, as well as the owner of the premises on which the sign is displayed, shall be responsible for compliance with this chapter. The term "election campaign period" as used in this subsection has the meaning set forth in Wis. Stats. § 12.04(1)(a). 
(8)  Real estate signs. A real estate sign advertising the sale or rental of property, which shall not exceed seven square feet in residential and agricultural zoning districts, and 32 square feet in commercial, business or industrial zoning districts; two such signs shall be permitted, one of which may be an off-premises directional sign not exceeding seven square feet at the entrance to a subdivision. Off-premises signs shall not be located in the right-of-way (agent shall have permission of any property owner prior to placing signs on private property). 
(9)  Construction signs. A construction sign pertaining to the construction of a structure on the premises on which it is erected and which shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. Said sign shall be placed and maintained only during construction of the structure. 
(10)  Temporary signs. A temporary sign not to exceed four square feet in area, displayed for a period of not more than 48 hours at one time and no more than twice in any one year period. A single sign shall be permitted and only on the premises where the activity advertised is to take place. A permit is required for temporary signs exceeding four square feet. 
(11)  Crop signs. Crop demonstration signs which designate a variety, brand or other identification of a field crop, fertilizer, herbicide, pesticide or insecticide being grown or used not to exceed eight square feet in area. Crop demonstration signs shall be located on the same premises where the crop is grown or product used. A separate sign for each fertilizer, herbicide, pesticide or insecticide being used is permitted. Signs may designate a variety or brand name but shall not direct attention to a dealer or place where such products are sold. 
(12)  Home occupation signs. Home occupation signs which direct attention to a home occupation allowed on the premises under chapter 22, pertaining to zoning. Home occupation signs shall not exceed three square feet in area and shall be attached to the residential building in which a home occupation is permitted. 
(13)  Farm signs. Farm signs in agricultural districts which identify the owner's name, farm name or farm product available, and which shall not exceed 12 square feet. 
(14)  Employment opportunity signs. Job opening signs which refer to a job opening or employment available on the premises not to exceed 12 square feet in area. Job opening signs shall be displayed for no longer than 30 days in a one-year period. 
(15)  Municipal signs. Any sign erected by the city to promote safety, welfare, or items of general interest to the community, including, but not limited to, signs dealing with traffic safety, road construction, and special events. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.02(3); Ord. No. 2019-O-14, § 1, 6-25-2019)  
Sec. 26-5. - Damage to signs. 
(a)  Willful damage. No person shall willfully disturb, remove, deface or damage any sign erected or maintained under the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Accidental damage. Any person who accidentally disturbs, removes or defaces or damages any sign in any manner which causes such sign to violate any provision of this chapter or permit issued hereunder or the owner of any sign so disturbed, removed, defaced or damaged shall immediately report the same to the zoning administrator. Failure to report such damage shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to penalty as herein provided. 
(c)  Owner's responsibility. The owner of the sign shall be responsible for the repair or replacement of removed, lost, damaged or defaced signs in accordance with this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.17)  
Sec. 26-6. - Penalty; enforcement. 
Penalties for any person, owner, occupant or other user of the premises who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be as provided in section 1-21. Compliance herewith may be enforced by injunctional order at suit of the city upon complaint of the zoning administrator. It shall not be necessary to prosecute for forfeiture before resorting to injunctional proceedings. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.18)  
Sec. 26-7. - Verona Road Reconstruction Project #1206-07-05. 
Any business use within or abutting the project limits identified in the Verona Road Reconstruction Project #1206-07-05 (for section 26-7, hereafter "project") the following may be available: 
(1)  Temporary banners. The display of a temporary banner allowed under 26-88 may be extended for the duration of the construction project from commencement until one month after opening of traffic lanes for the segment which the business adjoins. 
(2)  Waiver for on-site sign(s). A business use that will have its site obscured by construction of retaining walls related to project may apply for a waiver from the plan commission to allow any combination of the following: a roof sign; a detached sign exceeding 25 feet, but no greater height than that necessary to clear the retaining wall or grade obstruction, and/or up to an additional 25 square feet of total signage area per business, which also applies to a detached sign (allow 175 compared to standard 150 square feet). The following shall be applicable to any waiver request: 
a.  Application to the plan commission shall be made in writing in accord with standard procedures and timing of requests. 
b.  Evidence of the obstruction(s) caused by the project. 
c.  The proposed signage plan shall include, at a minimum: requested waivers, size, area, height, and wording of the sign(s). If attached, building elevation(s) showing proposed signs. Explanation and drawings showing or explaining the effect of retaining walls or grade alteration to current visibility, how the proposed signage, and requested waivers will appropriately mitigate the obstruction. The solution shall be proportional to the obstruction. 
d.  Information on whether the business or land owner received any payment or other compensation from the acquisition authority for signage or obstruction of the business. 
e.  Application may be made no sooner than the Wisconsin DOT preliminary construction plans have been approved, which plans shall clearly note retaining walls which affect visibility of the business. 
f.  Besides applying the proportionality test in point 3, the plan commission shall also apply impact of the increase in height or sign area will negatively impact other property owners or the use and enjoyment of their property; that the waiver will not impair or substantially diminish value of property value within the area; the requested waiver will not be out of character with the surrounding area or uses; change of grade or construction of retaining walls will cause such an obstruction that use of the standard sign code provisions would not be effective. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-24, § 1, 7-22-2014; Ord. No. 2019-O-33 , § 1, 10-22-2019)  
Secs. 26-8—26-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 26-31. - Permit required. 
No person shall place, erect, alter or relocate within the city any sign, as defined in this chapter, without first obtaining a permit and paying the required fee therefor, unless specifically exempt or excepted herein. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.03)  
Sec. 26-32. - Application. 
Any person desiring to place, erect, alter or relocate a sign, as herein defined, except an exempt sign, shall make application to the zoning administrator and shall provide in writing the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  The name and address of the owner of the premises upon which the sign is to be attached or erected. 
(3)  The street number and street name or parcel number of the land upon which the sign is to be attached or erected. 
(4)  A scale drawing of the proposed sign and a map of the lot or parcel of land on which it is to be erected showing its intended location on the site. 
(5)  The materials to be used in the construction of the sign. 
(6)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the sign if he/she is neither the applicant nor the owner of the premises on which the sign is to be attached or erected. 
(7)  A description of all electrical equipment and appurtenances, if the sign is to be lighted or illuminated. 
(8)  Such other information as the zoning administrator may require in order to indicate compliance with this chapter and all other ordinances of the city and, in connection with applications for permits for temporary signs, a written statement that the sign will be displayed for a period of time not exceeding 30 days. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.04)  
Sec. 26-33. - Issuance of permit. 
The zoning administrator shall examine each application for a sign permit and if it shall appear that the proposed sign is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and all other ordinances of the city shall issue a permit therefor upon payment of the fee as hereinafter provided. The zoning administrator may withhold the permit until an inspection of the premises upon which it is proposed to attach or erect the sign has been completed. If a permit is issued, but the sign authorized by the permit is not attached or erected within six months after the issuance of the permit, the permit shall expire and be null and void. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.05)  
Sec. 26-34. - Permit fee. 
The applicant for a sign permit shall pay a permit fee as set forth in the annual budget appendix fee schedule. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.06)  
Secs. 26-35—26-56. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-57. - Safety regulations. 
(a)  Attachment, location. No sign or any part thereof, or anchor, brace or guide rod shall be attached, fastened or anchored to any fire escape, ladder or standpipe, and no sign or any part thereof, or anchor, brace or guide rod shall be erected or maintained which may cover or obstruct any door, doorway or window of any building and which may hinder or prevent ingress or egress through such door, doorway or window, or which may hinder or prevent the raising or placing of ladders against such building in the event of fire. 
(b)  Street and intersections. No sign shall be erected adjacent to a public street or at the intersection of any streets in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any location where, by reason of the position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device; or which makes use of the words "stop," "look," "drive-in," "danger," or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. Any sign located in violation of the provisions of this subsection may be declared to be public nuisances and may be removed by the zoning administrator pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 86.04 or 349.09. 
(c)  Weight, dead loads, live loads. All signs, except flat signs and those signs weighing less than ten pounds, shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind pressure of not less than 30 pounds per square foot of area and shall be constructed to adequately support the dead load and any anticipated live loads (i.e., ice, snow) of the sign. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.08(3))  
Sec. 26-58. - Roof signs. 
No sign shall be mounted upon any roof or any building or structure in any district, except a sign painted on the roof of a building or structure which is designed to provide information to air traffic. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.08(4))  
Sec. 26-59. - Posting restrictions. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall paste or otherwise fasten any paper, poster or other material, paint, stencil or write any number, sign, name or any disfiguring mark within any street right-of-way, on any sidewalk, curb, gutter, street, post, fire hydrant, pole or tree, any other sign, building, fence or other structure, nor shall any of said objects be defaced in any manner. 
(b)  Prohibitions in streets and highways. No signs shall be placed within the limits of any street or highway except such as are necessary for the guidance and warning of traffic or as provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.046 for children's play areas. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.08(5))  
Sec. 26-60. - Setback requirements. 
In zoning districts where setbacks are required for building construction, no part of any sign shall extend over the property line. Any signs projecting over sidewalks shall have a minimum of eight feet of clearance. No sign shall be located within or over any public street right-of-way unless a street encroachment permit approved by the common council has been issued therefor. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.08(12))  
Sec. 26-61. - Height requirements. 
No part of any sign shall be more than 25 feet in perpendicular height above the nearest established street grade. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.08(13))  
Secs. 26-62—26-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC SIGN TYPES 
 
Sec. 26-81. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-O-24, § 2, adopted July 22, 2014, amended the Code by repealing former § 26-81 in its entirety. Former § 26-81 pertained to off-site signs, and derived from 2009 Compiled Ordinances, § 24.08(11).  
Sec. 26-82. - On-site signs. 
(a)  A flat sign shall be permitted on the face or side of any principal building. The total area of such sign or signs shall not exceed one-tenth of the area of the face or side (including doors and windows) of the principal building, provided that the total area of such sign or signs shall not exceed 150 square feet. 
(b)  A projecting sign which is attached to a building shall not extend into the street right-of-way. The total area (in square feet) of a projecting sign shall not exceed 32 on one side or 64 on both sides. The total area of a projecting sign on the face or side of a principal building in combination with a flat sign shall not exceed one-tenth of the area of the face or side of the building. 
(c)  Two detached signs shall be permitted for any building subject to the following: 
(1)  The detached signs shall not project closer than one foot from the street right-of-way. 
(2)  The area of the detached sign or signs shall not be greater than 150 square feet on either side. 
(3)  The maximum height of any detached sign shall be 25 feet. 
(d)  The total signed area per business shall not exceed 150 square feet. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.08(14))  
Sec. 26-83. - Flashing and lighted signs. 
(a)  No flashing, alternating, rotating, or swinging sign, operated by mechanical means or wind drive, whether illuminated or not, is permitted except on-site time and temperature signs, on-site LED motor vehicle fuel pricing signs, and electronic drive-thru menu board signs of 20 square feet or less and where content is not visible from a public street, may be permitted by issuance of a conditional use permit by the plan commission. No flashing, alternating, rotating or swing flood, pot or beacon light is permitted for the purpose of illuminating any sign. No floodlight or spotlight illuminating any sign shall be located in such a manner as to permit its beam or glare of light to be directed onto surrounding premises or roadways. Each illuminated sign shall comply with the city electrical code. 
(b)  Each sign described in this subsection and which becomes nonconforming on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall cease to flash, alternate, rotate or swing six months after said effective date; provided, however, that the remainder of the sign, without the flashing, alternating, rotating or swinging feature, may continue to be displayed if it complies in other respects with the provisions of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.08(6); Ord. No. 2015-O-07, § 1, 3-24-2015; Ord. No. 2018-O-22, § 1, 7-24-2018)  
Sec. 26-84. - Portable signs. 
Portable signs, except temporary signs, are not permitted. Portable signs which become nonconforming on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be removed six months after said effective date. An existing portable sign may be permanently mounted if it complies with setback requirements, safety regulations and other applicable provisions of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.08(7))  
Sec. 26-85. - Banners, inflatable signs and beacons. 
Professionally printed advertising banners may be used by businesses on a temporary basis only. A banner shall be considered a temporary sign as defined in section 26-88, except that banners shall not exceed 40 square feet, and shall not be used for more than 45 days in any 12-month period. Each new banner shall require a separate sign permit. The use of any inflatable signs, beacons and searchlights are prohibited, except by special permit issued by the common council for specific events not to exceed ten days in any 12-month period. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.08(8))  
Sec. 26-86. - Development signs. 
Development signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. For buildings under construction the sign shall be on the same premises as the building under construction. For subdivisions in which lots are offered for sale, one sign may be located on each outer boundary of the subdivision. Building construction signs shall be removed before a certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the building inspector. Development signs shall be removed when more than 95 percent of the lots in the development have been sold. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.08(9))  
Sec. 26-87. - Permanent subdivision signs. 
Signs identifying the subdivision may be located at main entrances to the subdivision, shall state the name of the subdivision only and shall not exceed 40 square feet. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.08(10))  
Sec. 26-88. - Temporary sign permits. 
If a permit for a temporary sign as defined herein is granted, the failure to remove it at the end of such 45-day period shall constitute a violation of this article and subject the applicant, as well as the owner of the premises on which it is displayed, to the penalties herein provided. In cases where a temporary sign on premises having a frontage on two streets is applied for, the applicant shall be entitled to two such temporary signs provided that each such sign shall (when displayed) face a different street. Under no circumstances shall a permit for a temporary sign or signs be granted for any premises more than once in any calendar year. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.02(16))  
Secs. 26-89—26-119. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 26-120. - Single-family residential districts. 
In single-family residential districts, no sign shall be permitted, except the following: 
(1)  A single sign which is limited in content to the name, address and home occupation of the owner or occupant of the premises, not exceeding three square feet in area. 
(2)  A sign erected by any church, school or public body on its own grounds and for its own purposes and not to exceed 40 square feet. 
(3)  A single sign not exceeding 12 square feet in total area located on the premises of any nonconforming business use. 
(4)  Development signs, construction signs, subdivision signs. 
(5)  Home occupation signs. 
(6)  Real estate signs. 
(7)  Public election or referenda signs. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.09(1))  
Sec. 26-121. - Multifamily residential districts. 
In multifamily residential districts, no sign shall be permitted, except the following: 
(1)  Signs permitted in a single-family residential district. 
(2)  A sign identifying an apartment/townhouse complex not to exceed a maximum of 40 square feet per sign. Total signage allowed shall not exceed 150 square feet. A sign identifying an apartment/townhouse complex may be allowed up to 80 square feet if the following criteria are met: 
a.  Complex is set back a minimum of 150 feet from a street or street intersection due to a publicly dedicated stormwater facility; and 
b.  Sign is placed on a water feature or retaining wall that is incorporated into the design of the project; and 
c.  Total signage allowed for the complex, including this sign, shall not exceed 150 square feet; and 
d.  All other aspects of chapter 26 sign ordinance are met. 
(3)  A sign advertising the sale or rental of the premises or any part thereof. Any such sign six square feet or less is exempt under section 26-4(8). Nonexempt signs are permitted according to the number of residential units in the building or complex involved as follows: 
Number of Residential Units 	Maximum Sign Area 
Four to 15 	12 square feet 
16 or more 	35 square feet 
 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.09(2); Ord. No. 2015-O-22, § 1, 7-28-2015)  
Sec. 26-122. - Conservancy or recreational districts. 
In conservancy or recreational districts, no sign shall be permitted, except those installed by direction of the park department for conservancy, recreational and related purposes. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.09(3))  
Sec. 26-123. - Agricultural districts. 
In agricultural districts, no sign shall exceed 90 square feet, and no sign shall be permitted, except the following: 
(1)  Those signs permitted in single-family residential districts. 
(2)  Crop demonstration signs. 
(3)  Farm signs not exceeding 90 square feet in area. (Farm signs which do not exceed 12 square feet are exempt signs.) 
(4)  Directory signs. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.09(4))  
Sec. 26-124. - Business, rural development, commercial, or industrial districts. 
In business, rural development, commercial or industrial districts, no sign shall be permitted, except the following: 
(1)  Those signs permitted in single-family residential and agricultural districts. 
(2)  On-site signs. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.09(5); Ord. No. 2014-O-24, § 3, 7-22-2014)  
Sec. 26-125. - Planned development districts. 
In planned development districts, a master sign program can be developed to create a coordinated system of signing which will be effective, fair and reasonable for all parties concerned, including the city, the developers and surrounding property owners, as determined by the city council. Such a program may involve relaxing sign number and area standards and shall be included with the general development plan of the proposed planned development district. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.09(6))  
Sec. 26-126. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Any nonconforming sign may continue to be displayed, except as provided in this article. 
(b)  Sign permits legally issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the use of which will be nonconforming under the provisions of this article, shall be void unless actual construction is commenced within 90 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(c)  Whenever a nonconforming sign is 50 percent or more damaged by fire, flood, explosion, earthquake, war, riot or act of God, it shall be reconstructed to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Whenever it is desired to change or alter the principal content or message of an existing nonconforming sign, such as the name of a business or product, except signs designed for changeable copy, such alteration shall constitute a major change and the sign shall be made conforming and comply with the provisions of this article within six months after the application for a permit to alter the sign has been filed with the zoning administrator. 
(e)  Any existing off-site advertising sign which was conforming at the time of erection may be continued provided that no increase in size, illumination or flashing of such sign shall be allowed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.10)  
Secs. 26-127—26-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 26-151. - Installation requirements; materials. 
(a)  Live load. All signs shall be designed, constructed and anchored to withstand a horizontal wind pressure of not less than 30 pounds per square foot of exposed area. 
(b)  Dead load. All sign structures shall be designed, constructed and fastened to adequately support the dead load of any sign. 
(c)  Footings. All footings for supports of detached signs erected on the ground shall be not less than 4½ feet below the existing ground level. 
(d)  Attachment. Projecting signs which are permitted to extend beyond building or parapet walls shall be attached to brackets fastened to such walls or roofs by any accepted method, but shall not be attached to any part of an unbraced wall above a point of bearing of the roof rafters. 
(e)  Materials. All signs shall be constructed of materials suitable for the intended purpose. 
(f)  Letters, decorations and embellishments. Letters, decorations and embellishments in cutout or irregular form, maintained in conjunction with, attached to or superimposed upon any sign, shall be safely and securely built or attached to the sign structure. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.12(1))  
Sec. 26-152. - Electrical sign requirements. 
(a)  The application for a permit for the erection of a sign in which electrical wiring and connections are to be used shall be submitted to the zoning administrator who in consultation with the electrical inspector, shall examine the plans and specifications for the sign which are submitted and may require additional information relating to the proposed electrical installation from the applicant. The electrical inspector's inspection shall determine if the proposed installation complies with applicable ordinances relating to electrical wiring and construction. The application shall be approved by the electrical inspector if the plans and specifications are found to comply therewith. After action by the electrical inspector, the application may be given final approval by the zoning administrator. 
(b)  All electrical signs, other than those bearing the label of approval of a recognized testing laboratory shall be inspected and approved by the electrical inspector on the site prior to actual erection of the sign. No sign shall be erected, despite issuance of a permit, until site inspection has been made by and the sign permit initialed by the electrical inspector. 
(c)  All electrical signs shall be equipped with a watertight safety switch. The switch shall be located where the electrical supply enters the sign. Any moveable part of a sign, such as the cover of a service opening, shall be securely fastened by a chain or hinges. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.12(2))  
Sec. 26-153. - Maintenance. 
All signs and sign structures shall be properly maintained and kept in a neat and proper state of maintenance and appearance. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.13(1))  
Sec. 26-154. - Removal. 
Signs which no longer serve the purpose for which they are intended, or which are not maintained, or which have been abandoned, shall be removed by the owner of the sign or the owner of the premises on which the sign is erected after notice by the zoning administrator to remove the same. The sign owner, or owner of the premises, shall complete the removal within 30 days after notice is mailed by the zoning administrator by certified mail. If the sign is not removed within the time herein provided, the zoning administrator shall cause the sign to be removed and the cost thereof to be entered on the tax roll as a special charge against the real estate. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 24.13(2))  
Chapter 27 - STREETS AND PUBLIC WAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Injury to highways, Wis. Stats. § 86.02; trees on and adjacent to highway, Wis. Stats. § 86.03; highway encroachments, Wis. Stats. § 86.04; snow removal in private driveways, Wis. Stats. § 86.105; utility lines on highways, Wis. Stats. § 86.16; regulation of highway signs, Wis. Stats. § 86.19; advertising in highways prohibited in certain locations, Wis. Stats. § 86.191; local roads improvement program, Wis. Stats. § 86.31; flood damage aids, Wis. Stats. § 86.34; local regulation of privileges in streets, Wis. Stats. § 66.0425. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 27-1. - Penalties. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, penalties for violation of this chapter shall be as provided in section 70-309 or, if no penalty is provided in that section, then as provided in section 1-21(b).  
Secs. 27-2—27-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STREET USE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 27-21. - State statutes regulating the use of streets and highways adopted. 
The following sections of the Wisconsin Statutes, together with any future amendments thereto, are adopted and incorporated in the Code by reference, as if fully set forth herein, and every act prohibited or required by said statutes is prohibited or required by this article: 
Wis. Stats. § 66.0425 	Privileges in streets. 
Wis. Stats. § 86.01 	Materials left in highway. 
Wis. Stats. § 86.021 	Highways, cultivation of; injury by farm equipment. 
Wis. Stats. § 86.022 	Obstructing highway with embankment or ditch. 
Wis. Stats. § 86.025 	Camping on highways. 
Wis. Stats. § 86.03 	Trees on and adjacent to highway. 
Wis. Stats. § 86.04 	Highway encroachments. 
Wis. Stats. § 86.06 	Highways closed to travel; penalties. 
Wis. Stats. § 86.07 	Digging in highways or using bridges for advertising. 
 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.002)  
Secs. 27-22—27-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS 
 
Sec. 27-46. - Purpose. 
The streets under the jurisdiction of the city are primarily for the use of the public in the ordinary way. However, under proper circumstances, the public safety and human services committee may grant a permit for street use, subject to reasonable regulation and control. Therefore, this division is enacted to regulate and control the use of streets to the end that the health, safety and general welfare of the public and the good order of the city can be protected and maintained. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.20(1))  
Sec. 27-47. - Application. 
Persons or groups desiring to use city streets for special events shall make written application for a street use permit on a form provided by the city clerk and file with the city clerk. The application shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant or applicants. 
(2)  If the proposed street use is to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and of the authorizing responsible heads of such organization. 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be responsible for conducting the proposed use of the street. 
(4)  The date and duration of time for which the requested use of the street is proposed to occur. 
(5)  An accurate description of that portion of the street proposed to be used. 
(6)  The number of persons for whom use of the proposed street area is requested. 
(7)  The proposed use, described in detail, for which the street use permit is requested. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.20(2))  
Sec. 27-48. - Time frame. 
(a)  Applications to close three or more blocks of streets, or 1,200 or more feet, must be submitted not less than two months prior to the date of the proposed event. Applications to close less than three blocks of streets, or less than 1,200 feet, shall be submitted not less than 30 days prior to the date of the proposed event. If the time frame is not met, the permit will not be granted. 
(b)  Neighborhood events using but not closing streets shall register with the city clerk not less than two weeks prior to event. After registration is forwarded to and response received from necessary city staff, the clerk shall notify the registrant of the staff determination. If approved, no further action is necessary. If denied, the registrant may appeal as stated in section 27-50(c). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.20(3))  
Sec. 27-49. - Representatives to appear before public safety and human services committee. 
The person or representative of the group making application for a street use permit shall appear before the public safety and human services committee, prior to the granting of said street use permit to provide any additional information which is reasonably necessary to make a fair determination as to whether a permit should be granted. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.20(4))  
Sec. 27-50. - Procedure. 
(a)  Distribution of copies. Upon receipt of a street use permit application, the city clerk shall immediately forward copies of the application to the police, fire and public works departments and to the public safety and human services committee of the common council. The clerk's office shall review the application and determine all affected residences. Complete notice of the request, along with public safety and human services committee meeting information, shall be sent to all parties affected. 
(b)  Committee review and decision. The public safety and human services committee shall review the reports of the police, fire and public works departments and evaluate the application. Based upon the committee's evaluation, the committee shall either approve or deny the application in writing and may impose special conditions, provisions or requirements, if any. 
(c)  Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the committee may appeal to the common council by filing a notice of appeal with city clerk within ten days of the decision of the committee, stating the basis of the appeal. The common council may by majority vote reverse or modify the decision of the committee. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.20(5))  
Sec. 27-51. - Additional requirements for large-scale events. 
(a)  Cleaning and sanitation charges. The applicant shall agree to pay within 20 days of billing those costs incurred by the city for cleaning and sanitation services and delivery and pick-up of barricades as determined by the director of public works and presented in writing to the applicant. 
(b)  Performance bond. The applicant may be required to furnish a performance bond prior to being granted a permit. 
(c)  Insurance. For special events involving use of the streets for travel of any kind, the applicant shall agree to indemnify, defend and hold the city and its employees and agents harmless against all claims, liability, loss, damage or expense incurred by the city on account of any injury to or death of any person or damage to property caused by or resulting from the activities for which the permit is granted and shall secure this agreement by furnishing a certificate of comprehensive general liability insurance on a form provided by the city clerk naming the city, its employees and agents as additional insured. The insurance shall include coverage for contractual liability and property damage with minimum limits of $1,000,000.00 combined single limits per occurrence. The certificate of insurance shall provide a 30-day written notice to the city upon cancellation, nonrenewal or material change in the policy. 
(d)  Meeting with street use committee. The applicant must also meet with the street use committee, which consists of the city clerk, chief of police, and director of public works, or their designees, at least 45 days prior to the event. 
(e)  Notification of affected residents. The applicant is required to notify all affected property owners of the event 30 days prior to occurrence. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.20(6))  
Sec. 27-52. - Termination of street use permit. 
A street use permit for an event in progress may be terminated by the city police department if the health, safety and welfare of the public appears to be endangered by activities generated as a result of the event or the event is in violation of any of the conditions of the permit. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.20(7))  
Sec. 27-53. - Acts, activities subject to forfeiture. 
(a)  Any person who shall do any of the following shall upon conviction be subject to forfeiture as specified in section 70-309: 
(1)  Hold, sponsor or be in charge of any activity for which a street use permit is required without possessing a valid street use permit. 
(2)  Violate any condition placed upon a street use permit. 
(3)  Provide false or inaccurate information on a written application for a street use permit. 
(b)  Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.20(8))  
Sec. 27-54. - Fees. 
A fee schedule for street use shall be adopted as set forth in the annual budget appendix fee schedule. The fee shall accompany the application. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.20(9))  
Secs. 27-55—27-81. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - USE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 27-82. - Placing of offal, vegetables, garbage, etc., on streets prohibited. 
No person shall, directly or indirectly, scatter, throw, cast, drop, deposit, lay or direct any offal, vegetables, garbage, coal, nails, metals, glass, ashes, clay, earth or other thing upon any street, alley or sidewalk within the city. This does not include placing ashes, sand, sawdust or salt upon a sidewalk for safe pedestrian travel. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.085(1))  
Sec. 27-83. - Vehicles not to track mud. 
No person shall operate a vehicle upon the streets or highways of the city in a manner which causes excessive soil, dirt, mud, earth, sand, gravel or other organic materials to be deposited on the public right-of-way. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.085(2))  
Sec. 27-84. - Deposit of material in rights-of-way of street prohibited. 
No person shall place matter in any gutter or ditch within the right-of-way of any street or highway in the city so as to obstruct the flow of water therein unless such person shall provide a suitable culvert so as to provide for the free and unobstructed flow of water. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.085(3))  
Sec. 27-85. - Damage caused by deposit on streets. 
Any person depositing materials in or upon the street rights-of-way within the city in violation of the provisions of this division shall be liable for all damages which may accrue to the public due to the presence of such rubbish or material in the streets and for any costs incurred by the city for cleanup. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.085(4))  
Secs. 27-86—27-113. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - SNOW AND ICE 
 
Sec. 27-114. - Snow and ice to be removed from sidewalks. 
The owner of each lot or part of lot shall remove or cause to be removed all snow and ice which may have fallen or accumulated upon the sidewalk in front of the premises which he/she owns not later than 6:00 p.m. of the day after the same has ceased to fall or accumulate; provided that when ice has so formed upon any sidewalk that it cannot be removed, then the owner shall keep the same effectively sprinkled with sand, salt or other suitable substance in such manner as to prevent the ice from being dangerous, until such time as it can be removed, and then it shall be promptly removed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 18.18(1))  
Sec. 27-115. - Removal by city charged to property. 
The city street department shall cause to be cleared all sidewalks which shall not have been cleared of snow and ice by the owner as required in section 27-114. The department shall keep an accurate account of the expenses thereof and report the same to the city clerk, who shall annually prepare a statement of the expense so incurred in front of each lot or parcel of land and enter the amount thus determined in the tax roll as a special tax against said lot or parcel of land to be collected in all respects like other taxes upon real estate. Prosecution under 27-117 shall not bar the city from proceeding under this section nor shall proceeding under this section bar prosecution under section 27-117. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 18.18(2))  
Sec. 27-116. - Deposit of snow on public roadways prohibited. 
Snow removed from private property or driveway approaches shall not be deposited onto public roadways. Snow removed from edge of roadway to allow access to mailboxes shall be placed on terrace areas. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 18.18(3))  
Sec. 27-117. - Enforcement. 
Actions for violations of this section may be commenced by citation as provided by Wis. Stats. § 66.0113 and chapter 18 of this Code or by summons and complaint or warrant as provided by Wis. Stats. § 66.0114(1)(a). Any city police officer or the director of public works or designee may issue citations for violation of section 27-114. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 18.18(5))  
Secs. 27-118—27-147. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION, OBSTRUCTION AND OCCUPANCY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 27-148. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  In the exercise of governmental functions, the city has priority over all uses of the public rights-of-way. The city desires to anticipate and minimize the number of obstructions and excavations taking place therein and to regulate the placement of facilities in the rights-of-way to ensure that the rights-of-way remain available for public services and safe for public use. The taxpayers of the city bear the financial burden for the upkeep of the rights-of-way and a primary cause for the early and excessive deterioration of its rights-of-way is the frequent use of such rights-of-way. 
(b)  The city finds increased use of the public rights-of-way and increased costs to the taxpayers of the city and that these costs are likely to continue into the foreseeable future. 
(c)  The city finds that occupancy and excavation of its rights-of-way causes costs to be borne by the city and its taxpayers, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Administrative costs associated with public right-of-way projects, such as registration, permitting, inspection and supervision, supplies and materials. 
(2)  Management costs associated with ongoing management activities necessitated by public right-of-way users. 
(3)  Repair or restoration costs to the roadway associated with the actual excavation into the public right-of-way. 
(4)  Degradation costs defined as depreciation caused to the roadway in terms of decreased useful life, due to excavations into the public rights-of-way. 
(d)  In response to the foregoing facts, the city hereby enacts this article relating to the administration of and permits to excavate, obstruct and/or occupy the public rights-of-way. This article imposes reasonable regulations on the placement and maintenance of equipment currently within its rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some future time. This article also imposes reasonable restrictions on the placement of obstructions or other use of rights-of-way. It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of state and federal agencies. 
(e)  The purpose of this article is to provide the city with a legal framework within which to regulate and manage the public rights-of-way and to provide for the recovery of the costs incurred in doing so. This article provides for the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city as they use the rights-of-way of the city, as well as ensuring the structural integrity of the public rights-of-way. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.025(1))  
Sec. 27-149. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means any person requesting permission to excavate, obstruct and/or occupy a right-of-way. 
Degradation means the decrease in the useful life of the paved portion of the right-of-way, excluding the sidewalk right-of-way, caused by an excavation of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation did not occur. 
Department means the department of public works of the city. 
Emergency means a condition: 
(1)  That poses a clear and immediate danger to life or health, or of a significant loss of property; 
(2)  That requires immediate repair or replacement in order to restore service to a customer; or 
(3)  Where a vehicle is temporarily disabled and the owner has not made arrangements for its removal from any right-of-way. 
Engineer means the city engineer or his/her designee. 
Excavate means to dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or penetrate any part of a right-of-way. 
Facilities means all equipment owned, operated, leased or subleased in connection with the operation of a service or utility service, and shall include, but is not limited to, poles, wires, pipes, cables, underground conduits, ducts, manholes, vaults, fiber optic cables, lines and other structures and appurtenances. 
In , when used in conjunction with the term "right-of-way," means over, above, within, on or under a right-of-way. 
Local representative means a local person, or designee of such person, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make decisions for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this chapter. 
Obstruct means to place any object in a right-of-way so as to hinder free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way. 
Permittee means any person to whom a permit to occupy, excavate or obstruct a right-of-way has been granted by the city under chapter 70, article V, pertaining to offenses against property. 
Prequalified contractor means a contractor approved by the department on an annual basis to work in the right-of-way. 
Public utility has the meaning provided in Wis. Stats. § 196.01(5). 
Registrant means any person who has registered with the city to have his/her facilities located in any right-of-way. 
Repair means to perform construction work necessary to make the right-of-way useable for travel according to department specifications, or to restore equipment to an operable condition. 
Restore or restoration means the process by which an excavated right-of-way and surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is reconstructed, per department specifications. 
Right-of-way means the surface and space above, below, and adjacent to an improved or unimproved public roadway, highway, street, bicycle lane and public sidewalk in which the city has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.025(2))  
Sec. 27-150. - Administration. 
The engineer or his/her designee is responsible for the administration of the rights-of-way, and the permits and ordinances related thereto. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.025(3))  
Sec. 27-151. - Reservation of regulatory and police powers. 
The city, by the granting of a permit or registration to excavate, obstruct and/or occupy the right-of-way, or by registering a person under this article does not surrender or in any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights which it has now or may be hereafter granted to the city under the Constitution and statutes of the state to regulate the use of the rights-of-way by the permittee; and the permittee by its acceptance of a permit to excavate, obstruct and/or occupy the right-of-way or by registration under this article agrees that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory powers, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general law, and ordinances enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.025(27))  
Sec. 27-152. - Violation or failure to comply with article. 
Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $600.00. Each day such violation or failure to comply continues shall be considered a separate offense. In addition to the forfeiture, any person who violates this article shall be liable for any and all costs incurred by the city in removing obstructions and/or restoring the right-of-way to its condition prior to the occupancy or obstruction. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.025(29))  
Secs. 27-153—27-172. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION 
 
Sec. 27-173. - Registration for right-of-way excavation, construction, or permanent occupation. 
(a)  Each person who has, or seeks to have, facilities located in any right-of-way shall register with the department and pay the fee set forth in section 27-175. Registration will consist of providing application information and paying a registration fee. This section shall not apply to those persons who have facilities in the right-of-way pursuant to a franchise or other agreement. 
(b)  No person may construct, install, maintain, repair, remove, relocate or perform any other work on, or use any equipment or any part thereof in any right-of-way unless that person is registered with the department or is a prequalified contractor. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or amend the provisions of a city ordinance requiring persons to plant or maintain the street terrace in the area of the right-of-way between their property and the street curb or pavement, construct sidewalks or driveways or other similar activities. Persons performing such activities shall not be required to obtain any permits under this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.025(4))  
Sec. 27-174. - Registration information. 
The information provided to the department at the time of registration shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Each registrant's name, Diggers Hotline registration certificate number, street address and email address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers. 
(2)  The name, address and email address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or designee shall be available at all times. Current information regarding how to contact the local representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time of registration. 
(3)  A certificate of insurance on a form prescribed by the department. 
(4)  If the registrant is a corporation, a LLC or LLP, a copy of any certificate required to be filed under the state statutes as recorded and certified by the secretary of state. 
(5)  A copy of the registrant's certificate of authority from the state public service commission or other applicable state or federal agency, where the person is lawfully required to have such certificate from said commission or other state or federal agency. 
(6)  Execution of an indemnification agreement in a form prescribed by the department, if applicable. 
(7)  The registrant shall keep all of the information listed above current at all times by providing to the department information as to changes within 15 working days following the date on which the registrant has knowledge of any change. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.025(5))  
Sec. 27-175. - Registration fee. 
The department shall charge an annual registration fee as set forth in the annual budget appendix fee schedule. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.025(6))  
Sec. 27-176. - Reporting obligations. 
(a)  Every registrant shall, at the time of registration and no later than December 31 for the following each year, file a construction and major maintenance plan with the department. The department shall make available at the time of registration, and on January 15 of each year the department's construction and major maintenance plan. The registrant's plan and the department's plan shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the department and shall contain the information determined by the department to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the frequency of excavations of rights-of-way. The plan shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following information: 
(1)  The locations and the estimated beginning and ending dates of all projects planned to be commenced during the next calendar year; and 
(2)  The tentative locations and estimated beginning and ending dates for all projects contemplated for the following two calendar years. 
(b)  By February 15 of each year, the department will have available for inspection in its office a composite list of all projects of which the department has been informed in the annual plans. All registrants are responsible for keeping themselves informed of the current status of this list. 
(c)  Thereafter, by February 1, each registrant may change any project in its list and must notify the department of all such changes in said list. The department will make all such changes available for inspection in its office. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a registrant may at any time join in a project of another registrant listed by the other registrant or undertake any maintenance or construction project not listed in registrant's plan. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.025(7))  
Secs. 27-177—27-205. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS FOR EXCAVATION OR OCCUPATION 
 
Sec. 27-206. - Permit to excavate in right-of-way required. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article or other chapters of this Code, no person shall excavate any right-of-way without first having obtained an excavation permit from the department. A copy of any permit issued under this article shall be made available at all times by the permittee at the indicated work site and shall be available for inspection by the department upon request. 
(b)  Application for a permit shall be made to the department. Permit applications shall contain, and will be considered complete only upon compliance with the requirements of the following provisions: 
(1)  Registration with the department if required by this article. 
(2)  Submission of a completed permit application form, including all required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the proposed project and the location of all existing and proposed facilities that are part of applicant's proposed project. 
(3)  Payment of all money due to the city for: 
a.  Applicable permit fees and costs as set forth below; 
b.  Any unpaid fees or costs due for prior excavations; or 
c.  Any loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city because of applicant's prior excavations of the rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the city. 
(c)  The department shall, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 182.017(9), approve or deny a permit application no later than 60 days after receipt of the application. If the department fails to do so, the department shall be considered to have approved the application and granted the permit. If a department denies a permit application, the department shall provide the applicant a written explanation of the reasons for the denial at the time that the department denies the application. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.025(8))  
Sec. 27-207. - Excavation permit fee. 
The excavation permit fee shall be established by the department in an amount sufficient to recover the costs incurred by the city. This fee shall recover administrative and inspection costs, as well as degradation costs should the permittee choose to repair rather than restore the right-of-way. Payment of said fees shall be collected prior to issuance of the permit. However, the engineer may, with the advice and consent of the comptroller, establish a fee collection process from governmental agencies and private utilities in order to expedite the permitting system and recognize that certain excavations are deemed emergencies. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.025(9))  
Sec. 27-208. - Waiver of fees. 
Fees shall not be waived unless the work involved is a direct result of the engineer's demand that a plant owned by a utility be removed or relocated or unless waived by the board of public works on appeal. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.025(10))  
Sec. 27-209. - Fee schedule. 
(a)  The minimum fee for each excavation permit for a single address shall be set forth in the annual budget appendix fee schedule. The fee for a permit issued after commencing work, except in cases of emergency as determined by the engineer, shall be double the fees set forth herein. This permit fee shall be in addition to any forfeiture provided elsewhere in this article. 
(b)  For those permit applications which provide for a substantial undertaking of excavation within the public right-of-way attended by disruption of the general public and traffic, the engineer is authorized to assess the actual cost of the city employee's time engaged in the review and inspection of the anticipated work multiplied by a factor determined by the respective department to represent the city's cost for statutory expense, benefits, insurance, sick leave, holidays, vacation and similar benefits, overhead and supervision, said factor not to exceed 2.0, plus the cost of mileage reimbursed to city employees which is attributed to the work, plus all consultant fees associated with the work at the invoiced amount plus ten percent for administration. 
(c)  The city and its contractors shall not pay degradation fees for excavations due to general government functions. 
(d)  Permit fees paid for a permit that the department has revoked are not refundable. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.025(11))  
Sec. 27-210. - Right-of-way repair and restoration. 
(a)  Required. The permittee shall be required to repair the public right-of-way to department specifications, subject to inspection and acceptance by the department, and to pay a degradation fee, as per section 27-211, unless the permittee elects to restore the right-of-way pursuant to section 27-212. In addition to repairing its own work, the permittee must repair the general area of the work, and the surrounding areas, including the paving and its foundations, to the specifications of the department. The department shall inspect the area of the work and accept the work when it determines that proper repair has been made, per specifications of the department. 
(b)  Guarantees. The permittee guarantees its work and shall maintain it for 36 months following its completion. During this period it shall, upon notification from the department, correct all work to the extent necessary, using the method required by the department. Said work shall be completed within ten calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the department, not including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances constituting force majeure. 
(c)  Failure to repair/restore. If the permittee fails to repair/restore the right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the department, or fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all work required by the department, the department at its option may do such work. In that event the permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of repairing/restoring the right-of-way. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.025(12))  
Sec. 27-211. - Degradation. 
The general formula for computing the degradation fee shall be the cost per square yard for street, overlay and seal coat multiplied by the appropriate depreciation rate for that street multiplied by the area of the patch. The area of the patch shall be calculated by adding one foot to each side of the actual street cut. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.025(13))  
Sec. 27-212. - Restoration in lieu of repair and degradation. 
The permittee may elect to restore the excavation and surrounding pavement in lieu of repair and a degradation fee. The restoration shall be in accordance with the standard specifications for public works construction and the plans and specifications of the department. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.025(14))  
Sec. 27-213. - Notice of completion. 
When the work under any permit hereunder is begun and completed, the permittee shall notify the department. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.025(15))  
Sec. 27-214. - Site inspection. 
Permittee shall make the work site available to the department and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the work. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.025(16))  
Sec. 27-215. - Authority of department. 
At the time of inspection the city may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a threat to the life, health, safety or well-being of the public. The city may issue an order to the registrant or permittee for any work that does not conform to the applicable city standards, conditions or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten days after issuance of the order, the registrant or permittee shall present proof to the department that the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within the required time, the department may revoke the permit pursuant to section 27-217. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.025(17))  
Sec. 27-216. - Compliance with other laws. 
Obtaining a permit to excavate and/or occupy the right-of-way does not relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses, and authority and to pay all fees required by any other city, county, state, or federal rules, laws or regulations. A permittee shall comply with all requirements of local, state and federal laws. A permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable codes and established rules and regulations, and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who does the work. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.025(18))  
Sec. 27-217. - Revocations, suspensions, refusals to issue or extend permits. 
The department may refuse to issue a permit or may revoke, suspend or refuse to extend an existing permit if it finds any of the following grounds: 
(1)  The applicant or permittee is required to be registered per section 27-173 and has not done so; 
(2)  Issuance of a permit for the requested date would interfere with an exhibition, celebration, festival or other event; 
(3)  Misrepresentation of any fact by the applicant or permittee; 
(4)  Failure of the applicant or permittee to maintain required bonds and/or insurance; 
(5)  Failure of the applicant or permittee to complete work in a timely manner; 
(6)  The proposed activity is contrary to the public health, safety or welfare; 
(7)  The extent to which right-of-way space where the permit is sought is unavailable as determined by the engineer; 
(8)  The competing demands for the particular space in the right-of-way; 
(9)  The availability of other locations in the right-of-way or in other rights-of-way for the facilities of the permittee or applicant; 
(10)  The applicability of ordinances or other regulations of the right-of-way that affect location of facilities in the right-of-way; 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.025(19))  
Sec. 27-218. - Discretionary issuance. 
The department may issue a permit where issuance is necessary to: 
(1)  Prevent substantial economic hardship to a customer of the permittee or applicant; 
(2)  Allow such customer to materially improve its utility service; or 
(3)  Allow the permittee or applicant to comply with state or federal law or city ordinance or an order of a court or administrative agency. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.025(20))  
Sec. 27-219. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the department revoking, suspending, refusing to issue or refusing to extend a permit may file a request for review with the board of public works. A request for review shall be filed within ten days of the decision being appealed. Following a hearing, the board of public works may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the department. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.025(21))  
Sec. 27-220. - Emergency situations/work done without a permit. 
(a)  Each registrant shall immediately notify the city by verbal notice on an emergency phone number provided by the city of any event regarding its facilities that it considers to be an emergency. The registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency. Within two business days after the occurrence of the emergency the registrant shall apply for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith and otherwise fully comply with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  If the city becomes aware of any emergency regarding a registrant's facilities, the department may attempt to contact the local representative of each registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary to protect the public safety as a result of the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the registrant whose facilities occasioned the emergency. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.025(22))  
Sec. 27-221. - Nonemergency situations/work without a permit. 
Except in an emergency, any person who, without first having obtained the necessary permit, excavates a right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit, and shall in addition to any penalties prescribed by ordinance, pay double the normal fee for said permit, pay double all the other fees required by this article or other chapters of this Code, deposit with the department the fees necessary to correct any damage to the right-of-way and comply with all of the requirements of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.025(23))  
Sec. 27-222. - Discontinued operations. 
A registrant who has determined to discontinue its operations in the city must either: 
(1)  Provide information satisfactory to the department that the registrant's obligations for its facilities under this article have been lawfully assumed by another registrant; or 
(2)  Submit to the department a proposal and instruments for dedication of its facilities to the city. If a registrant proceeds under this section, the city may, at its option: 
a.  Accept the dedication for all or a portion of the facilities; 
b.  Require the registrant, at its own expense, to remove the facilities in the right-of-way at ground or above ground level; or 
c.  Require the registrant to post a bond or provide payment sufficient to reimburse the city for reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred in removing the facilities. 
However, any registrant who has unusable and abandoned facilities in any right-of-way shall remove it from that right-of-way within two years, unless the department waives this requirement. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.025(24))  
Sec. 27-223. - Abandoned facilities. 
(a)  Facilities of a registrant who fails to comply with this article, and which, for two years, remains unused shall be deemed to be abandoned. Abandoned facilities are deemed to be a nuisance. In addition, to any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity the city may, at its option: 
(1)  Abate the nuisance; 
(2)  Take possession of the facilities; or 
(3)  Require removal of the facilities by the registrant, or the registrant's successor in interest. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to a public utility that is required to follow the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 196.81. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.025(25))  
Secs. 27-224—27-254. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - TEMPORARY PERMITS 
 
Sec. 27-255. - Temporary occupancy or obstruction permit. 
(a)  Any person desiring to occupy or obstruct any right-of-way for any reason other than construction, excavation, or similar acts described elsewhere in this article shall apply for a temporary occupancy permit. The application for such permit shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name and contact information of person applying for permit. 
(2)  Purpose of permit. 
(3)  Location of occupation or obstruction. 
(4)  Dates of proposed occupancy of right-of-way. 
(5)  Fee for temporary occupancy permit. The department shall charge a fee for temporary occupancy permits, as set forth in the annual budget appendix fee schedule. 
(6)  The department shall issue or deny permits for temporary occupancy consistent with the purposes of this article. 
(b)  Temporary occupancy or obstruction permit. No occupancy permit shall be granted for a period exceeding three days, unless written justification is provided to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works as to why additional permit duration is warranted. The Director of Public Works may authorize occupancy permit durations up to 30 days. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.025(26); Ord. No. 2015-O-33, 12-8-2015)  
Secs. 27-256—27-273. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DRIVEWAYS AND STREET ACCESS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 27-274. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to promote the safe and efficient ingress and egress to and traffic upon public streets and roadways and establish standards for access driveways and curbs in the city in the interest of public safety, convenience and general welfare. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.01)  
Sec. 27-275. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Access means the recognized point of vehicular entry onto a roadway. 
Commercial access means access on public or private property which is used for commercial, industrial, mercantile purposes or for any use and purpose which cannot be defined as residential access under this section. 
Controlled access highway means a roadway on which traffic is such that the common council has found, determined and declared it to be necessary, in the interest of public safety, convenience and general welfare to regulate entrance upon and departure from the roadway except at places specifically designated and provided for such purposes, and to exercise special controls over traffic on such roadways. All highways listed in section 27-333 are found, determined and declared to be controlled access highways. 
Curb cut means that section of the concrete curb removed to permit ingress and egress from adjacent property and shall be measured between the points of tangency of the driveway approach at radii with the normal street curbing. 
Department means the city public works department. 
Driveway means every way or area in private ownership and used for vehicular driveway back of the street or highway right-of-way line. 
Driveway approach means an area improved for vehicular traffic on a public street right-of-way which connects the traveled portion of the street with a driveway. 
Permit means a permit to construct a driveway entrance and approach granted by the department upon application therefor in accordance with this article. 
Private roadway means any nonpublic roadway where more than two dwelling structures, or more than two commercial structures under separate ownership have access. 
Residential access means access to a residence, barn, private garage or other improved property and ordinarily used only the by owner or occupant of the premises, his/her guests and necessary service vehicles. Residential access does not include a single access to be used by three or more families to either single- or multiple-unit dwellings. 
Rural road means a street or highway on which the legal speed limit exceeds 35 miles per hour. 
Sight distance means stopping sight distance according to the design speed of a particular highway as indicated in the AASHTO, "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets," 1984, page 138, Table III-1 (Rounded for Design Values). 
Street, highway and roadway have the meanings set forth in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(64), (22) and (54), respectively, as incorporated in this Code by section 68-1. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.03)  
Sec. 27-276. - Variances. 
Where the zoning board of appeals finds that unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty from strict compliance with this article, it may vary the application of this article; provided: 
(1)  The public interest is secured; and 
(2)  The board finds that: 
a.  Such variation will not establish an undesirable precedent; and 
b.  Will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this article or chapter 22, pertaining to zoning, chapter 24, pertaining to land division or chapter 25, pertaining to architectural control. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.10)  
Secs. 27-277—27-300. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 27-301. - Required. 
A permit shall be required before commencing any construction, repair or alteration of any access drive, driveway, driveway approach, curb or gutter whether or not such action is temporary or for the purpose of permanent construction, repair or alteration. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.08(1))  
Sec. 27-302. - Application. 
Application for a driveway or access permit shall be made on a form prescribed by the department and filed with the head of the department. A processing fee as set forth in the annual budget appendix fee schedule shall be paid at the time the application is filed. In addition to the application, the department may require the submission of a scale drawing, showing the location of existing and proposed structures, and any other appropriate supporting data deemed necessary for adequate review of the application. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.08(2))  
Sec. 27-303. - Approval by head of department. 
The authority to approve, conditionally approve, or reject applications for driveway access permits is delegated to the head of the department. The head of the department shall render a written determination on the permit application within 30 days. If the application is rejected or conditionally approved, the determination shall state the reasons therefor. Prior to issuance, the department head shall refer all permit applications to the city zoning administrator for determination of compliance with the review requirements of chapter 22, pertaining to zoning, chapter 24, pertaining to land division, and chapter 25, pertaining to architectural control. No permit shall be issued until the zoning administrator notifies the head of the department in writing that all required approvals by the plan commission and common council have been given. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.08(3))  
Sec. 27-304. - Inspection. 
Before the work authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this article is commenced, the permittee shall notify the department. No person shall commence work on a driveway approach or use or permit the use of a driveway or access until such work is inspected and approved in writing by the department or its authorized agent. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.08(4))  
Sec. 27-305. - Restrictions and responsibilities. 
(a)  A permit issued under this article shall expire one year from the date of issuance. 
(b)  The permittee shall assume all responsibility for any injury or damage to persons or property resulting, directly or indirectly, during the construction, repair or alteration of any driveway approach or driveway under a permit issued under this section. 
(c)  No driveway or driveway approach shall be relocated or its dimensions altered without reapplication for a permit under this section. 
(d)  A driveway entrance and approach constructed for one type of use shall not be used under a different use until a permit for such different use at that location is obtained. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.08(5))  
Sec. 27-306. - Appeal. 
(a)  Time to file. If approval of any proposed or previously permitted driveway or access is denied or rescinded by the head of the department for any reason other than failure to obtain required approval under chapters 22, 24 and 25, the applicant, owner, lessor or lessee may appeal to the zoning board of appeals for review of the denial under Wis. Stats. ch. 68 by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within 30 days after such denial. 
(b)  Filing fee. At the time of filing the appeal, the appellant shall pay a fee as set forth in the annual budget appendix fee schedule to assist in defraying the cost of the review. 
(c)  Procedure. The appeal shall be conducted as a review of a final determination in accordance with Wis. Stats. §§ 68.10 to 68.12. 
(d)  Other appeals. Appeals under this article may be consolidated with appeals under chapter 22 relating to the same lot or parcel. Combined appeals shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the board of appeals pursuant to chapter 22. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.08(6))  
Sec. 27-307. - Repair and restoration of concrete curb and gutter. 
(a)  Where applicable, all permittees shall restore and repair to city standards all concrete curb and gutters removed, broken, or altered and all terrace areas damaged or disturbed by the construction, repair or alteration of any driveway pursuant to a permit under this article. The permittee shall be responsible for all such restoration and repair caused by work done pursuant to permit regardless of whether the area disturbed or curb and gutter damages abut the property of the permittee adjacent or other property. 
(b)  Upon the failure of any permittee to comply with subsection (a) of this section, the city may make such repairs as necessary and charge the cost of such repairs to the permittee under Wis. Stats. § 66.0703 as well as seek civil penalties or forfeitures under law. 
(c)  The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0703 and chapter 10, article II, division 6, shall be followed as a police power action in the case of reconstruction and repair of concrete curb and gutter damaged by ordinary wear and tear or weathering. Property deemed benefited by such reconstruction or repair shall be assessed 50 percent of the cost of the work and the city shall assume the remaining 50 percent of the cost. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.09)  
Secs. 27-308—27-332. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAYS 
 
Sec. 27-333. - Designation of controlled access highways. 
The following streets within the city limits are hereby designated as controlled access highways: 
(1)  All highways or portions of highways now located within the corporate boundaries of the city which were previously designated controlled access highways by the Dane County Board pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 83.027, including county highways MM, PD, D, M and B. 
(2)  All rural roads within the corporate boundaries of the city. 
(3)  All state trunk highways or connecting streets and all interstate highways within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.04(1))  
Sec. 27-334. - Adoption by city. 
By adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the city approves and confirms the designation of the roadways listed in section 27-333 as controlled access highways and hereby administers them as such. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.04(2))  
Sec. 27-335. - Easement of access limited. 
No owner or occupant of abutting land shall have the right of easement of access by reason of the fact that their property abuts on the controlled access highway, unless otherwise approved by the department. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.04(3))  
Sec. 27-336. - Alternate access routes to be utilized. 
Every owner and occupant of land abutting the controlled access highway shall utilize alternative access routes. If the department determines that no alternative access is available, there shall be allowed by the department one access onto the controlled access highway per abutting lot existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.04(4))  
Sec. 27-337. - Lawful existing access grandfathered; effect of discontinuance. 
All legally authorized existing points of access in use on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived as shown in the records of the county highway department or the city may be continued after the implementation of the provisions of this article; provided if the use of an established point of access is discontinued for a period of one year, the department may revoke the access privilege or require alterations or improvements to achieve compliance with the standards set forth in this article. Modifications to points of access which were established prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be subject to the requirements set forth herein. Nothing in this section shall be construed to constitute approval of an access shown on any approved plat or certified survey map unless such access was in use at the time of the designation of the highway as a controlled access highway by the authority then in charge of the highway. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.04(5))  
Sec. 27-338. - Revocation of access control. 
A controlled access highway designation shall remain in force until the access control is revoked by an action of the common council. The council shall revoke access control on a controlled access highway or any portion thereof, when, after traffic engineering surveys, investigations and studies and a public hearing, it finds that the revocation of access control on such highway or portion thereof is in the public interest. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.04(6))  
Sec. 27-339. - Review of point of access. 
Any point of access permitted under this article shall be subject to review and approval by the department where the department determines that there has been a change in the use which will affect safe and efficient ingress and egress to, and use of, a controlled access highway. This determination shall be based primarily on a significant change in the volume of traffic or the type of vehicle using the point of access. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.04(7))  
Secs. 27-340—27-366. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - NUMBER AND LOCATION OF DRIVEWAYS 
 
Sec. 27-367. - Number of driveways limited. 
(a)  Residential. Residential access shall be controlled by the following: 
(1)  Single-family residential: No more than one driveway access per dwelling. 
(2)  Two-family: One driveway for each dwelling unit, provided there is a minimum of five feet of separation between driveways. 
(3)  Multifamily: A maximum of one driveway for every 200 feet of street frontage not to exceed three total driveways per project, with the final level determined by the department in consultation with the plan commission during architectural and design review. 
(4)  Access onto county roadways and major collector streets shall be determined by a traffic impact analysis. Where possible, driveways shall be set a minimum of 250 feet from an intersection. 
(b)  Industrial. A maximum of one driveway approach for every 200 feet of frontage shall be permitted for industrial access. 
(c)  Commercial. A maximum of one driveway approach for every 125 feet of frontage, but not to exceed a total of two driveway approaches, shall be permitted for commercial (including office and multifamily) uses. A lesser or greater distance may be set by the department in consultation with the plan commission during architectural and design review. Access onto county roadways and major collector streets shall be determined by a traffic impact analysis. Where possible, driveways shall be set a minimum of 250 feet from an intersection. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.05)  
Sec. 27-368. - Sight distance. 
All driveways and driveway approaches shall be so located as to provide adequate sight distance in both directions along the street without interfering with vehicular or pedestrian traffic on the street, as required and approved by the department. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.06(1))  
Sec. 27-369. - Joint driveway approaches. 
No driveway approach shall be so constructed that any part of the same extends in front of property belonging to a person other than the permittee unless both property owners sign a joint application for a permit. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.06(2))  
Sec. 27-370. - Separation of driveways. 
Except when a greater distance is required by the department because of special safety concerns, the following minimum separation distances shall be maintained between driveway approaches: 
(1)  Residential: ten feet, but not less than the sum of the approach radii. 
(2)  Nonresidential: 50 feet on highways with maximum speed limit of 35 m.p.h. 
(3)  Nonresidential: 200 feet, on highways with speed limits in excess of 35 m.p.h. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.06(3))  
Secs. 27-371—27-398. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - GRADES, STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 
 
Sec. 27-399. - General construction and improvement specifications. 
All driveways, driveway approaches, curb cuts, curb construction or improvements shall be done under specifications prepared and approved by the department and in accordance with elevation and grades from time to time established by the department and filed in the office of the department and filed in the office of the department. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.07(1))  
Sec. 27-400. - Culverts. 
Culverts, aprons and walls shall be installed at all driveway approaches where storm sewer improvements have not been constructed. The size and installation of culverts shall be in accordance with specifications from time to time established by the department and filed in its office. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.07(2))  
Sec. 27-401. - Length. 
No driveway, except for those used for agricultural operations, shall exceed 300 feet in length (as measured along the centerline of such drive beginning at the pavement edge of the intersecting public street) unless such driveway is at least 20 feet in width, has an all-weather surface and has an approved fire department turnaround. If the driveway serves more than two separate dwelling structures, or two or more commercial buildings under separate ownership, it shall be classified as a private roadway and subject to the requirements of section 27-433. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.07(3))  
Sec. 27-402. - Curb openings. 
(a)  Curbs shall not be interrupted by openings for driveways or other accessways to private property unless the number and location of such interruptions have been approved by the department. 
(b)  When allowed, curb openings (excluding tapers) shall be no less than 14 feet nor more than 24 feet in width for single-family and multifamily dwellings. The curb opening (excluding tapers) for each driveway at a two-family dwelling unit shall not exceed 20 feet in width (40 feet total). The curb opening (excluding tapers) intended to afford access to commercial or industrial property shall be as determined and prescribed by the department, but no greater than 37 feet in width. The applicant may request an administrative variance for a commercial or industrial curb opening (excluding tapers) that is greater than 37 feet in width by providing documentation that demonstrates the following: 
(1)  Is needed to accommodate truck turning movements to the property to avoid impacts to the orderly flow of traffic on adjacent road. Applicant should supply: 
a.  Size of vehicle and frequency of truck activity; 
b.  Turning path exhibit for truck movements at the driveway; and 
c.  Designation of primary access for truck traffic to the site. 
(2)  Will not have an adverse impact upon properties adjacent to the property upon which the proposed driveway is located; 
(3)  Has been designed to address all public safety impacts associated with the increased curb opening width. 
The director of public works may require special conditions for the additional curb opening width such as, but not limited to, pavement markings, colored concrete, or signage. 
If the director of public works declines to approve a request for a larger commercial or industrial curb opening width, such request shall be referred to the board of public works for recommendation and to the council for action. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.06(4); Ord. No. 2015-O-28, § 1, 10-22-2015)  
Secs. 27-403—27-432. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - PRIVATE ROADWAYS 
 
Sec. 27-433. - Design and construction specifications. 
Private roadways shall be at least 24 feet in width, and constructed with either standard concrete curb and gutter or concrete ribbon curb and gutter. The required 24-foot width shall be measured from flow line to flow line of the curb and gutter. In addition, the private roadways shall meet the specifications as set forth in sections 27-434—27-440. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.06(5))  
Sec. 27-434. - Construction materials. 
All private roadways shall be constructed of asphalt or concrete and shall provide for subbase and pavement design equal to or greater than that for local public streets. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.07(4)(a))  
Sec. 27-435. - Turnarounds required for certain roads. 
If a private roadway is over 300 feet in length (centerline measurement) from the public street access and has a dead end, it shall provide a turnaround to meet the minimum following specifications: A cul-de-sac turnaround shall be accomplished with a minimum radius of 50 feet. A T-shape turnaround shall be at least 30 feet in length to each side of the edge of the main private roadway pavement (the total top of the T would be 84 feet). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.07(4)(b))  
Sec. 27-436. - Road names. 
Private roadways shall be named with a suffix ending in "way." All names shall comply with section 24-8(b). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.07(4)(c))  
Sec. 27-437. - Grade and curvature. 
Private roadway street grades shall not exceed eight percent, or be less than 0.48 percent. A road grade of up to ten percent may be approved for unique and special circumstances by the city engineer. Curvature of the private roadways shall have a radius of at least 100 feet. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.07(4)(d), (e))  
Sec. 27-438. - Intersections. 
Where there is an intersection of private roadways, the intersection shall provide a radius of at least 20 feet. At the private roadway intersection with a public street, the appropriate sidewalk section and grades shall be maintained. Drive openings shall not exceed those allowed under this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.07(4)(f), (g))  
Sec. 27-439. - Maintenance agreement required. 
The owners of the private roadways shall provide a maintenance agreement dealing with standard annual maintenance and longterm reconstruction maintenance to the city engineer for review and approval. The owners shall also be required to provide and maintain any and all private roadway signage for the users of the private roadway. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.07(4)(h))  
Sec. 27-440. - Plan commission may impose additional requirements. 
The plan commission, for projects requiring its approval may require parking stalls, pedestrian access, aesthetic improvements, pervious pavement or other measures to provide for the safe and efficient movement of persons and vehicles within the area served by the private roadway. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 25.07(4)(i))  
Chapter 29 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Historic preservation program, Wis. Stats. § 44.30 et seq.; definitions relating to historic preservation, Wis. Stats. § 44.31; city planning and zoning, Wis. Stats. § 623.23; comprehensive municipal planning, Wis. Stats. § 66.1001. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 29-1. - Purpose and intent. 
It is hereby declared a matter of public policy that the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of improvements of special character or special historical interest or value is a public necessity and is required in the interest of health, prosperity, safety and welfare of the people. The purpose of this chapter is to: 
(1)  Effect and accomplish the protection, enhancement and perpetration of such improvements which represent or reflect elements of the city's cultural, social, economic, political, engineering and architectural history; 
(2)  Safeguard the city's historic and cultural heritage, as embodied and reflected in such historic structures and sites; 
(3)  Foster civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the past; 
(4)  Protect and enhance the city's attractions to residents and visitors and serve as a support and stimulus to business and industry; 
(5)  Strengthen the economy of the city; and 
(6)  Promote the use of historic districts and landmarks for the education, pleasure and welfare of the people of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 29.01)  
Sec. 29-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alteration means any act or process that changes one or more of the exterior features of a structure or site including, but not limited to, the erection, construction, reconstruction, or removal of any structure or site. 
Commission means the landmarks preservation commission created under chapter 6, article II, division 2. 
Construction means the act of adding an addition to an existing structure or the erection of a new principal or accessory structure on a lot or property. 
Demolition means any act or process that destroys in part or in whole a historic site or structure. 
Historic site means any parcel of land whose historic significance is due to a substantial value in tracing human history, or whose archaeological significance is able to be documented, or upon which a historic event has occurred and which has been designated as a historic site pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or an improvement parcel, or part thereof, on which is situated a landmark and any abutting improvement parcel, or part thereof, used as and constituting part of the premises on which the landmark is situated. 
Historic structure means any improvement which has a special character or special historic interest or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the city, state or nation and which has been designated as a historic structure pursuant to provisions of this chapter. 
Improvement means any building, structure, place of work or art or other object constituting a physical betterment of property, or any part of such betterment. 
Improvement parcel is the unit or property which includes a physical betterment constituting an improvement and the land embracing the site thereof, and is treated as a single entity for the purpose of levying real estate taxes; provided, however, that the term "improvement parcel" shall also include any unimproved area of land which is treated as a single entity for tax purposes. 
Removal means any relocation of a structure on its site or to another site. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 29.02)  
Sec. 29-3. - Conditions dangerous to life, health and property. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit the making of necessary construction, reconstruction, alteration or demolition of any historic structure, any improvement on a historic site pursuant to order of any governmental agency or pursuant to any court judgment, for the purpose of remedying emergency conditions determined to be dangerous to life, health or property. In such cases, no approval from the commission shall be required. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 29.12)  
Sec. 29-4. - Landmarks preservation commission. 
This landmarks preservation commission shall have composition and membership as defined in sections 6-272 and 6-273. 
(1)  In addition to the powers and duties set forth in section 6-273, the commission shall have the power subject to section 29-5, to designate historic structures and historic sites within the city limits. Property owners or their designees may apply, at no cost, to be considered for designation, or the commission may undertake the designation procedure upon the majority vote of the commission members. Such designations shall be based upon criteria set forth in article III, division 2, of this chapter. Once designated by the commission, and approved by the common council, such historic structures and sites shall be subject to all the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Whenever a historic structure or historic site is designated, the commission shall provide a brief cultural and/or architectural analysis supporting the historical significance of the structure or site, specific guidelines for development if appropriate and a statement of preservation objectives. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, §§ 29.03, 29.05(1))  
Sec. 29-5. - Procedure for designation or rescission of historic structures and sites. 
(a)  The commission may, after notice and public hearing, establish historic structures and sites or rescind such designation after application of the criteria in sections 29-68 and 29-69. 
(b)  At least ten days prior to such hearing, the commission shall notify the owners of record of such property, as listed in the office of the city assessor and any person holding a claim or encumbrance against such property according to the record in the register of deeds, as well as persons who are owners of property in whole or in part, as listed in the office of the city assessor, situated within 300 feet of the boundaries of such property. Notice of such hearing shall also be published as a Class 1 notice, under the state statutes. 
(c)  The commission shall also notify the following: the parks and recreation department, fire department, police department, zoning and planning department and the councilmember from the district in which the proposed designation is located. Each aforementioned city department noted shall respond to the commission within 15 days of notification with its comments on the proposed designation or rescission. Failure to respond shall not delay the hearing. 
(d)  The commission shall then conduct such public hearing and, in addition to the notified persons, may hear expert witnesses, and shall have the power to subpoena such witnesses and records as it deems necessary. The commission may conduct an independent investigation into the proposed designation or rescission. 
(e)  Within ten days after the close of the public hearing, the commission may designate the property as either a historic structure or a historic site. In the case where the commission has had a request to rescind a designation, the commission shall make its determination within ten days after the close of the public hearing. The common council shall act to approve or disapprove a designation within 60 days of the date of the commission's recommendation. 
(f)  After such designation or rescission has been made, notification shall be sent to the property owner or owners, and to such other persons as appeared at the public hearing. Notification shall also be given to the city clerk, the parks and recreation department, zoning and planning department, assessing department, building inspection department, fire department, police department and the plan commission. The commission shall cause such designation or rescission to be recorded, at the city's expense, in the office of the Dane County Register of Deeds. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 29.05(2))  
Secs. 29-6—29-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION FUND 
 
Sec. 29-27. - Established. 
To facilitate proper maintenance of historic buildings and sites, the city shall establish a special interest-earning segregated account to receive monies earmarked for preservation from grants, donations or other funding sources, including any monies designated during the yearly budget process. Such funds may be issued on a grant basis to persons who may request financial assistance in order to maintain their historically designated property in the manner prescribed by this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 29.13(1))  
Sec. 29-28. - Grant application procedure. 
Grant application materials shall be formulated by and kept on file in the zoning/planning department. Applications for the monies in the account shall be reviewed by the landmarks preservation commission. The commission shall make recommendations to the zoning administrator/city planner who shall make the final determination to award, modify or not award a grant. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 29.13(2))  
Sec. 29-29. - Limitations. 
No grants may be submitted until the monies in the account total at least $5,000.00. If the funds fall below $1,000.00, a moratorium shall be placed on grant applications until the fund again reaches $5,000.00. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 29.13(3))  
Secs. 29-30—29-46. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC SITES AND STRUCTURES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 29-47. - Recognition plaques. 
At such time as a historic structure or historic site has been designated in accordance with the provisions of this article, such structure or site is eligible to have erected on it, at city expense, a suitable plaque declaring that such property is a designated historic structure or site. If a plaque is requested by the owner, and approved by the commission, the plaque shall state the accepted name of the landmark, the date of its construction, and other information deemed appropriate by the commission. In the case of a historic site which is not the site of a historic building, such plaque shall state the common name of the site, and such other information deemed appropriate by the commission. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 29.07)  
Secs. 29-48—29-67. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CRITERIA 
 
Sec. 29-68. - For structure and site designation. 
For purposes of this article, a historic structure or historic site designation may be placed on any site, natural or improved, including any building, improvement or structure located thereon, or any area of particular historic, architectural, cultural, archaeological, or geographical significance to the city such as historic structures or sites that: 
(1)  Exemplify or reflect the broad cultural, political, economic, geographical, prehistory, or social history of the nation, state or community; 
(2)  Are identified with historic personages or with important events in the national, state or local history; 
(3)  Embody the distinguishing characteristics or an architectural type or specimen, inherently valuable for a study of a period, style, method of construction, or of indigenous materials or craftsmanship; or 
(4)  Are representative of the notable work of a master builder, designer or architect whose individual genius influenced an age. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 29.04(1))  
Sec. 29-69. - Operating guidelines may be adopted by commission. 
The commission may adopt specific operating guidelines for landmark sites designation providing such are in conformance with the provisions in this division. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 29.04(2))  
Secs. 29-70—29-96. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CERTIFICATES OF APPROPRIATENESS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 29-97. - Required. 
(a)  No owner or person in charge of a historic site or structure shall undertake alteration, construction, removal or demolition upon such designated property or cause or permit any such work to be performed upon such property unless a certificate of appropriateness has been granted by the landmarks preservation commission. Any proposal for alteration, construction, removal or demolition involving a designated historic site or structure shall be filed with the landmarks commission, and no other city permits which may be required shall be granted until the landmarks commission has granted a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  If a project is undertaken without receiving a certificate of appropriateness, the commission may require that the work be removed and the structure or site returned to its appearance before alteration. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 29.05(3)(a))  
Sec. 29-98. - Initial review of application. 
Upon filing of any application with the landmarks commission, for alteration, construction or removal, the landmarks commission shall determine: 
(1)  Whether, in case of a designated historic site or structure, the proposed work would detrimentally change, destroy or adversely affect the significance of the site based on the analysis of the site made at the time of its designation; 
(2)  Whether, in the case of a designated historic structure, the proposed work would detrimentally change, destroy or adversely affect any exterior architectural feature of the improvement upon which said work is to be done; 
(3)  Whether, in the case of the construction of a new improvement upon a historic site, the new improvement would adversely affect the physical appearance of the site, or not harmonize with the external appearance of existing improvements on the site; and 
(4)  Whether the proposed alteration, construction, or removal does not conform to the guidelines for development or preservation objectives outlined in the analysis made at the time of designation. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 29.05(3)(b))  
Sec. 29-99. - Standards from grant or denial. 
In determining whether to grant approval of any application for alteration, construction or removal, the commission shall consider the following standards: 
(1)  Interiors. In general, the commission shall not regulate or find cause to deny an application for a certificate of appropriateness if the alternation or construction proposed for the interior of a structure does not affect the exterior of the structure. 
(2)  Height. All additions shall be no higher than the existing or original building. 
(3)  Second exit platforms. Second exit platforms shall not be applied to the front or side of a building, unless they are not visible from the street. 
(4)  Solar apparatus. Passive and active solar apparatus will be allowed only if such devices do not detract from the architectural integrity of the building and are as unobtrusive as possible. Solar apparatus will not be permitted if such devices hide from street view significant architectural features of the building or neighboring building, if their installation requires the loss of significant architectural features, or if they are of such a large scale that they become a major feature of the design. 
(5)  Repairs. Repairs in materials that exactly duplicate the original in composition, texture and appearance are encouraged. Repairs in new materials that duplicate the original in texture and appearance are also permitted. Repairs in materials that do not duplicate the original in appearance will be permitted on an individual basis if the repairs are compatible with the character and materials of the existing structure and if repairs that duplicate the original in appearance are prohibitively expensive. 
(6)  Restoration. Projects that will return the appearance of the building to an earlier appearance are encouraged and will be permitted if such projects are documented by photographs, architectural or archaeological research or other suitable evidence. 
(7)  Residing with aluminum or vinyl. Residing with aluminum or vinyl that replaces clapboards or nonoriginal siding on buildings originally sided with clapboards will be permitted only of the new siding imitates the width of the original siding within one inch, provided that all architectural details (such as window trim, wood cornices, and ornament) either remain uncovered or are duplicated exactly in appearance. Siding that imitates wood graining may be permitted. If more than one layer of siding exists on the building, all layers except the first must be removed before new siding is applied. If insulation is applied under the new siding, all trim must be built up so that it projects from the siding as in the original. 
(8)  Storms, screens and storm doors. The repair and retention of original storms, screens and storm doors, or the replacement of same with new units that duplicate the original in materials and appearance is encouraged. Replacements with nonoriginal materials, such as combination metal components, may also be permitted. If metal components are used, owners are encouraged to use metal components which have been factory enameled. Painting of raw aluminum storms after a year of weathering of the finish is encouraged. Storm doors that imitate a specific style shall be permitted only if the style matches the style of the building. 
(9)  Addition and alterations. 
a.  The appearance of street facades of a building shall not be altered unless the design is sensitive to the historic character of the building. Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing properties shall not be discouraged when such alterations and additions do not destroy significant historical, architectural, or cultural materials, and such design is compatible with the size, scale, color, materials, and character of the structure or site. 
b.  Whenever possible, new additions or alterations shall be done in such a manner that, if such additions or alterations were to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the structure would be unimpaired. 
c.  Roof alterations, resulting in an increased building volume, to provide additional windows, headroom, or area are not permitted, unless such alterations return the structure to an original documented condition. If the existing roofing material is the same as the original, changes in the appearance of roofing materials (not including color) will not be permitted except when the repair of the existing roof is unfeasible and the cost of replacing it in kind is prohibitive. The new roof shall match the original in appearance (not including color) as closely as economically possible. If the existing roofing material is not original to the house, the new roofing materials shall harmonize in color with the house. Thick wood shakes, rolled roofing and hexagonal shingles will not be allowed. Restoration to a documentable earlier appearance is encouraged. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 29.05(4))  
Sec. 29-100. - Determination. 
(a)  Time for making. The commission shall make a determination as to whether to grant a certificate of appropriateness within 30 days of an application. 
(b)  Grant of application. If the commission finds that the provisions in sections 29-97 through 29-100 have been satisfied, the commission shall grant approval to the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness to the applicant. Upon such approval, any other necessary city permits may be issued. 
(c)  Denial of application. A denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by a statement of the reasons for the denial. The commission shall make recommendations to the applicant concerning changes, if any, in the proposal that would cause the commission to reconsider its denial and shall confer with the applicant and attempt to resolve as quickly as possible the differences between the owner and commission. The applicant may resubmit an amended application which incorporates the commission's concerns or suggestions. 
(d)  Appeal. The commission's action to approve or deny an application for a certificate of appropriateness may be appealed to the board of appeals according to the procedure in division 2 of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 29.05(5))  
Sec. 29-101. - Rescission of designation. 
Any party who is listed as the owner of record of a historic structure or site at the time of its designation, who can demonstrate to the commission that by virtue of such designation he/she is unable to find a buyer willing to preserve such historic structure or site, even though he/she had made reasonable attempts in good faith to find and attract such a buyer, may petition the commission for a rescission if it designation. Following the filing of such petition with the secretary of the commission, the procedure outlined in section 29-5 shall be followed and in addition: 
(1)  The owner and the commission shall work together in good faith to locate a buyer for the subject property who is willing to abide by its designation. 
(2)  If, at the end of a period not exceeding one year from the date of such petition, no buyer can be found, and if the owner still desires to obtain such rescission, the commission shall rescind its designation of the subject property. 
(3)  In the event of rescission, the commission shall notify the city clerk, the building inspection department and the city assessor of same, and shall cause the same to be recorded, at its own expense, in the office of the county register of deeds. 
(4)  Following any such rescission, the commission may not redesignate the subject property a historic structure or site for a period of not less than five years following the date of rescission. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 29.09)  
Secs. 29-102—29-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - APPEAL 
 
Sec. 29-131. - Persons entitled to appeal. 
An appeal of a decision of the commission to approve or deny a certificate of appropriateness may be taken to the board of appeals by the applicant for the certificate of appropriateness or by the councilmember from the district in which the subject structure or site is located. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 29.06(1))  
Sec. 29-132. - Procedure. 
Such appeal shall be initiated by filing a petition to appear, specifying the grounds therefor, with the board of appeals within ten days of the date the decision of the commission is made. The board of appeals shall follow its rules and procedures for hearing of appeals, including scheduling of a public hearing within 30 days and the notification of property owners within 300 feet of the subject property. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 29.06(2))  
Sec. 29-133. - Decision. 
After a public hearing the board may, by favorable vote of four members, reverse or modify the decision of the landmarks commission if, after balancing the interest of the public in preserving the subject property and the interest of the owner in using it for his/her own purposes, the board finds that, owing to special conditions pertaining to the specific piece of property, failure to approve or modify the proposal will preclude any and all reasonable use of the property and/or will cause serious hardship for the owner, provided that any self-created hardship shall not be a basis for reversal or modification of the landmarks commission's decision. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 29.06(3))  
Secs. 29-134—29-164. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - DEMOLITION 
 
Sec. 29-165. - Permit, approval of commission and certificate of appropriateness required. 
No permit to demolish all or part of a designated historic structure or site shall be granted by the city except as provided in this article. No owner or operator of a historic structure or site shall be granted a permit to demolish such property unless approval therefor has been granted by the landmarks commission and a certificate of appropriateness has been issued. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 29.05(6)(a))  
Sec. 29-166. - Application. 
An application for a permit to demolish all or part of a historic structure or site shall be filed with the landmarks commission either prior to or concurrent with the filing of a demolition permit from the building inspection department. Such application shall be made in all cases, both when demolition is considered in conjunction with a special development plan, a rezoning plan or a conditional use plan. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 29.05(6)(a)(1))  
Sec. 29-167. - Suspension of action on application; effect of failure to suspend or issue determination. 
Upon filing of an application for a permit to demolish such property, the landmarks commission may suspend action on the application for a period not to exceed one year from the date of the filing of application for the demolition permit. Failure to grant approval, or to issue a written determination to suspend action on the application within 30 days of the application date shall be deemed approval for the demolition, provided that the determination period may be extended an additional 30 days by written stipulation of the applicant and the commission. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 29.05(6)(a)(2))  
Sec. 29-168. - Applicant's rights and duties upon suspension of action on application. 
If the commission determines to suspend action on the application, the commission and the applicant shall undertake negotiations to find a mutually agreeable method of saving the subject property. During negotiations, the owner shall take whatever steps are necessary to prevent further deterioration of the structure or site. At the end of the one-year period the commission shall act on the suspended application by either granting or refusing to grant approval for the proposed demolition. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 29.05(6)(a)(3))  
Sec. 29-169. - Standards to be applied in considering application. 
In determining whether to grant approval of any demolition, the commission shall consider and may give decisive weight to any or all of the following: 
(1)  Whether the building or structure is of such architectural or historic significance that its demolition would be detrimental to the public interest and contrary to the general welfare of the people of the city and the state; 
(2)  Whether demolition of the subject property would be contrary to the purpose and intent of this chapter as set forth in section 29-1 and the objectives outlined in the analysis made at the time of designation; 
(3)  Whether the building or structure is of such old and unusual or uncommon design, texture and/or material that it could not be reproduced or be reproduced only with great difficulty and/or expense; 
(4)  Whether retention of the structure or site would promote the general welfare of the people of the city and the state by encouraging the study of American history, architecture and design or by developing an understanding of the American culture and heritage; 
(5)  Whether the structure or site is in such a deteriorated condition that it is not structurally or economically feasible to preserve or restore it, provided that any hardship or difficulty claimed by the owner is not self-created or the result of any failure to maintain the property in good repair. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 29.05(6)(b))  
Sec. 29-170. - Appeal. 
An appeal from the decision of the landmarks commission to approve or deny a demolition application shall be made to the board of appeals as set forth in article IV, division 2, of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 29.05(6)(c))  
Secs. 29-171—29-193. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - MAINTENANCE 
 
Sec. 29-194. - Duty to keep in good repair. 
Every person in charge of a historic structure or historic site shall keep in good repair all of the exterior portions of such improvement and all interior portions thereof, which, if not so maintained, may cause or tend to cause the exterior portions of such improvement to fall into a state of disrepair. This provision shall be in addition to all other provisions of law requiring such improvement to be kept in good repair. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 29.08)  
Sec. 29-195. - City's right to inspect. 
Every person in charge of any historic structure or historic site shall maintain same or cause or permit same to be maintained in a condition with the provisions of this chapter. The common council may appoint the building inspection department or any other individual or group of individuals to enforce this article. The duties of the inspection officer shall include periodic inspection at intervals provided by the common council of designated historic structures and sites. These inspections may include physical entry upon the property and improvement, with permission of the owner, to ensure that interior alterations or maintenance will not jeopardize the exterior appearance or structural stability of the improvement. If an owner refuses permission for the enforcement officer to enter for purposes of inspection, the inspection officer may obtain a warrant of entry pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0119 and take any other reasonable measures to further enforcement of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 29.10)  
TITLE III BUILDING AND ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL  
Chapter 30 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Requirements for floodplain regulation, Wis. Stats. § 87.30; town construction site erosion control and stormwater management zoning, Wis. Stats. § 60.627; conservation generally, Wis. Stats. § 23.09 et seq.; public lands administration, Wis. Stats. § 24.01 et seq.; protection of forest lands and forest productivity, Wis. Stats. § 26.01 et seq.; navigable waters, harbors, and navigation, Wis. Stats. § 30.01 et seq.; public inland waters, Wis. Stats. § 33.001 et seq.; nuisance weeds, Wis. Stats. § 23.235; flood damage aids on highways, Wis. Stats. § 86.34; flood control, Wis. Stats. § 87.01 et seq.; drainage of lands, Wis. Stats. § 88.01 et seq.; floodplain zoning, Wis. Stats. § 87.30; soil and water conservation and animal waste management, Wis. Stats. § 92.01 et seq.; municipal soil conversation on private land, Wis. Stats. § 92.115; groundwater protection standards, Wis. Stats. § 160.001 et seq.; smoke as health hazard, Wis. Stats. § 254.57; environmental health, Wis. Stats. § 251.04 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 30-1—30-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 30-19. - Introduction. 
(a)  Authority. This article is adopted under the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 62.11(5). 
(b)  Findings and purpose. The city finds that urbanizing land uses have accelerated the process of soil erosion, runoff and sediment deposition in surface waters within the city. It is, therefore, declared to be the purpose of the article to control and, if possible, prevent soil erosion and minimize stormwater runoff increases and, thereby, to preserve the natural resources, control floods and prevent impairment of property, protect the quality of public waters, preserve wildlife and conservancy areas, and protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the people of the city. 
(c)  Applicability. This article applies to use of lands within the incorporated boundaries of the city and the public and private lands subject to extraterritorial review as provided by Wis. Stats. ch. 236. 
(d)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or interfere with any existing easement, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations, ordinances or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, wherever this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall govern. 
(e)  Interpretation. In its interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be held to be the minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the city and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by state law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 27.01)  
Sec. 30-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Affected means that a regulated activity has significantly: 
(1)  Caused negative impacts on water quality or the use or maintenance of land or business; or 
(2)  Endangered one's health, safety, or general welfare. 
Agricultural means related to or used for the production of food and fiber, including but not limited to, general farming, livestock and poultry enterprises, grazing, nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod production, cranberry production and wild crop harvesting. Clearing and grubbing of an area or structural development are not agricultural activities. 
Average annual rainfall means measured precipitation in Madison, Wisconsin, between March 12 and December 2, 1981. 
Bank erosion means the removal of soil or rock fragments along the banks or bed of a stream channel resulting from high flow after rain events. 
Best management practice means a practice, technique, or measure that is an effective, practical means of preventing or reducing soil erosion or water pollution, or both, from runoff both during and after land development activities. These can include structural, vegetative or operational practices. 
City engineer means the municipal employee or contracted entity designated by the common council as the local approval authority responsible for administering this article. 
Cold water community means surface waters capable of supporting a community of cold water fish and other aquatic life, or serving as a spawning area for cold water fish species as provided in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 102.04(3)(a). 
Connected imperviousness means an impervious surface that is directly connected to a separate storm sewer or water of the state via an impervious flow path. 
Construction site erosion control means preventing or reducing soil erosion and sedimentation from land disturbing activity. 
Deep tilling means a practice that is implemented to restore soil structure to pre-developed conditions by cutting a series of horizontal ridges and depressions in the soil perpendicular to the direction of flow. 
Direct conduits to groundwater means wells, sinkholes, swallets, fractured bedrock at the surface, mine shafts, non-metallic mines, tile inlets discharging to groundwater, quarries, or depressional groundwater recharge areas over shallow fractured bedrock. 
Effective infiltration area means the area of the infiltration system that is used to infiltrate runoff and does not include the area used for site access, berms or pretreatment. 
Erosion (soil erosion) means the detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Excavation means any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the resulting conditions. 
Existing development means buildings and other structures and impervious area existing prior to August 22, 2001. 
Fill means any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported, or moved to a new location and shall include the resulting conditions. 
Financial security instrument means a surety bond, performance bond, maintenance bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or similar guarantees submitted to the city to ensure that requirements of article are carried out in compliance with the stormwater management plan. 
Flood/flooding means a temporary rise in the level of water which results in the inundation of areas not ordinarily covered by water. 
Groundwater protection area means wellhead protection area restricted zones as identified in article IX of chapter 22, areas within 100 feet of a private well, and areas where seasonal high groundwater is less than five feet below ground surface. 
Gully erosion means a severe loss of soil caused by or resulting in concentrated flow of sufficient velocity to create a defined flow channel. 
Heavily disturbed site means a site where an area of land is subjected to significant compaction due to the removal of vegetative cover or earthmoving activities, including filling. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG) has the meaning used in the runoff calculation methodology promulgated by the United States Natural Resources Conservation Service Engineering Field Manual for Conservation Practices. 
Illicit connection means any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows the discharge of sanitary waste to the public stormwater system and any connections to the public stormwater system from indoor drains. 
Illicit discharge means any discharge to the public stormwater system that is not composed entirely of stormwater runoff except discharges with a state pollutant discharge elimination system permit or other discharges permitted by the city. 
Impervious surface means any land cover that prevents rain or melting snow from soaking into the ground, such as roofs (including overhangs), roads, sidewalks, patios, driveways and parking lots. For purposes of this article, all road, driveway or parking surfaces, including gravel surfaces, shall be considered impervious, unless specifically designed to encourage infiltration and approved by the city engineer. 
Infiltration, for the purposes of this article, refers to any precipitation that does not leave the site as surface runoff. 
Infiltration system means a device or practice such as a basin, trench, rain garden or swale designed specifically to encourage infiltration, but does not include natural infiltration in pervious surfaces such as lawns, redirecting of rooftop downspouts onto lawns or minimal infiltration from practices such as swales or roadside channels designed for conveyance and pollutant removal only. 
Internally drained watershed means any drainage basin or watershed that does not discharge stormwater during a storm of 24-hour duration and two-year recurrence interval with the land in its pre-development condition. 
Land disturbing activities means any land alterations or disturbances that may result in soil erosion, sedimentation, or change in runoff including, but not limited to, removal of ground cover, grading, excavating, and filling of land. 
Lightly disturbed site means a site where an area of land is subjected to minor compaction due to the limited removal of vegetative cover or earthmoving activities. 
Local land division ordinance means any county, city, village or town ordinance adopted under Wis. Stats. ch. 236 to regulate the division of land. 
Maximum extent practicable (MEP) means a level of implementing best management practices in order to achieve a performance standard specified in this article which takes into account the best available technology, cost effectiveness and other competing issues such as human safety and welfare, endangered and threatened resources, historic properties and geographic features. MEP allows flexibility in the way to meet performance standards and may vary based on the performance standard and site conditions. 
New development means any of the following activities: 
(1)  Structural development, including construction of a new building or other structures; 
(2)  Expansion or alteration of an existing structure that results in an increase in the surface dimensions of the building or structure; 
(3)  Land disturbing activities; or 
(4)  Creation or expansion of impervious surface. 
Non-erosive velocity means a rate of flow of stormwater runoff, usually measured in feet per second, that does not erode soils. Non-erosive velocities vary for individual sites, taking into account topography, soil type, and runoff rates. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the public stormwater system that is not composed entirely of stormwater runoff. 
Peak flow means the maximum rate of flow of water at a given point in a channel, watercourse, or conduit resulting from the predetermined storm or flood. 
Pervious surface means any land cover that permits rain or melting snow to soak into the ground. 
Plan means an erosion control plan required by section 30-22 or a stormwater management plan required by section 30-23. 
Plan review agency means the city public works department or a contracted entity charged by the city with the responsibility for reviewing stormwater and erosion control plans under this article. 
Plat review officer means the city planning and zoning department or a contracted entity charged by the city with the responsibility for reviewing land divisions, certified survey maps or subdivision plats, or any combination thereof, under Wis. Stats. ch. 236. 
Post-development refers to the extent and distribution of land cover types anticipated to occur under conditions of full development of the submitted plan. This term is used to match pre-development and post-development stormwater peak flows as required by this article. 
Pre-development refers to the extent and distribution of land cover types present before the initiation of the proposed land development activity, assuming that all land uses prior to land disturbing activity are in good condition as described in the Natural Resources Conservation Service Technical Release 55, "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds" (commonly known as TR-55). This term is used to match pre-development and post-development stormwater peak flows as required by this article. In a situation where cumulative impervious surface created after August 21, 2001, exceeds the 20,000-square-foot threshold, the pre-development conditions shall be those prior to the proposed land disturbance. 
Public stormwater system means all public storm sewers, drainage conduits, drainage conveyances, municipal streets, roadside ditches, curb and gutter, catch basins, storm drain inlets, channels, detention basins, and public greenways, and all improvements thereto, which are operated to collect, convey, store, absorb, inhibit, treat, use or reuse stormwater runoff to prevent or reduce flooding, environmental degradation, and water pollution. 
Recharge means the portion of the average annual rainfall that infiltrates into the soil and becomes groundwater. The term "recharge" does not include evaporation, transpiration, or runoff from the site. 
Redevelopment means any construction, alteration or improvement exceeding 4,000 square feet of land disturbance performed on sites where the existing site is predominantly developed as commercial, industrial, institutional or multifamily residential uses. Projects may include a mix of redevelopment and new impervious surfaces. New impervious surfaces added as a result of redevelopment are subject to section 30-23(1). 
Runoff curve number (RCN) has the meaning used in the runoff calculation methodology promulgated by the United States Natural Resources Conservation Service Engineering Field Manual for Conservation Practices. 
Sediment means solid earth material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, gravity or ice, and has come to rest on the earth's surface at a different site. 
Sedimentation means the deposition of eroded soils at a site different from the one where the erosion occurred. 
Sheet and rill erosion means a loss of soil caused by sheet flow or shallow concentrated flow, and characterized by an absence of channeling or a relatively uniform loss across the exposed upper layer of the soil or shallow irregular scouring of the soil surface. 
Site means the bounded area described in an erosion control plan or stormwater management plan. 
Slope means the net vertical rise over horizontal run, expressed as a percentage, which represents a relatively homogeneous surface incline or decline over the area disturbed. 
Soil loss rate means the rate, usually measured in tons per acre per year, at which soil is transported beyond the perimeter of a given control site and which occurs as a result of sheet and rill erosion. This term does not apply to soil movement resulting from concentrated flow such as gully or bank erosion. 
Storm events means the precipitation amounts that occur over a 24-hour period that have a specified recurrence interval for the county. For example, one-year, two-year, ten-year and 100-year storm events mean the precipitation amounts that occur over a 24-hour period that have a recurrence interval of one, two, ten and 100 years, respectively. 
Stormwater means the flow of water which results from, and which occurs during and immediately following, a rainfall or snowmelt or icemelt event. 
Stormwater management means any measures taken to permanently reduce or minimize the negative impacts of stormwater runoff quantity and quality after land development activities. 
Stormwater runoff/runoff means the waters derived from rains falling or snowmelt or icemelt occurring within a drainage area, flowing over the surface of the ground and collected in channels, watercourses or conduits. 
Street reconstruction means removal and replacement of the road subgrade, where existing stormwater conveyance systems are modified. 
Structure means any human made object with form, shape and utility, either permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon, or set into the ground, streambed or lake bed. 
Unnecessary hardship means that circumstance where special conditions, which were not self-created, affect a particular property and make strict conformity with regulations unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of this article. 
USLE means universal soil loss equation. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 27.02; Ord. No. 2014-O-06, § 2, 3-25-2014)  
Sec. 30-21. - Legislative findings and intent. 
(a)  The city finds that construction site erosion and uncontrolled stormwater runoff from land disturbing and land development activities have significant adverse impacts upon regional water resources and the health, safety, property and general welfare of the community, and diminish the public enjoyment and use of natural resources. Specifically, soil erosion and stormwater runoff can: 
(1)  Carry sediment, nutrients, pathogens, organic matter, heavy metals, toxins and other pollutants to regional lakes, streams and wetlands; 
(2)  Diminish the capacity of water resources to support recreational and water supply uses and a natural diversity of plant and animal life; 
(3)  Clog existing drainage systems, increasing maintenance problems and costs; 
(4)  Cause bank and channel erosion; 
(5)  Increase downstream flooding; 
(6)  Reduce groundwater recharge, which may diminish stream base flows and lower water levels in regional lakes, ponds and wetlands; 
(7)  Contaminate drinking water supplies; 
(8)  Increase risk of property damage and personal injury; and 
(9)  Cause damage to agricultural fields and crops. 
(b)  The city also finds that effective sediment and stormwater management depends on proper planning, design, and timely installation of conservation and management practices and their continuing maintenance. 
(c)  The purpose of this article is to set forth the minimum requirements for construction site erosion control and stormwater management that will diminish threats to public health, safety, public and private property and natural resources of the city. 
(d)  This article is intended to regulate construction site erosion and stormwater runoff, to accomplish the following objectives: 
(1)  Promote regional stormwater management by watershed; 
(2)  Minimize sedimentation, water pollution from nutrients, heavy metals, chemical and petroleum products and other contaminants, flooding and thermal impacts to the water resources of the city; 
(3)  Promote infiltration and groundwater recharge; 
(4)  Protect functional values of natural watercourses and wetlands; 
(5)  Provide a set of performance standards that are consistent with the standards set forth by the county; 
(6)  Achieve an appropriate reduction in sediment load rates to downstream waters compared to no controls for all new development, redevelopment, and street reconstruction; 
(7)  Ensure no increase in temperature of stormwater post-construction in order to protect cold water communities; 
(8)  Ensure no increase in the rate of surface water drainage from sites during or after construction; and 
(9)  Protect public and private property from damage resulting from runoff or erosion. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 27.03; Ord. No. 2014-O-06, § 2, 3-25-2014)  
Sec. 30-22. - Applicability of requirement for erosion control permits. 
Unless expressly exempted by section 30-24, an erosion control permit under section 30-26 shall be required and all construction site erosion control provisions of this article shall apply to any of the following activities in the city: 
(1)  Land disturbing activity in excess of 4,000 square feet; 
(2)  Land disturbing activity that involves the excavation or filling, or a combination of excavation and filling, in excess of 400 cubic yards of material; 
(3)  Land disturbing activity that disturbs more than 100 linear feet of road ditch, grass waterway or other land area where surface drainage flows in a defined open channel; including the placement, repair or removal of any underground pipe, utility or other facility within the cross section of the channel; 
(4)  Any new public or private roads or access drives longer than 125 feet; 
(5)  Development that requires a subdivision plat or certified survey map, as defined in the applicable local land division ordinances; 
(6)  Any installation of utilities in which underground conduits, cables, piping, wiring, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, etc., will be laid, repaired, replaced, or enlarged, which will involve more than 300 linear feet of trenching or earth disturbance; 
(7)  Land disturbing activity that disturbs less than 4,000 square feet of land, including the installation of access drives, that the city engineer determines to have a high risk of soil erosion or water pollution, or that may significantly impact a lake, stream, or wetland area. Examples of activities with a high risk of soil erosion or water pollution may include, but are not limited to, land disturbance on erodible soil or disturbance adjacent to lakes, rivers, streams or wetlands All such determinations made by the city engineer shall be in writing, unless waived by applicant. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 27.04; Ord. No. 2014-O-06, § 2, 3-25-2014)  
Sec. 30-23. - Applicability of requirement for stormwater control permits. 
Unless otherwise exempted by section 30-24, a stormwater control permit under section 30-26 shall be required and all stormwater management provisions of this article shall apply to any of the following activities within the city: 
(1)  Any development after August 22, 2001, that results in the cumulative addition of 20,000 square feet of impervious surface to the site; 
(2)  Any development that requires a subdivision plat or certified survey map as defined in applicable local land division ordinances; 
(3)  Redevelopment, as defined in section 30-20; 
(4)  Other land development activities, including, but not limited to, redevelopment or alteration of existing buildings and other structures, that the city engineer determines may significantly increase downstream runoff volumes, flooding, soil erosion, water pollution or property damage, or significantly impact a lake, stream, or wetland area. All such determinations shall be made in writing unless waived by the applicant. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 27.05; Ord. No. 2014-O-06, § 2, 3-25-2014)  
Sec. 30-24. - Exemptions and clarifications. 
(a)  The following activities are exempt from all requirements of this article: any activity directly related to the planting, growing and harvesting of agricultural crops except the construction of a building or other structure. 
(b)  The following activities are exempt from the construction site erosion control provisions of section 30-22: 
(1)  One- and two-family dwelling units regulated under the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code adopted in chapter 35. Land disturbing activities in excess of one acre, or not associated with the construction of a dwelling, are not exempt from this article. The city shall regulate these sites during the period that residential building permits are in effect, consistent with then-existing state uniform dwelling code requirements. 
(2)  Construction of public buildings and buildings that are places of employment relating to activities specifically regulated by the state department of commerce during the period that department of commerce-authorized building permits are in effect and specific erosion control procedures on these construction sites are effective, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 281.33. 
(3)  State building projects subject to Wis. Stats. § 13.48(13) and state highway projects subject to Wis. Admin. Code ch. Trans 401. 
(c)  The following activities are exempt from the infiltration standards described in section 30-28(b)(6), pertaining to stormwater performance standards. 
(1)  Redevelopment sites. 
(2)  New development sites with less than ten percent connected imperviousness based on complete development of the post-construction site, provided the cumulative area of all impervious surfaces is less than one acre. 
(3)  Agricultural facilities and practices. 
(4)  Areas where the infiltration rate of the soil is less than 0.6 inches/hour measured at the bottom of the proposed infiltration system where the soil layer is not easily removed or manipulated. 
(5)  Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet for commercial and industrial development. 
(6)  Roads in commercial, industrial and institutional land uses, and arterial roads. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the language of subsection (b)(2) of this section, activities unrelated to actual building construction shall be subject to all the requirements of this article. These activities shall include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Land disturbing activity prior to excavation for foundation work; 
(2)  Landscaping; 
(3)  Installation of driveways, parking areas and sidewalks; 
(4)  Earthwork on an area greater than 4,000 square feet on sites not directly related to structural concerns; and 
(5)  Development of ponds and channelized watercourses, commercial parks, and landing strips or airport runways. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the language of subsection (b)(3) of this section, the following activities are subject to the requirements of this article: 
(1)  Buildings and activities of municipalities; 
(2)  Buildings and activities of school districts; and 
(3)  Local highway and municipal street projects. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 27.06; Ord. No. 2014-O-06, § 2, 3-25-2014)  
Sec. 30-25. - Regulations for lands not otherwise subject to the provisions of this article. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, it shall be a violation of this article for any condition to be established, maintained, or allowed to be maintained, that results in excessive runoff or erosion to adjacent land, public streets or water bodies. Penalties and remedies may be sought for such activities as provided in section 30-26. Erosion and runoff are excessive when in the opinion of the city engineer, an unsafe condition results in the streets, undue sedimentation occurs in water bodies, runoff endangers downstream property owners or their property, or the public health and safety or general welfare of the citizens of the city is harmed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 27.07)  
Sec. 30-26. - Erosion and stormwater control permits and administration. 
(a)  Start of land disturbing activity. No activity meeting the criteria described in section 30-22 or 30-23 shall occur and no zoning permit may be issued, until an erosion control and stormwater control permit is issued by the city engineer. 
(b)  Application materials. The applicant must provide the following when requesting a permit: 
(1)  Completed application form. 
a.  The application must be signed by the landowner or include a notarized statement signed by the landowner authorizing the applicant to act as the landowner's agent and bind the landowner to the terms of this article. 
b.  If a landowner appoints an agent to submit an application pursuant to subsection (b)(1)a of this section, the landowner shall be bound by all of the requirements of this article and the terms of any permit issued to the agent. 
(2)  Fees as required by section 30-32. 
(3)  If required by section 30-22, an erosion control plan meeting all the standards of section 30-27. 
(4)  If required by section 30-23, a stormwater management plan meeting all of the standards of section 30-28 and a draft maintenance agreement as described in section 30-28(a)(11). 
(5)  Copies of permits or permit applications or approvals required by any other governmental entity. 
(6)  A proposed timetable and schedule for completion and installation of all elements of approved erosion control and stormwater management plans and a detailed schedule for completion of construction. 
(7)  An estimate of the cost of completion and installation of all elements of the approved erosion control and stormwater management plans. 
(8)  Evidence of financial responsibility to complete the work proposed in the plan. The city engineer may require a financial security instrument sufficient to guarantee completion of the project. 
(c)  Approval process. 
(1)  The city engineer shall verify that the permit application is complete under subsection (b) of this section. Plan review staff shall review the plan(s) for compliance with the standards identified in sections 30-27 and 30-28. 
(2)  Within ten business days for erosion control plans and 15 business days for stormwater control plans, plan review staff shall either approve the submitted plan or notify the city engineer of any deficiencies. Staff engaged in this review and approval process shall be certified where appropriate by the state department of commerce for this purpose. 
(3)  The city engineer shall notify the applicant in writing of any deficiency in the proposed plan and the applicant shall be given an opportunity to correct any deficiency. 
(4)  Where installed stormwater practices will be privately owned, an affidavit which describes the property by legal description, notifying future prospective purchasers of the existence of a stormwater permit issued under this article and applicable plan, timetables and potential liability imposed by subsection (h)(3) of this section for failure to bring the property into compliance with this article after notification, shall be recorded with the county register of deeds prior to issuance of an erosion and stormwater control permit. The foregoing information shall also be noted on every plat and certified survey map. 
(5)  Upon approval of the plan, the erosion control or stormwater management permit shall be issued by the city engineer after the applicant has met all other requirements of this article. 
(d)  Permit conditions. 
(1)  The plan shall be implemented prior to the start of any land disturbing activity and shall be maintained over the duration of the project. Stormwater components of the plan shall be maintained in perpetuity. 
(2)  The permittee is responsible for successful completion of the erosion control plan and the stormwater management plan. The permittee shall be liable for all costs incurred, including environmental restoration costs, resulting from noncompliance with an approved plan. 
(3)  Application for a permit shall constitute express permission by the permittee and landowner for the city engineer to enter the property for purposes of inspection under subsection (e) of this section or curative action under subsection (h)(3) of this section. The application form shall contain a prominent provision advising the applicant and landowner of this requirement. 
(4)  All incidental mud-tracking off-site onto adjacent public thoroughfares shall be cleaned up and removed by the end of each working day using proper disposal methods. 
(5)  A copy of the approved permit and erosion control plan shall be kept on the project site, in a place readily accessible to contractors, engineers, city inspection staff and other authorized personnel. 
(e)  Inspections. 
(1)  Application for a permit under this article shall constitute permission by the applicant and landowner for the city engineer to enter upon the property and inspect during the construction phase prior to the inspections pursuant to subsections (e)(5) and (6) of this section, as necessary to confirm compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(2)  The permittee shall inspect the site weekly and within 24 hours after every rainfall of 0.5 inches or more. The permittee shall submit copies of the inspections to the city engineer. 
(3)  The permittee shall notify the city engineer within ten days after installation of all practices in an approved erosion control plan and achievement of soil stabilization. 
(4)  The city engineer shall inspect the property to verify compliance with the erosion control plan within ten days of notification of soil stabilization. 
(5)  The permittee shall notify the city engineer and submit drawings documenting construction within ten days after installation of all practices in an approved stormwater management plan. A professional engineer shall submit as-built certification to ensure that constructed stormwater management practices and conveyance systems comply with the specifications included in the approved plans. At a minimum, as-built certification shall include a set of drawings comparing the approved stormwater management plan with what was constructed. Other information shall be submitted as required by the city engineer. 
(6)  The city engineer shall inspect the property to verify compliance within thirty days of notification. 
(7)  Maintenance is the responsibility of the owner, and facilities are subject to inspection and orders for repairs. Annual maintenance reports must be submitted to the city engineer in accordance with section 40-896. 
(f)  Permit transfers. 
(1)  When a permittee and landowner act to transfer an interest in property subject to an approved plan prior to completion of the proposed steps to attain soil stabilization, the permittee must secure approval from the city. 
(2)  When a permittee and landowner transfer ownership, possession or control of real estate subject to either or both an uncompleted erosion control or stormwater management plan, the successor in interest to any portion of the real estate shall be responsible to control soil erosion and runoff and shall comply with the minimum standards provided in this article. 
(3)  When ownership, possession or control of property subject to an uncompleted erosion control or stormwater management plan, or both, is transferred, the former owner (seller) shall notify the new owner (buyer) as to the current status of compliance with notice to the authority, and provide a copy of the erosion control plan or stormwater management plan, or both. 
(4)  Transfers of interest in real estate subject to an approved, uncompleted plan may be conducted consistent with this article under any of the following arrangements: 
a.  The transferee shall file a new, approved erosion control or stormwater management plan, or both, with the city. 
b.  The transferee shall obtain an approved assignment from the city as sub-permittee to complete that portion of the approved plan regulating soil erosion and runoff on the transferee's property. 
c.  The permittee shall provide the city with a duly completed and executed continuing surety bond or certified check in an amount sufficient to complete the work proposed in the approved plan; at the time of transfer the permittee may seek to reduce the surety bond or certified check to the appropriate amount to complete remaining work. If the transferor enters into escrow agreements with transferees to complete an approved plan, these funds shall be available to the city to attain plan compliance. When an approved erosion control plan and, if required, a stormwater management plan are or are not completed as proposed, the city may use the surety bond to complete remaining work to achieve plan compliance. 
(g)  Plan or permit amendments. Any proposed modifications to approved plans, construction schedules or alterations to accepted sequencing of land disturbing site activities shall be submitted to the city engineer for approval prior to implementation of said changes. 
(h)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Stop work order. Whenever the city engineer finds any noncompliance with the provisions of this article, the city engineer shall attempt to communicate with the owner or person performing the work to obtain immediate and voluntary compliance if such person is readily available. If the owner or person performing the work is not readily available, that person refuses to voluntarily comply immediately or the noncompliance presents an imminent danger or will cause or threatens to cause bodily injury or damage to off-site property, including, but not limited to, off-site runoff, the city engineer shall post in a conspicuous place on the premises, a stop work order which shall cause all activity not necessary to correct the noncompliance to cease until noncompliance is corrected. 
a.  The stop work order shall provide the following information: date of issuance, identification of the property subject to the stop work order, reason for posting and the signature of the inspector posting the order. 
b.  It shall be a violation of the article for the unauthorized removal of the stop work order from the premises. 
(2)  In addition to posting a stop work order, the city engineer shall provide notification to the owner or contractor by personal service, written notice by certified mail, electronic mail, or facsimile transmission. 
a.  The permittee, landowner and contractor shall have 24 hours from the time and date of notification by the city engineer to correct any noncompliance with the plan when notification is by either personal communication of noncompliance to owner or contractor or their respective agents or written notice sent by certified mail to owner or contractor. 
b.  If notice is not provided under subsection (h)(2)a of this section, the permittee and landowner shall have 72 hours to correct any noncompliance with the plan when notification is by posting notice in a conspicuous place on the site or sending notice by electronic mail or facsimile transmission to owner or contractor. 
(3)  If any noncompliance is not corrected within the time periods specified in subsection (h)(2)a or b of this section, the permittee and landowner authorize the city engineer to take any action, to perform any work, or commence any operations necessary to correct conditions upon the subject property where notice of noncompliance has been issued to bring the property into conformance with plan requirements. The permittee and landowner further consent to reimburse the authority for the total costs and expenses of the aforementioned actions, said reimbursement may be collected as a special charge upon the property for current services rendered as provided by law. 
(4)  If the permittee has filed an appeal under section 30-31(a)(1) prior to the expiration of the time for compliance under subsection (h)(2) of this section, the city engineer may take action, perform work or correct conditions only to the extent necessary to protect against or correct an imminent hazard or a condition that will cause or threatens to cause personal injury or damage to off-site property. 
(i)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any person, owner, occupant or other user of the premises who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a forfeiture as listed in the forfeiture/bond/deposit schedule. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(2)  Any person who has the ability to pay any forfeiture entered against him or her under this article but refuses to do so may be confined in the county jail until such forfeiture is paid, but in no event to exceed 30 days. In determining whether an individual has the ability to pay a forfeiture, all items of income and all assets may be considered regardless of whether or not such income or assets are subject to garnishment, lien or attachment by creditors. 
(3)  As a substitute for or as an addition to forfeiture actions under subsection (i)(1) of this section or corrective action under subsection (h)(3) of this section, the city attorney is authorized to seek enforcement of any part of this article by court action seeking injunctive relief. It shall not be necessary for the city attorney to take corrective action or prosecute for forfeiture before resorting to injunctive relief. 
(j)  Fees. 
(1)  The permit fee shall be payable at the time an application for either an erosion control or a stormwater management permit, or both, is submitted. 
(2)  Permit Fee Doubled: When an applicant or landowner begins work in excess of permit thresholds prior to permittee approval or written approval of city engineer, the applicable fees shall be double. 
(k)  Timeframe and expiration. 
(1)  Erosion control plan timetables and construction schedules must begin within one year of the date the permit application is filed. 
(2)  All permit applications shall expire upon the earlier of: 
a.  One year from the date the applicant is notified of an application deficiency, if the applicant has not submitted additional information to adequately address the deficiency within the year; or 
b.  The completion date listed on the approved permit. The completion date shall be no more than three years from the date of application. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 27.08; Ord. No. 2014-O-06, § 2, 3-25-2014)  
Sec. 30-27. - Erosion control plan requirements. 
(a)  Plan materials. Erosion control plans required under section 30-22 may include consideration of adjoining landowners' cooperative efforts to control transport of sediment and except as specifically exempted below, shall include at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Property lines, lot dimensions, and limits of disturbed area; 
(2)  Limits of impervious area, including buildings. Include all public and private roads, interior roads, driveways, parking lots, and indicate type of paving and surfacing material; 
(3)  All natural and artificial water features including, but not limited to, lakes, ponds, streams (including intermittent streams), and ditches; and areas of natural woodland or prairie. The plan must show ordinary high-water marks of all navigable waters, 100-year flood elevations and delineated wetland boundaries. A certified flood zone determination may be required at the applicant's expense; 
(4)  All erosion control measures to be installed; 
(5)  Cross sections of and profiles of channels, swales, and road ditches; 
(6)  Culvert and/or storm pipe sizes; 
(7)  Direction of flow of runoff; 
(8)  Watershed size for each drainage area; 
(9)  Design discharge for ditches and structural measures; 
(10)  Runoff velocities; 
(11)  Fertilizer and seeding rates and recommendations; 
(12)  Detailed description and proposed completion schedule of each element of the erosion control plan, including time schedules for stabilization of ditches and slopes; 
(13)  Provision for sequential steps mitigating erosive effect of land disturbing activities to be followed in appropriate order and in a manner consistent with accepted erosion control methodology suitable to proposed sites and amenable to prompt re-vegetation, including calculations, such as the universal soil loss equation (USLE), demonstrating the erosion control performance standards under subsection (c) of this section will be met; 
(14)  Provisions to prevent mud-tracking off-site onto public thoroughfares during the construction period; 
(15)  Provisions to disconnect impervious surfaces, where feasible; 
(16)  Provisions to prevent sediment delivery to, and accumulation in, any proposed or existing stormwater conveyance systems; 
(17)  Copies of permits or permit applications required by any other unit of government or agency; 
(18)  Existing and proposed elevations (referenced to the North American Vertical Datum of 1988) and existing and proposed contours in the area, where deemed necessary; 
(19)  Itemized estimated cost (including labor) for installation of all elements of the erosion control plan; and 
(20)  Any other information necessary to reasonably determine the location, nature and condition of any physical or environmental features of the site. 
(b)  Erosion control performance standards. 
(1)  Proposed design, suggested location and phased implementation of effective, practicable erosion control measures for plans shall be designed, engineered and implemented to achieve the following results: 
a.  Prevent gully and bank erosion; 
b.  Limit total off-site permissible annual aggregate soil loss for exposed areas resulting from sheet and rill erosion to an annual, cumulative soil loss rate not to exceed 7.5 tons per acre annually; and 
c.  Discharges from new construction sites must have a stable outlet capable of carrying designed flow as required in section 30-28(b)(4), at a non-erosive velocity. Outlet design must consider flow capacity and flow duration. This requirement applies to both the site outlet and the ultimate outlet to stormwater conveyance or water body. 
(2)  Plan compliance under subsection (c)(1) of this section shall be determined using the U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service Technical Guide or another commonly accepted soil erosion methodology approved by the county conservationist, that considers season of year, site characteristics, soil erodibility and slope. 
(3)  Erosion control measures for plan approval need not attempt to regulate soil transportation within the boundaries of the applicant's site. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 27.09; Ord. No. 2014-O-06, § 2, 3-25-2014)  
Sec. 30-28. - Stormwater management plan requirements. 
(a)  Plan materials. Stormwater management plans shall satisfy all of the requirements in subsection (b) of this section, and shall address at a minimum the following information: 
(1)  A narrative describing the proposed project, including an implementation schedule for planned practices; 
(2)  Identification of the entity responsible for long term maintenance of the project; 
(3)  A topographic map of the site location, including the contiguous properties, existing drainage patterns and watercourses affected by the proposed development of the site and the existing vegetative cover; 
(4)  A map showing drainage areas for each watershed area; 
(5)  A summary of runoff peak flow rate calculations, by watershed area, including: 
a.  Pre-development peak flow rates; 
b.  Post-development peak flow rates with no detention; 
c.  Post-development peak flow rates with detention; 
d.  Assumed runoff curve numbers (RCNs), which shall be consistent with Table 2 in section 30-35(a) for pre-development conditions; and 
e.  Time of concentration (Tc) used in calculations; 
(6)  A complete site plan and specifications, signed by the Professional Engineer who designed the stormwater management system(s) and measures. All plans shall be drawn to an easily legible scale, shall be clearly labeled, and shall include, at a minimum, all of the following information: 
a.  Property lines and lot dimensions; 
b.  All buildings and outdoor uses, existing and proposed, including all dimensions and setbacks; 
c.  All public and private roads, interior roads, driveways and parking lots. Show traffic patterns and type of paving and surfacing material; 
d.  All natural and artificial water features, including, but not limited to lakes, ponds, streams (including intermittent streams), and ditches. Show ordinary high-water marks of all navigable waters, 100-year flood elevations and delineated wetland boundaries, if any. If not available, appropriate flood zone determination or wetland delineation, or both, may be required at the applicant's expense; 
e.  Depth to bedrock; 
f.  Depth to seasonal high water table; 
g.  The extent and location of all soil types as described in the county soil survey, slopes exceeding 12 percent, and areas of natural woodland or prairie; 
h.  Existing and proposed elevations (referenced to the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, where available) and existing and proposed contours in the area requiring a grading and filling permit; 
i.  Elevations, sections, profiles, and details as needed to describe all natural and artificial features of the project; 
j.  Soil erosion control and overland runoff control measures, including runoff calculations as appropriate; 
k.  Detailed construction schedule; 
l.  Copies of permits or permit applications required by any other governmental entities or agencies; 
m.  Location of all stormwater management practices; 
n.  All existing and proposed drainage features; 
o.  The location and area of all proposed impervious surfaces; 
p.  The limits and area of the disturbed area; and 
q.  Any other information necessary to reasonably determine the location, nature and condition of any physical or environmental features; 
(7)  Calculations demonstrating the stormwater management performance standards under subsection (b) of this section will be met; 
(8)  Engineered designs for all structural management practices; 
(9)  A description of methods to control oil and grease or written justification for not providing such control; 
(10)  If required under subsection (b)(6) of this section, a description and plans to control temperature of runoff; and 
(11)  A maintenance plan and schedule for all permanent stormwater management practices as recorded on the affidavit required in section 30-26(c)(4). 
(12)  A summary of infiltration calculations including: 
a.  Pre-development infiltration volume. 
b.  Calculated infiltration volume goal. 
c.  Achieved post-development infiltration volume. 
(b)  Stormwater management performance standards. Proposed design, suggested location and phased implementation of effective, practicable stormwater management measures for plans shall be designed, engineered and implemented to achieve the following results: 
(1)  Sediment control. 
a.  For new development, by design, one of the following methods shall be used: 
i.  Reduce total suspended solids load leaving the site by 80 percent, based on the average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff management controls. This method requires the use of a continuous model such as SLAMM, P8 or equivalent, and the use of approved grain size distribution curves and rainfall data. These files are managed and maintained by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and are available on its website. No person shall be required to exceed an 80 percent total suspended solids reduction, for the site as a whole, to meet the requirements of this subdivision. This analysis shall use approved procedures and shall assume no re-suspension of particles. 
ii.  Retain soil particles greater than five microns on the site, as measured during a one-year 24-hour storm event. This analysis shall use approved procedures and shall assume no re-suspension of particles. 
b.  For redevelopment, by design, one of the following methods shall be used: 
i.  Reduce, to the maximum extent practicable, total suspended solids load leaving the redeveloped site by 80 percent, based on the average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff management controls. This method requires the use of a continuous model such as SLAMM, P8 or equivalent, and the use of approved grain size distribution curves and rainfall data. These files are managed and maintained by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and are available on its website. No person shall be required to exceed a sixty (60) percent total suspended solids reduction, as compared to no controls, for new parking areas to meet the requirements of this section. This analysis shall use approved procedures and shall assume no re-suspension of particles. 
ii.  Retain soil particles greater than five microns on the site, as measured during a one-year 24-hour storm event. This analysis shall use approved procedures and shall assume no re-suspension of particles. 
(2)  Oil and grease control. For all stormwater plans for commercial or industrial developments and all other uses where the potential for pollution by oil or grease, or both, exists, the first 0.5 inches of runoff will be treated using the best oil and grease removal technology available. This requirement may be waived by the plan reviewer only when the applicant can demonstrate that installation of such practices is not necessary. 
(3)  Runoff rate control; hydrologic calculations. All runoff calculations shall be according to the methodology described in the Natural Resources Conservation Service's Technical Release 55, "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds" (commonly known as TR-55), or other methodology approved by the county conservationist. The maximum pre-development runoff curve number and minimum post-development runoff curve numbers that may be used in the calculations are shown in section 30-35. The post-development soil permeability class for heavily disturbed sites shall be lowered one permeability class unless deep tilling or similar practices have been implemented to restore soil structure to pre-developed conditions. Lightly disturbed areas require no permeability class modification. 
(4)  Runoff rate control; design standards. Except for redevelopment, all stormwater facilities shall be designed, installed and maintained to effectively accomplish the following: 
a.  Maintain pre-development peak runoff rates for the one-year, 24-hour storm event (2.5 inches over 24-hour duration). 
b.  Maintain pre-development peak runoff rates for the two-year, 24-hour storm event (2.9 inches over 24-hour duration). 
c.  Maintain pre-development peak runoff rates for the ten-year, 24-hour storm event (4.2 inches over 24-hour duration). 
d.  Maintain pre-development peak runoff rates for the 100-year, 24-hour storm event (6.0 inches over 24-hour duration). 
e.  Safely pass storm events in excess of the 100-year, 24-hour storm event (6.0 inches over 24 hours duration). 
(5)  Outlets. Discharges from new construction sites must have a stable outlet capable of carrying designed flow as required in subsection (b)(4) of this section, at a non-erosive velocity. Outlet design must consider flow capacity and flow duration. This requirement applies to both the site outlet and the ultimate outlet to stormwater conveyance or water body. 
(6)  Infiltration. The stormwater management plan shall include the following provisions and practices to increase the infiltration of runoff at sites outside of groundwater protection areas: 
a.  Residential development. For both residential and non-residential developments, design practices to infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that post-development infiltration volume shall be at least ninety percent (90%) of the pre-development infiltration volume, based upon average annual rainfall. If when designing appropriate infiltration systems, more than two percent (2%) of the site is required to be used as effective infiltration area, the applicant may alternately design infiltration systems and pervious surfaces to meet or exceed the estimated average annual recharge rate. The annual pre-development recharge rate shall be determined from the Wisconsin Geological and Natural History Survey's 2012 report, Groundwater Recharge in Dane County, Estimated by a GIS-Based Water-Balanced Model or subsequent updates to this report, or by a site specific analysis using other appropriate techniques. If this alternative design approach is taken, at least two percent (2%) of the site must be used for infiltration. 
b.  Internally Drained Watersheds. For both residential and non-residential sites located wholly or in part within an internally drained watershed, practices shall be designed to infiltrate one hundred percent (100%) of the average annual pre-development infiltration volume, regardless of the effective area of the infiltration system. 
c.  Pretreatment. Before infiltrating runoff, pretreatment shall be required for parking lot runoff and for runoff from new road construction in commercial, industrial and institutional areas that will enter an infiltration system. The pretreatment shall be designed to protect the infiltration system from clogging prior to scheduled maintenance and to protect groundwater quality. Pretreatment design shall be performed in accordance with the technical standards and specifications referenced in section 30-30. 
d.  Deep tilling or similar practices. Deep tilling or similar practices shall be implemented to restore soil structure to pre-developed conditions. The depth of tilling shall be at least two inches below the hardpan layer or compacted zone, as determined by a soil probe or soil penetrometer, up to a maximum depth of 36 inches. The maximum spacing of the cuts is five feet. 
e.  Prohibitions. Notwithstanding subsections (b)(6)a through d of this section, infiltration systems may not be installed in any of the following areas: 
1.  Areas associated with tier 1 industrial facilities identified in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 216.21(2)(a) including storage, loading, rooftop and parking. 
2.  Storage and loading areas of tier 2 industrial facilities identified in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 216.21(2)(b). 
3.  Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas. 
4.  Areas within 1,000 feet up gradient or within 100 feet down gradient of direct conduits to groundwater. 
5.  Areas without proper separation distance from bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of seasonal high groundwater or the top of bedrock. Infiltration practices shall be located so that the characteristics of the soil and the separation distances between the bottom of the infiltration system and the elevation of seasonal high groundwater or the top of bedrock are in accordance with Table 1. below: 
Table 1. Separation Distances and Soil Characteristics 
Source Area 	Separation Distance 	Soil Characteristics 
Industrial, Commercial, Institutional, Parking Lots and Roads 	5 Feet or More 	Filtering Layer 
Residential Arterial Roads 	5 Feet or More 	Filtering Layer 
Roofs Draining to Subsurface Infiltration Practices 	1 Foot or More 	Native or Engineered Soil with Particles Finer than Coarse Sand 
Roofs Draining to Surface Infiltration Practices 	Not Applicable 	
All Other Impervious Source Areas 	3 Feet or More 	Filtering Layer 
 
6.  Areas with runoff from industrial, commercial and institutional parking lots and roads and residential arterial roads with less than five feet separation distance from the bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of seasonal high groundwater or the top of bedrock. 
7.  Areas within 400 feet of a community water system well as specified in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 811.16(4) for runoff infiltrated from commercial, industrial and institutional land uses or regional devices for residential development. 
8.  Areas where contaminants of concern, as defined in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 720.03(2) are present in the soil through which infiltration will occur. 
f.  Alternate use of runoff. Where alternate uses of runoff are employed, such as for toilet flushing, laundry or irrigation, such alternate use shall be given equal credit toward the infiltration volume required by this section. 
g.  Minimizing groundwater pollution. According to Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 151, infiltration systems designed in accordance with this section shall, to the extent technically and economically feasible, minimize the level of pollutants infiltrating to groundwater and shall maintain compliance with the preventive action limit at a point of standards application in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 140. However, if site-specific information indicates that compliance with the preventive action limit is not achievable, the infiltration system may not be installed or shall be modified to prevent infiltration to the maximum extent practicable. 
(7)  Thermal control reduction. The stormwater management plan shall include provisions and practices to reduce the temperature of runoff for sites located within the watershed of a river or stream identified by the state department of natural resources as: 
a.  A cold water community as identified through Wis. Admin. Code § NR 102.04(3)(a), Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 104, and Class I, Class II, and Class III Trout Streams identified in "Wisconsin Trout Streams," DNR publication PUB-FH-806-2002 or its successor. 
b.  Rivers or streams proposed by the state department of natural resources as cold water communities and class I, II, and III trout streams. 
(8)  Thermal control continued. The stormwater management plan does not have to meet the requirement in subsection (b)(7) of this section if the applicant can justify by use of a model approved by the city engineer and the county conservationist that practices are not necessary because the temperature increase of runoff from the site post-development will be zero. 
(9)  Thermal control affected watersheds. A current list and maps of affected watersheds shall be available for reference at the office of the city engineer. 
(c)  Stormwater management goals. The following standards shall be met whenever technically feasible without financial hardship as determined by the city engineer, and proposed design, suggested location and implementation of practices to meet these goals shall be included in plans: 
(1)  For existing development, design practices to retain soil particles greater than 20 microns on the site (40 percent reduction) resulting from a one-year 24-hour (2.5 inches over 24 hours duration) storm event, according to approved procedures, and assuming no sediment resuspension. For certain watersheds (e.g. Nine Springs Creek watershed), there may be a higher TSS percentage reduction required based on the Rock River Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) criteria. 
(2)  For street reconstruction, design practices to retain soil particles greater than 20 microns on the site (40 percent reduction) resulting from a one-year, 24 hour (2.5 inches over 24 hours duration) storm event, according to approved procedures, and assuming no sediment resuspension. 
(3)  For new construction, design practices to retain soil particles greater than 5 microns on the site (80 percent reduction) resulting from a two-year 24-hour storm event (2.9 inches over 24 hours duration), according to approved procedures, and assuming no sediment resuspension. 
(4)  For new residential and non-residential development outside of groundwater protection areas, infiltrate per subsection (b)(6)a of this section. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 27.10; Ord. No. 2014-O-06, § 2, 3-25-2014)  
Sec. 30-29. - Off-site stormwater management. 
(a)  Off-site stormwater management is allowed, provided that all of the following conditions for the off-site facility are met: 
(1)  The facility is in place; 
(2)  The facility is designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control that at least meets the article standards; 
(3)  The facility has a legally obligated entity responsible for its long-term operation and maintenance. 
(b)  At the discretion of the city engineer, new development will be allowed where the off-site stormwater management facility is not yet in place provided that all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  A temporary on-site stormwater management facility is constructed meeting the requirements of section 30-28(b), except section 30-28(b)(4)d; 
(2)  The permanent off-site stormwater management facility is constructed within one year of completing the new development; 
(3)  The temporary on-site stormwater management facility is maintained until the permanent off-site stormwater management facility is completed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 27.11; Ord. No. 2014-O-06, § 2, 3-25-2014)  
Sec. 30-30. - Technical standards and specifications. 
The design of all best management practices designed to meet the requirements of this article shall comply with the following technical standards: 
(1)  Natural resources conservation service's "Wisconsin Field Office Technical Guide, Article 4" or its successor; 
(2)  Applicable construction or erosion control standards by the state department of natural resources; 
(3)  The "Dane County Erosion Control and Stormwater Management Manual" or any other technical methodology approved by the county conservationist; and 
(4)  State department of natural resources' "Wet Detention Basin Conservation Practice Standard Code 1001" or its successor. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 27.12)  
Sec. 30-31. - Appeals and variances. 
(a)  Appeals. 
(1)  Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city engineer pursuant to this article may appeal to the board of appeals. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days after the challenged decision. Notice of appeal setting forth the specific grounds for the appeal shall be filed with the city engineer and the city clerk. The zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit to the board of appeals the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(2)  The secretary of the board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and publish a class 2 notice thereof under Wis. Stats. ch. 985 as well as give due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(3)  The board of appeals may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement decision or determination as ought to be made, and shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. 
(4)  The concurring vote of a majority of the board of appeals shall be necessary to reverse the decision of the city engineer. 
(b)  Variances. 
(1)  An applicant may include in the application a request for a variance from the requirements of section 30-27 or 30-28. No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates and the city engineer, after consultation with the county conservationist, finds that all of the following conditions are present: 
a.  Enforcement of the standards set forth in this article will result in unnecessary hardship to the landowner; 
b.  The hardship is due to exceptional physical conditions unique to the property; 
c.  Granting the variance will not adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare, nor be contrary to the spirit, purpose and intent of this article; 
d.  The project will have no impact upon any of the stated purposes of this article as set forth in section 30-20; 
e.  The applicant has proposed an alternative to the requirement from which the variance is sought that will provide equivalent protection of the public health, safety and welfare, the environment and public and private property; 
f.  The net cumulative effect of the variance will not impact downstream conditions; and 
g.  Existing regional facilities are shown to meet the performance standards of this article. 
(2)  If all of the conditions set forth in subsection (b)(1) of this section are met, a variance may only be granted to the minimum extent necessary to afford relief from the unnecessary hardship, with primary consideration to water quality. 
(3)  A variance from the provisions of section 30-28(b)(1), (2), and (7) may only be granted if: 
a.  The applicant has met the requirements of subsection (b)(1) of this section; and 
b.  The applicant will be denied all reasonable and beneficial use of the property if the variance is denied. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 27.13)  
Sec. 30-32. - Activities requiring special plan commission approval (parcel size of five acres or more). 
(a)  In addition to obtaining the approval of the city engineer as required under section 30-26, any land disturbing activity that occurs on a parcel of land five acres or more in size and where the disturbance falls under the requirements of section 30-22, shall be subject to plan commission review and action under this section, unless: 
(1)  A valid land division improvement agreement with the city is in place for the parcel. 
(2)  The parcel is an approved, or legal nonconforming mineral extraction site, although filling of a mineral extraction area is covered by the provisions of this section unless an approved restoration plan is in place and on file with the city. 
(3)  The land disturbing activity on the parcel is related to a valid and already approved architectural or design review request, or conditional use. 
(4)  The land disturbing activity on the parcel is an agricultural land use or gardening activity. 
(5)  The land disturbing activity is a building project having received at least a permit-to-start, or an activity having received other government approvals such as for a septic system. 
(6)  Governmental operations involving road, stormwater management or utility projects. Private utility company projects. 
(b)  An applicant for a land disturbing activity subject to plan commission review shall submit four full size sets, and one set reduced to 11 inches x 17 inches of all the information required under section 30-26(b) to the planning department at least three weeks before the plan commission meeting at which the applicant desires to have initial consideration. 
(c)  The city engineer and the city planner shall review the application for compliance with the requirements of the article and make a report thereon to the plan commission. The plan commission shall consider, but is not bound by, the city engineer's and city planner's report in reaching its determination. 
(d)  Upon submittal of proper information in a timely manner the plan commission shall review the information and has the authority to: 
(1)  Allow the land disturbing activity to proceed, approve with modifications and/or conditions, request additional information, or reject the erosion control application. Action shall occur within 60 days of submittal of a complete application. 
(2)  In case of request for additional information, the plan commission shall note generally what type of information is required and shall act on the request within 45 days of the date of submittal of the requested information. 
(3)  In case of rejection, the reasons for rejection shall be noted in the plan commission minutes, and rejection shall relate to the plan commission review standards identified in subsection (e) of this section. 
(e)  The plan commission's determination shall be based upon whether the proposed land disturbing activity meets all of the following standards: 
(1)  The land disturbing activity will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, morals, comfort, or general welfare. 
(2)  The establishment of the land disturbing activity will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of the parcel or surrounding lands, and will promote sound economic growth. 
(3)  The proposed erosion control activities are sufficient to prevent and control water pollution, control soil erosion, and to prevent and control adverse effects on spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life. 
(4)  The plan will not cause substantial change to the existing grades such that there will be a negative effect on the direction, velocity and amount of stormwater flow from the site onto public waterways, drainage channels or to adjoining or nearby lands. 
(5)  Truck or vehicular traffic shall not cause the depositing of mud or dirt onto the public rights-of-way. 
(6)  The land disturbing activity shall be properly staged as to limit the amount of site disruption at any point in time. 
(7)  The method and manner of fill placement is appropriate for future planned use. 
(f)  If the plan commission grants approval, conditionally approves, or approves with modifications, then the city engineer and the zoning administrator shall complete their review under section 30-26. If the plan commission denies the request, the applicant shall be notified by the planning and zoning department or the city engineer's office, with the reasons for denial outlined to the applicant. The applicant shall have the right to appeal the plan commission decision as provided in section 30-31. Any such appeal shall be filed in writing with the city clerk within ten days of the date of the notification of disapproval. 
(g)  All provisions of this article remain in force and effect. If the requirements of this section are more stringent or provide for additional standards, the requirements of this section shall apply. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 27.14)  
Sec. 30-33. - Permit fees. 
The city engineer may establish a fee schedule for erosion control and stormwater management permits or charge the developer for staff time associated with the review of the permit application. In addition to the base fee, the applicant shall pay the actual costs incurred by the city from any consultant or agent with whom the city may contract to provide services relating to the administration of this Code. The city shall bill the applicant for such charges, which shall be paid within 30 days. Any unpaid charges shall be assessed to the subject property as a special charge pursuant to Wis. Stats. 66.0627 and placed on the tax roll. Fees shall be as set forth in the annual budget appendix fee schedule. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 27.15; Ord. No. 2019-O-20, § 1, 8-13-2019)  
Sec. 30-34. - Illicit discharges. 
(a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to discharge or cause to be discharged, into the public stormwater system or any waterway within the city, any materials other than stormwater runoff or permitted discharges allowed under subsection (c) of this section. Prohibited discharges include, but are not limited to, pollutants or any liquids containing pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards. The commencement, conduct, or continuance, of any illicit discharge to the public stormwater system is prohibited. 
(b)  Prohibition of illicit connections. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to construct, use, maintain, or continue the existence of an illicit connection to the public stormwater system. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of the connection. 
(2)  It shall be considered a violation of this article to convey sanitary waste to the public stormwater system or allow such a conveyance to continue. 
(c)  Permitted discharges. The following nonstormwater discharges are not considered illicit discharges if done in a nonpolluting manner: water line flushing, irrigating, diverting stream flows, uncontaminated groundwater pumping, discharging from potable water sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, lawn watering, individual car washing, flow from riparian habitats and wetlands, dechlorinated swimming pool water, street wash water, and water from firefighting. 
(d)  Spills or accidentally discharged wastes. All persons delivering, hauling, disposing, storing, discharging, or otherwise handling potentially polluting substances, solid or liquid, such as, but not limited to the following; agricultural chemicals and other chemicals, fuel oil, gasoline, solvents, industrial liquids or fluids, milk, grease trap and septic tank waste, sewage sludge, sanitary sewer wastes, oil, or petroleum products or wastes, shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Immediately clean up any such spilled material to prevent its becoming a hazard to health or safety or directly or indirectly causing the pollution of the waterways within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(2)  Any such spilled material that cannot adequately be cleaned up by the responsible party or parties shall be immediately reported to the city police department so that assistance can be given by the proper agency. 
(3)  The party or parties responsible for the release, escape, or discharge of spilled materials may be held financially liable for the cost of any clean up deemed necessary or desirable and undertaken by the city or its designated agent, in an effort to minimize the potential effects of the discharged materials. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to store any potentially polluting substances unless such substances are stored in such a manner as to securely prevent them from escaping onto the ground surface and/or into any street, storm sewer, ditch, or drainageway, or waterway within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 27.16)  
Sec. 30-35. - Runoff curve numbers. 
(a)  Maximum pre-development runoff curve numbers used in such calculations shall be those shown in Table 2. The TR-55-specified curve numbers for other land uses shall be used. Heavily disturbed sites will be lowered one permeability class for hydrologic calculations. Lightly disturbed areas require no modification. Where practices have been implemented to restore soil structure to pre-developed conditions, no permeability class modification is required. 
Table 2. Maximum Pre-development Runoff Curve Numbers 
Land Use 	Hydrologic Soil Group 
	A 	B 	C 	D 
Woodland 	30 	55 	70 	77 
Grassland 	39 	61 	71 	78 
Cropland 	51 	68 	78 	83 
 
(b)  Minimum post-development runoff curve numbers shall be those in Table 3: 
Table 3. Minimum Post-Development Runoff Curve Numbers 
Average percent impervious area for land use (including streets) 	Hydrologic Soil Group 
	A 	B 	C 	D 
12 	46 	65 	77 	82 
20 	51 	68 	79 	84 
25 	54 	70 	80 	85 
30 	57 	72 	81 	86 
38 	61 	75 	83 	87 
65 	77 	85 	90 	92 
72 	81 	88 	91 	93 
77 	86 	91 	94 	95 
85 	89 	92 	94 	95 
 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 27.16(app. A); Ord. No. 2014-O-06, § 2, 3-25-2014)  
Secs. 30-36—30-58. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WELL ABANDONMENT 
 
Sec. 30-59. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to prevent contamination of groundwater and to protect the public health, safety and welfare by ensuring that unused, unsafe or noncomplying wells or wells which may serve as conduits for contamination or wells which may be illegally cross-connected to municipal water systems, are properly abandoned. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 21.01)  
Sec. 30-60. - Applicability. 
This article applies to all wells on premises served by or adjacent to city utility district no. 1, within the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 21.02)  
Sec. 30-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Municipal water system means the water supply and distribution system owned and operated by the city. 
Noncomplying means a well or pump installation which does not comply with the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 812 in effect at the time the well was constructed, a contamination source was installed, the pump was installed or work was done on either the well or pump installation. 
Pump installation means the pump and related equipment used for withdrawing water from a well including the discharge piping, the underground connections, pitless adapters, pressure tanks, pits, sampling faucets and well seals or caps. 
Unsafe means a well or pump installation which produces water which is bacteriologically contaminated or contaminated with substances in exceedance of the standards of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 109 or 140 or for which a health advisory has been issued by the department of natural resources. 
Unused means a well or pump installation which is not in use or does not have a functional pumping system. 
Well means an excavation or opening into the ground made by digging, boring, drilling, driving, or other methods for the purpose of obtaining groundwater for consumption or other use. 
Well abandonment means the filling and sealing of a well according to the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 811. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 21.03)  
Sec. 30-62. - Abandonment required. 
All wells located on premises served by the city utility district no. 1 shall be abandoned in accordance with the terms of this article and Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 811 by or no later than one year from the date of connection to the municipal water system, unless a well operation permit has been obtained by the well owner from the city utility district no. 1. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 21.04)  
Sec. 30-63. - Annexation. 
Upon annexation of lands to city utility district no. 1, the owners of such lands shall immediately identify to the director of public works, by filing a report with city utility district no. 1, all existing wells located on such lands. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 21.05)  
Sec. 30-64. - Well operation permit. 
City utility district no. 1 may grant a permit to a private well owner to operate a well for a period not to exceed five years providing the conditions of this section are met. An owner may request renewal of a well operation permit by submitting information verifying that the conditions of this section are met. City utility district no. 1, or its agent, may conduct inspections or have water quality tests conducted at the applicant's expense to obtain or verify information necessary for consideration for a permit application or renewal. Permit applications and renewals shall be made on a form provided by the city utility district no. 1. The following conditions must be met for issuance or renewal of a well operation permit: 
(1)  The well and pump installation meet or are upgraded to meet the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 812. 
(2)  The well construction and pump installation have a history of producing bacteriologically safe water as evidenced by at least two samplings taken a minimum of two weeks apart. No exception to this condition may be made for unsafe wells, unless the department of natural resources approves, in writing, the continued use of the well. 
(3)  There are no cross-connections between the well and pump installation and the municipal water system. 
(4)  The proposed use of the well and pump installation can be justified as being necessary in addition to water provided by the municipal water system. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 21.06)  
Sec. 30-65. - Abandonment procedures. 
(a)  All wells abandoned under the jurisdiction of this article or rules of city utility district no. 1 shall be abandoned according to the procedures and methods of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 812. All debris, pump, piping, unsealed liners and any other obstructions which may interfere with sealing operations shall be removed prior to abandonment. The material for filling the abandoned well shall be concrete. 
(b)  The owner of the well, or the owner's agent, shall notify the utility superintendent at least 48 hours prior to commencement of any well abandonment activities. The abandonment of the well shall be observed by city utility personnel. 
(c)  An abandonment report form, supplied by the department of natural resources, shall be submitted by the well owner to city utility district no. 1 and the department of natural resources within ten days of the completion of the well abandonment. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 21.07)  
Sec. 30-66. - Fuel storage facilities. 
Gasoline or fuel oil storage tank installations shall not be constructed within a 2,000-foot radius of an existing or proposed public water system well. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 21.08)  
Sec. 30-67. - New private wells prohibited. 
(a)  Except as hereinafter provided, new private wells shall not be constructed within the city utility district system when a water main exists less than 200 feet from the nearest point of the property to the city utility district main. In such cases service shall be provided by city utility district extensions and connection charges shall be paid in accordance with article II of chapter 40. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the prohibition set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the director of public works may authorize, subject to common council approval, the construction and operation of a private well on property situated within 200 feet of a city utility district main when all of the following circumstances exist: 
(1)  The private well is not used to obtain or provide water for human consumption; 
(2)  The municipal water supply is unsuitable for the intended use of water obtained from the private well; 
(3)  Use of the municipal water supply would impose an unreasonable hardship upon the property owner; 
(4)  The well poses no threat to the public good or to the health, safety, and welfare of the city; 
(5)  The owner of the well obtains and maintains a well operation permit in accordance with section 30-64. 
(c)  Any well constructed and operated under the circumstances listed in subsection (b) of this section shall be abandoned in accordance with section 30-62 when any of those circumstances cease to exist. 
(d)  The director of public works shall maintain a written record documenting the facts relied upon in authorizing the construction and operation of any private well within the city utility district. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 21.09)  
Chapter 32 - MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal regulation of manufactured and mobile home communities, Wis. Stats. § 66.0435 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 32-1. - Definitions. 
Whenever used in this chapter, the words and phrases which follow shall be construed as indicated unless a different meaning expressly appears from the context: 
Anchoring equipment means straps, cables, turnbuckles, and chains, including tensioning devices, which are used with ties to secure a mobile home to ground anchors. 
Anchoring system means a combination of ties, anchoring equipment, and ground anchors that will, when properly designed and installed resist overturning and lateral movement of the mobile home from wind forces. 
Commission means the Fitchburg Mobile Home Commission. 
Existing park means a mobile home park the construction of which was commenced prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
Expansion means to enlarge, to increase the size of the park (does not include replacing units on existing lots). 
Ground anchor means any device at the mobile home site designed to transfer mobile home anchoring loads to the ground. 
Licensee means any person licensed to operate and maintain a mobile home park under this section. 
Licensing authority means the city. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which in traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. 24 CFR 3280.2(a)(16). Manufactured homes should be certified and labeled as a "manufactured home" under 42 USC 5401 to 5426, or state law in conformity with federal law. 
Mobile home means a vehicle or trailer which is, or was originally, designed, constructed and equipped for primary use as sleeping, eating and living quarters, or which is intended for such use. The term shall include any additions, attachments, annexes, foundations and appurtenances unless the assessed value of such additions, attachments, annexes, foundations and appurtenances equals or exceeds 50 percent of the assessed value of the vehicle or trailer. 
Mobile home park means a plot or plots of ground upon which two or more units, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodation. 
New park means a mobile home park constructed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
Occupant means a person residing in a mobile home. 
Park means a mobile home park. 
Site means a plot of ground designed for the accommodation of one mobile home. 
Tie means a strap, cable or securing device used to connect the mobile home to ground anchors. 
Unit means a mobile home. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.01)  
Secs. 32-2—32-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOME COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 32-21. - Creation and duties. 
The Fitchburg Mobile Home Commission is hereby created to: 
(1)  Enforce the provisions of this chapter and all other ordinances, laws, orders and regulations which relate to the operation and maintenance of mobile homes, mobile home parks, and mobile home sites. 
(2)  Examine all applications for mobile home park licenses and permits and all mobile home park plans to determine whether or not they comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(3)  Inspect or direct such agent or supervisor as it shall designate to inspect, all mobile home parks, mobile home sites, and facilities thereon, together with all records of registration required by this ordinance, prior to the issuance of any license or permit and at least quarterly thereafter, and to make written reports of all such inspections to the city council. For these purposes the commission or its designated agent or supervisor shall have the right at all reasonable times to inspect all mobile home parks, mobile home sites, and the facilities thereon. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.02(1))  
Sec. 32-22. - Composition; officers. 
The mobile home commission shall be composed of the following city officers: police chief, fire chief, city clerk, building inspector, and zoning administrator or their designees. The commission shall elect a chairperson and secretary. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.02(2))  
Sec. 32-23. - Review of mobile home commission actions. 
(a)  The following decisions of the mobile home commission may be appealed to the city council: 
(1)  Rejection of an application for a mobile home park license or license renewal; and 
(2)  Rejection of an application for a temporary permit to locate a mobile home outside a mobile home park. 
(b)  A written notice of appeal must be filed with the city clerk within 14 days of the date when notice of the action of the mobile home commission which is being appealed is mailed to the petitioner. 
(c)  The notice of appeal shall state the action of the mobile home commission appealed from, shall specify the reasons stated by the commission for taking such action, and shall specify the reasons why the petitioner believes that action was inappropriate. 
(d)  The city clerk shall file the notice of appeal with the common council shall schedule the appeal for consideration by the common council at a meeting, open to the public, within 45 days of the filing of the notice of appeal. The clerk shall send notice of the time scheduled for consideration of the appeal to the petitioner at least ten days prior to the hearing of the appeal. 
(e)  Within 30 days-of the appeal hearing, the common council shall affirm, modify, or reverse the action of the mobile home commission or shall refer the matter back to the commission for further consideration. Notice of the decision of the common council shall be sent to the petitioner and the commission. 
(f)  The provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 68 shall not be applicable to any determination made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.20)  
Secs. 32-24—32-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - MOBILE HOME PARKS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 32-50—32-71. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 
 
Sec. 32-72. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or maintain, or permit to be established, operated or maintained upon any property owned, leased or controlled by him/her, a mobile home park within the city without having first secured a license for each such park from the city council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.03)  
Sec. 32-73. - Application. 
Any person desiring a mobile home park license shall file an application with the city clerk. The application shall be in writing, signed by the applicant and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The location and legal description of the mobile home park. 
(3)  A complete site plan of the park. 
(4)  Evidence of proper zoning destination for the proposed mobile home park site (if necessary, any rezoning process shall be completed prior to application for a mobile home park license). 
Application fee as set forth in the annual budget appendix fee schedule. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.04(1))  
Sec. 32-74. - Plans and specifications to be filed. 
The following items shall be filed with an original application for a mobile home park license: 
(1)  Site drawings showing: (scale one-quarter inch to foot or larger) 
a.  The area and extent of the proposed mobile home park; 
b.  The location of all proposed mobile home sites; 
c.  Landscaping plan; 
d.  The location of all sites having anchoring systems as required by section 32-146; 
e.  The location of all sewer and water pipes; 
f.  The recreation area required by division 4 of this article. 
(2)  Plans and specifications for: 
a.  Storm sewers and stormwater drainage facilities; 
b.  All roadways and driveways; 
c.  The water supply system; and sanitary sewer system; 
d.  The electrical system. 
(3)  A written explanation of the manner in which garbage will be collected and disposed of, including how recycling will be promoted and enforced. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.04(2))  
Sec. 32-75. - Review by commission. 
The city clerk shall forward the application and plans to the mobile home commission which shall examine them for conformity with the requirements of this article and with the requirements of any other ordinances, statutes or administrative rules and regulations which may be applicable to mobile home or trailer parks. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.04(3))  
Sec. 32-76. - Action of the commission. 
(a)  The mobile home commission shall recommend approval or conditional approval of the application to the common council or shall reject the application. If approval or conditional approval is recommended, the application shall be referred to the common council for consideration. The common council shall then approve, conditionally approve, or reject the application. 
(b)  If the commission rejects the application the applicant may appeal the committee recommendation. 
(c)  One copy of the plan shall be returned to the applicant with the date and action endorsed thereon and if approved conditionally or rejected, the conditions for approval or reasons for rejection shall be endorsed thereon or attached thereto. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.04(4))  
Sec. 32-77. - Right to inspect. 
Any time application for a license issuance or renewal is made the city shall have the right to inspect the mobile home park and the applicant shall cooperate with providing for such inspection upon request. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.04(5))  
Sec. 32-78. - Clerk to issue license. 
When the application has been approved by the common council or when the conditions for approval have been satisfied; and when construction has been completed according to the plans and specifications submitted with the application, the city clerk shall issue a license to the applicant. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.05)  
Sec. 32-79. - License fees. 
Fees for original issuance and renewal of licenses under this article shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.09)  
Sec. 32-80. - Surety bond. 
No license shall be issued until the applicant has posted a surety bond in the sum of $1,000.00 to guarantee the collection and payment of the monthly parking permit fees required by section 32-294, by the licensee. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.10)  
Sec. 32-81. - Term of license. 
A mobile home park license shall expire one year after its issuance unless sooner revoked. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.06)  
Sec. 32-82. - Renewal of license. 
(a)  Upon application by any licensee and after approval by the mobile home commission, with submitted evidence of occupancy permits for all mobile homes installed within the last 12 months, satisfactory DNR water quality tests results within the last 12 months, copy of a satisfactory inspection report from the county health department, evidence from the county health department that permits have been issued for all connections of units to the sewage disposal system and upon payment of the annual license fee, the city clerk shall issue a certificate renewing the license for another year, unless sooner revoked. 
(b)  The application for renewal shall be in writing, signed by the applicant and on forms furnished by the city. If an existing park is to be remodeled or expanded, the application for renewal shall be accompanied by the plans and specifications required by section 32-74 for the part that has been remodeled or expanded. Common council approval of the remodeling or expansion is required in accordance with sections 32-73 through 32-77. 
(c)  If unable to obtain satisfactory DNR water quality test results, the mobile home park shall supply water on a temporary basis in a manner approved by the public works director if safe water cannot be obtained from the well, until the well can be rebuilt or replaced. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.07)  
Sec. 32-83. - Transfer of license. 
Upon application for a transfer of license and after approval of the application by the city council, the city clerk shall issue a transfer upon payment of the required fee. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.08)  
Secs. 32-84—32-109. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES 
 
Sec. 32-110. - Complaint. 
(a)  Upon the filing of a verified complaint by any police, health, or fire officer or by any resident with the city clerk alleging that any person licensed under section 32-72 has violated any provision of this chapter the mobile home commission shall issue a summons commanding the licensee to appear before them on a day and at a place in such summons named, not less than five nor more than ten days from its date, and show cause why the license should not be revoked or suspended. 
(b)  The summons and a copy of the complaint shall be served at least five days before the date set for the appearance and may be served either personally upon the licensee or upon the person in charge of the mobile home park. Said complaint shall set forth each alleged offense, the date, time and place of each offense alleged and the facts constituting each offense alleged. The clerk shall give the complainant written notice of the time and date set for the hearing. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.19(1))  
Sec. 32-111. - Failure to appear for hearing. 
If the licensee does not appear as required by the summons, the allegations set forth in the complaint shall be deemed to be true and the common council may dismiss the complaint or suspend or revoke the license. Notice of the board's action shall be given to the licensee. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.19(2))  
Sec. 32-112. - Hearing procedure. 
If the licensee appears at the hearing and denies the allegations set forth in the complaint, each party may present testimony and evidence. The complainant shall be the first to proceed and the licensee, who may be represented by counsel, shall then have the opportunity to be heard in person and to present witnesses and testimony on its behalf. Both the complainant and the licensee shall have the right to cross examine adverse witnesses and to compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena which shall be issued by the common council chairperson upon request. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.19(3))  
Sec. 32-113. - Prerogative of the city council. 
(a)  If the common council determines that allegations of the complaint to be true, it may suspend or revoke the license. If the common council determines that the allegations are untrue or, if true, are not sufficient grounds for the suspension or revocation it shall dismiss the complaint. 
(b)  If the common council determines that the allegations of the complaint were malicious and without probable cause the cost shall be paid by the complainant. The common council may require security for costs to be posted by the complainant before issuing the summons. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.19(4))  
Secs. 32-114—32-139. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PARK PLAN 
 
Sec. 32-140. - Park location. 
Every mobile home and mobile home park shall be located on a well-drained area, and the premises shall be properly graded so as to prevent the accumulation of stormwaters or other waters. No mobile home or mobile home park shall be located in any area that is situated so that drainage of contaminated liquids or solids can be deposited on its location. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.15(1))  
Sec. 32-141. - Mobile home sites. 
(a)  Each site shall be clearly defined or delineated. The basic mobile home unit shall not occupy more than one-fourth of the area of the site and the complete unit, including all accessory structures, shall not occupy more than one-half of the area of the site. 
(b)  The units shall be so located on each site that there shall be at least a 20-foot clearance between each unit. No unit shall be located within ten feet of any building within the park or of any property line of the park. No unit shall be located within 25 feet of the right-of-way line of a highway or within ten feet of the right-of-way line of any public street or internal private street system of the park. 
(c)  Mobile home parks which, at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived existed lawfully with mobile home sites that do not comply with the foregoing minimum area requirements, may continue to operate. Any expansion and modification of such mobile home parks shall, however, comply with this section. 
(d)  Any new unit being installed in an preexisting mobile home park shall comply with all site requirements of this section. In addition a building permit shall be obtained in order to locate any new unit in an preexisting mobile home park. The building permit applicant shall be required to provide evidence that the unit will comply with all site requirements and also provide evidence that a sewer connection permit was issued from the county health department, if applicable. The electrical service for the site shall conform to the wiring requirements for the current addition of the National Electrical Code article 550. An occupancy permit shall be issued by the building inspector prior to the occupancy of the unit. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.15(2))  
Sec. 32-142. - Streets. 
(a)  All sites shall abut upon a street. A two-way street shall be at least 32 feet wide if parking is to be permitted on both sides of the street; 25 feet wide if parking is permitted on only one side; and 18 feet wide if parking on the street is prohibited. All one-way streets shall be at least 14 feet wide and shall be no longer than 500 feet. Parking on one-way streets shall be prohibited unless the width is increased by seven feet for each parking lane. 
(b)  Driveways shall be graveled or paved, maintained in good condition, have natural drainage, and be lighted at night. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.15(3))  
Sec. 32-143. - Parking. 
At least 1½ parking spaces shall be provided for each site. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.15(5))  
Sec. 32-144. - Recreation area. 
Each park shall contain a sufficient land area to provide adequate park, playground, recreation, and open space to meet the needs created by the mobile home park. At least one acre of land for each 100 sites or fraction thereof shall be provided to meet these needs. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.15(6))  
Sec. 32-145. - Landscaping. 
Landscape plans shall be developed in collaboration with and approved by the city plan commission. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.15(7))  
Sec. 32-146. - Anchoring. 
(a)  New parks. All new parks shall provide each site with an anchoring system meeting the standards specified in subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  Existing parks. 
(1)  If an existing park is remodeled, anchoring systems meeting the standards specified in subsection (c) of this section shall be provided for each remodeled site. 
(2)  If an existing park is expanded, anchoring systems meeting the standards specified in subsection (c) of this section shall be provided for each new site. 
(3)  If a site in an existing park becomes vacant, anchoring systems meeting the standards specified in subsection (c) of this section shall be provided for each such site before it may be reoccupied. 
(4)  If a site is vacant or becomes vacant, a building permit shall be issued by the building inspector prior to the site being occupied by a mobile home. An occupancy permit shall be required issued by the building inspector prior to the mobile home being occupied. 
(c)  Standards. All anchoring systems shall comply with the standards of the American National Standards Institute, ANSI 119.3, parts 2 and 4, a copy of which shall be kept on file at the office of the city clerk and shall be made available to the public for inspection and copying upon request. 
(d)  Commission approval. No person may commence construction of a new park or expand or remodel an existing park unless the plans for such construction, expansion or remodeling contain provisions for anchoring systems meeting the standards specified in section 32-265(d) and are approved by the commission. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.14(1), (2), (4), (5))  
Sec. 32-147. - Connection to public water and sewer required if available. 
If a public sanitary sewer or water supply system becomes available to a mobile home park, the park shall be connected to the city utility district in accordance with articles II and III of chapter 40. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.12(1))  
Sec. 32-148. - Fire hydrant required; location. 
A fire hydrant shall be located at each street entrance to the park. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.12(1)(a))  
Sec. 32-149. - Private wells. 
Private wells shall be permitted where a public water supply system is not available to the mobile home park. Any such well shall be located on the premises of the mobile home park and shall be constructed and have pump and distribution lines which are installed in accordance with the regulations of the state department of natural resources governing well drilling and pump installation. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.12(2))  
Sec. 32-150. - Service line and shutoff valve for each home site required. 
A separate water service line shall extend to each site, and a shutoff valve shall be situated between the main supply line and each site whether the source of water is a public utility or a private well. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.12(3))  
Sec. 32-151. - Electrical outlets. 
Every site shall be furnished with an electrical service outlet. Such outlet shall be equipped with an externally operated switch or fuse of not less than 60 amperes capacity, and a heavy duty outlet receptacle. Electrical outlets shall be weatherproof and no power lines shall be less than 15 feet above the ground. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.15(4))  
Sec. 32-152. - Compliance with state, county and city regulations required. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, all plumbing, electrical wiring and waste disposal systems shall conform to the building code of the city and to the rules and regulations of the county health department for the mobile home park and any additions to the mobile homes. All wiring shall conform to the city's electrical codes. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.13)  
Sec. 32-153. - Mobile home units constructed to federal standards exempt from local codes. 
The plumbing, wiring, and construction for the mobile homes units is preempted by the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Act of 1974, 24 CFR 3280.1 et seq. Mobile home units constructed to this standard are not subject to local building codes. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.13)  
Secs. 32-154—32-174. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - PARK MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 32-175. - Management of the park. 
Each mobile home park shall have an office for the attendant or person in charge of said park. A copy of the park license and of this article shall be posted therein and the park register shall at all times be kept in said office. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.18(1))  
Sec. 32-176. - Duties of mobile home park operator. 
The operator of any mobile home park shall be required to: 
(1)  Keep a register of all occupants, open at all times to inspection by federal, state, and local officers, which shall show for all occupants: 
a.  Names and addresses; 
b.  Dates of entrance and departure; 
c.  License numbers of all mobile homes; 
d.  States issuing such licenses. 
(2)  Maintain the park in a safe, clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all times. 
(3)  Ensure that the provisions of this chapter are complied with and enforce and report promptly to the proper authorities any violation of this chapter or any other violations of law which may come to his/her attention. 
(4)  Maintain in convenient and readily accessible places, ten-pound, multipurpose ABC type dry chemical hand fire extinguishers in the ratio of one to each eight units, or any fraction thereof. 
(5)  Prohibit the lighting of open fires on the premises. 
(6)  Collect the monthly parking permit fee provided for in article V of this chapter and keep a true and accurate record showing the names of the persons paying said fee and the amount paid. 
(7)  Transmit the monthly parking fees to the city treasurer on or before the tenth day of the month following the month for which such fees are due. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.18(2))  
Secs. 32-177—32-205. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MOBILE HOMES OUTSIDE PARKS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 32-206. - Parking prohibited. 
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to park any mobile home on any street, alley or highway within the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.11(1))  
Sec. 32-207. - One hour parking. 
Emergency or temporary stopping or parking for not longer than one hour shall be permitted on any street, alley or highway subject to any prohibitions, regulations, or limitations imposed by the traffic and parking regulations or ordinances applicable to such street, alley or highway. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.11(2))  
Sec. 32-208. - Storage permitted. 
The parking or storage of one unoccupied mobile home in a private garage or in the rear yard is permitted; provided, however, that no living quarters shall be maintained or any business practiced within such mobile home while so parked or stored. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.11(3))  
Secs. 32-209—32-239. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TEMPORARY PERMITS 
 
Sec. 32-240. - When required. 
When it is temporarily necessary to locate a mobile home outside of a mobile home park for emergency housing, or for the housing of seasonally employed workers, or for business related to agriculture, the common council may issue a temporary permit allowing the mobile home to be so located. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.11(3)(a))  
Sec. 32-241. - Expiration. 
A temporary permit shall expire at the end of six months, unless issued for agriculture-related business, in which event it shall expire at the end of one year. Each permit shall clearly show the expiration date and the purpose for which it was issued. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.11(3)(a), (b))  
Sec. 32-242. - Application; filing; fee. 
An application for a temporary permit shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the annual budget appendix fee schedule. The permit shall be granted only upon the written consent of the owner, the legal agent of the owner, or the lessee of the location for which the permit is issued. The person to whom such permit is granted shall be subject to the regular parking permit fee required by section 32-294. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.11(3)(c))  
Sec. 32-243. - Approval, conditional approval or denial. 
The city clerk shall forward the application and consent to the mobile home commission for review. The mobile home commission shall recommend approval or conditional approval of the permit to the common council or shall reject the application. If the commission rejects the application the applicant may appeal the committee recommendation. If approval or conditional approval is recommended the application shall be referred to the common council for consideration. The common council shall then approve, conditionally approve, or reject the application. If the application is rejected or conditionally approved, written notice stating the conditions for approval or reasons for rejection shall be given to the applicant. If the application has been approved or when any conditions of approval have been satisfied, the city clerk shall issue the temporary permit. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.11(3)(d))  
Secs. 32-244—32-264. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 
 
Sec. 32-265. - Anchoring requirements. 
(a)  If a new site is located outside of a mobile home park, anchoring systems meeting the standards specified in subsection (c) of this section shall be provided before it may be occupied. 
(b)  If a site located outside of a mobile home park becomes vacant, anchoring systems meeting the standards specified in subsection (c) of this section shall be provided for such site before it is again occupied by a mobile home. 
(c)  All anchoring systems shall comply with the standards of The American National Standards Institute, ANSI 119.3, parts 2 and 4, a copy of which shall be kept on file at the office of the city clerk and shall be made available to the public for inspection and copying upon request. 
(d)  No person may commence construction of a new park or expand or remodel an existing park unless the plans for such construction, expansion or remodeling contain provisions for anchoring systems meeting the standards specified in this section and are approved by the commission. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.14(3)—(5))  
Secs. 32-266—32-293. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PARKING PERMITS 
 
Sec. 32-294. - Required; calculation of fee. 
(a)  In addition to the license fee, the city shall collect from each occupied mobile home occupying space or lots in a mobile home park within the city a monthly parking permit fee computed as provided in this section. 
(b)  On January 1, the city assessor shall determine the total fair market value of each occupied mobile home which is subject to the monthly parking permit fee. The fair market value, minus the tax exempt household furnishings thus established, shall be equalized to the general level of assessment on other real and personal property in the city. The value of each occupied mobile home thus determined shall be multiplied by the general property gross tax rate established on the preceding year's assessment of general property. The parking permit fee shall be reduced by the credit allowed under Wis. Stats. § 79.10. The total annual parking permit fee thus computed shall be divided by 12 and shall represent the monthly mobile home parking permit fee. 
(c)  The fee shall be applicable to occupied mobile homes moving into the city any time during the year. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.16(1))  
Sec. 32-295. - Responsibility of park licensee to collect parking fee. 
It shall be the full and complete responsibility of each licensee of a mobile home park to collect the proper fee from the owner or occupant of each occupied mobile home within the mobile home park. The licensee shall pay such parking permit fees to the city treasurer on or before the tenth of the month following the month for which such fees are due. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.16(2))  
Sec. 32-296. - Park licensee's duty to report changes in number of occupied mobile homes. 
(a)  The licensee of a mobile home park shall notify the city clerk and the city assessor of each increase or decrease in the number of occupied mobile homes situated in his/her park within five days of any change. The additional occupied units shall be reported on forms prescribed by the state department of revenue. 
(b)  As soon as the assessor receives the notice of such addition he/she shall determine its fair market value and notify the city clerk of his/her determination. The city clerk shall equalize the fair market value established by the city assessor and shall apply the tax rate for that year, divide the annual parking permit fee thus determined by 12 and notify the mobile home park licensee of the monthly fee to be collected from the unit. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.16(3))  
Sec. 32-297. - Landowner's duty to report occupied mobile homes and collect parking fee. 
For mobile homes permitted to be located outside of a licensed mobile home park, must be taxed as real property and are subject to a monthly parking permit fee the monthly parking permit fee shall be paid by the owner of the mobile home, the occupant thereof, or the owner of the land on which it stands, the same as, and, in the manner provided for mobile homes located in mobile home parks, and the owners of such land are required to comply with the collection and reporting requirements of sections 32-295 and 32-296. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.16(4))  
Sec. 32-298. - Fee rate and valuation to be reestablished annually. 
A new fee rate and a new valuation shall be established each January and shall continue for that calendar year. The valuation established shall be subject to review as are other values established under Wis. Stats. ch. 70. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.16(5))  
Sec. 32-299. - Effect of failure to pay monthly fee. 
Failure to pay the monthly parking permit fee in timely fashion shall be treated in all respects like a default in payment of personal property tax and shall be subject to all procedures and penalties applicable thereto under Wis. Stats. chs. 70 and 74. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.16(7))  
Sec. 32-300. - Exemptions. 
The monthly parking permit fee shall not apply where a mobile home park is owned and operated by the county or state under the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 59.07(13) or 70.11(1). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.17)  
Sec. 32-301. - Disposition of fee proceeds. 
The city shall retain ten percent of the monthly parking permit fees collected in each month to cover the cost of administration and shall pay to the school district in which the mobile home park or mobile home is located, within 20 days after the end of each month, such proportion of the remainder of the fees collected in the preceding month as the ratio of the most recent property tax levy for school purposes bears to the total tax levy for all purposes in the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.16(6))  
Secs. 32-302—32-320. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 32-321. - Unlawful acts. 
(a)  No person shall in the city erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, or maintain any mobile home park or other structure or equipment regulated by this Code, or cause, permit or suffer the same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or fail to timely comply with any lawful order issued hereunder. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter, other than the reporting requirements set forth in article V of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $10.00 nor more than $100.00 per violation and the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail until payment of such forfeiture and the costs of prosecution, but not to exceed 30 days for each violation. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person who fails to comply with the reporting requirements of article V of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit $25.00 and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail until payment of such forfeiture and the costs of prosecution, but not to exceed 30 days for each violation. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.21(1))  
Sec. 32-322. - Notice of violation and order. 
(a)  The building inspector may serve a notice of violation and order on any person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, removal, or maintenance of any mobile home park or other equipment or structure in violation of the provisions of this Code, or in violation of a detail statement or a plan approved thereunder, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code. Such notice or order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
(b)  The building inspector may also recommend suspension or revocation to the mobile home commission suspend or revoke any permit for any building or structure on any property on which such noncompliance is discovered in accordance with section 35-55. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.21(2))  
Sec. 32-323. - Prosecution; defenses. 
(a)  If a notice of violation and order is not complied with promptly, the mobile home commission may request the city attorney to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to correct or abate such violation or require the removal or termination of the unlawful use violation of the provisions of this Code or of the notice or order made pursuant thereto. 
(b)  In any court action or legal proceeding, the fact that a license was issued shall not constitute a defense, nor shall any error, oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of the building inspector or mobile home commission constitute a defense. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.21(3))  
Sec. 32-324. - Citations. 
In the event that any person fails or neglects to comply with a lawful order issued under the provisions of this Code, the building inspector may issue a citation in accordance with chapter 18 imposing a forfeiture, as provided in section 32-326. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.21(4))  
Sec. 32-325. - Injunctions and restraining orders. 
As a substitute for, or in addition to, forfeiture actions, the city attorney may, on behalf of the city, seek enforcement of any and all parts of this Code by court actions seeking an injunction or restraining order against the person responsible for the violation for the purpose of ordering that person to do one or more, of the following: 
(1)  Restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from any further violation. 
(2)  Restrain or correct the construction or alteration of such a mobile home park. 
(3)  Require the removal of items in violation of the provisions of this Code. 
(4)  Prevent the occupation or use of the mobile home park or part thereof erected, constructed, installed, altered or maintained in violation of, or not in compliance with, with the provisions of this Code, or in violation of a plan or specification under which a license was issued. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.21(5))  
Sec. 32-326. - Forfeitures. 
Any person who violates any provision of this Code or any lawful order of the building inspector pursuant thereto shall be subject to penalties as provided in section 1-21. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.21(6))  
Sec. 32-327. - Relationship to nuisance actions. 
No provisions of this Code shall be construed to bar any private or public nuisance action to enjoin or abate the use or occupancy of any mobile home park under state law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.21(7))  
Sec. 32-328. - Assistance from other officials. 
The building inspector in the performance of his/her duties shall receive the assistance of the chiefs of the police and fire departments and of all other city officials, including the city attorney, in prosecuting violations hereof. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 5.21(8))  
Chapter 34 - NONMETALLIC MINING 
(RESERVED)  
Chapter 35 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— City housing authorities, Wis. Stats. § 66.1201; fences generally, Wis. Stats. § 90.01 et seq.; regulation of building industry generally, Wis. Stats. § 101.01 et seq.; one- and two-family dwelling code, Wis. Stats. § 101.60 et seq.; municipal authority regarding one- and two-family dwelling code, Wis. Stats. § 101.65; multifamily dwelling code, Wis. Stats. § 101.971 et seq.; modular home code, Wis. Stats. § 101.70 et seq.; municipal authority regarding modular home code, Wis. Stats. § 101.76; electrical wiring and electricians, Wis. Stats. § 101.80 et seq.; municipal authority regarding electrical wiring and electricians, Wis. Stats. § 101.86; municipal licensing authority regarding electricians, Wis. Stats. § 101.861; manufactured and mobile homes, Wis. Stats. § 101.91 et seq.; plumbing and fire protection systems and swimming pool plan review, Wis. Stats. § 145.01 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 35-1—35-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 35-19. - Purpose and intent. 
This article provides certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements for safe and stable design, methods of construction and uses of materials in buildings and structures hereafter erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, converted to other uses or demolished, and regulates the equipment, maintenance, use and occupancy of all such buildings and structures. The purpose of this article is to protect and foster the health, safety and well-being of persons occupying or using such buildings and the general public. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.00(3)) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulation construction and inspection of dwellings, Wis. Stats. § 101.60.  
Sec. 35-20. - Definitions. 
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, when used in this article the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Building means a structure for support, shelter or enclosure of persons or property. 
Building inspector means the executive official in charge of the city building inspection department as described in section 35-51(a) or any person officially authorized by the building inspector or the city to carry out the administrative and enforcement functions prescribed in this chapter. 
Structure means an assembly of materials forming a construction for occupancy or use. 
Swimming pool means any manmade depression in the ground, either temporary or permanent, or a container of water, either temporary or permanent and either above or below the ground, in which water more than 18 inches deep is contained and which is used primarily for the purpose of bathing or swimming. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.01)  
Sec. 35-21. - Scope. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all buildings and structures in the city with the exception of the following: 
(1)  Recreational vehicles and mobile homes. On-site additions to recreational vehicles and mobile homes are not exempt. 
(2)  Historical buildings designated as such by the federal or state government. 
(3)  Temporary buildings used exclusively for construction purposes, not exceeding two stories in height and not used as living quarters. 
(4)  Buildings owned by the federal government. Buildings owned by other than the federal government but leased to the federal government are not exempt. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.00(4))  
Sec. 35-22. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all new construction, all additions and alterations to existing buildings, all remodeling, repairs and maintenance of existing buildings, building use changes, buildings being moved from one location to another and to demolition of buildings. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.00(5))  
Sec. 35-23. - Responsibility. 
This article shall be binding alike upon every owner of a building; every person in charge of or responsible for or who causes the construction, repair or alteration of any building or structure; and every professional engineer, architect or other person who shall prepare plans for the construction, alteration or addition to any building or structure in the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.00(6))  
Sec. 35-24. - Performance code. 
This article shall be interpreted and administered as a performance code. No part of this article is intended to prohibit or discourage the construction of innovative buildings and structures. Minor variances from this article may be approved by the building inspector when those variances comply with the spirit and intent of the provisions specifically cited herein. The building inspector may approve alternative materials or methods of construction when he/she finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this article, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this article in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire-resistance, durability and safety. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.00(7))  
Sec. 35-25. - Relationship to other regulations. 
This article shall not affect violations of any other ordinance, code or regulation prior to the effective date hereof, and any such violation shall be governed and shall continue to be punishable to the full extent of the law under the provisions of those ordinances, codes or regulations in effect at the time the violation was committed. The provisions of this article shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other ordinances or regulations of the city or the state which prescribe standards other than are provided herein. In case of conflicts among such standards, the more restrictive standard shall apply. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.00(8))  
Sec. 35-26. - Matters not provided for. 
Any requirement essential for structural, fire or sanitary safety of an existing or proposed building or structure, or essential for the safety of the occupants thereof, and which is not specifically covered by this article, shall be determined by the building inspector. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.00(9))  
Sec. 35-27. - Workmanship. 
All work performed under the scope of this article shall be conducted, executed and completed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner so as to secure the results intended by this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.00(10))  
Sec. 35-28. - Maintenance. 
All buildings and structures and all parts thereof shall be maintained in a safe condition and all devices and safeguards which are required at the erection, alteration, addition, or repair of any building shall be maintained in good working order. This section shall not be construed as permitting the removal or nonmaintenance of any existing devices or safeguards unless authorized in writing by the building inspector. Such maintenance requirements shall apply to all buildings now existing or hereafter erected. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.00(11))  
Sec. 35-29. - Liability for damages. 
This article shall not be construed as assuming any liability on the part of the city for damages to anyone injured or for any property destroyed by a defect in any building or element. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.00(12))  
Sec. 35-30. - Code availability. 
A copy of this article shall be kept on file at the office of the building inspector and shall be made available to the public for reference, inspection and purchase upon request during normal business hours. A copy of the provisions of the Wisconsin Administrative Code adopted by reference in section 35-77 shall be kept on file at the office of the building inspector and shall be made available to the public for reference and inspection upon request during normal business hours. Copies of the Wisconsin Administrative Code referenced herein may be purchased from the state department of administration, document sales and distribution office. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.001(3))  
Sec. 35-31. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Fee schedule. A fee schedule for all permits issued by the building inspection department shall be as set forth in the annual budget appendix fee schedule. The fee schedule shall be kept on file in the building inspector's office and shall be referred to as the "building inspection permit fee schedule." The building inspection permit fee schedule shall be considered a supplement to this article and shall be made available for reference and public inspection during normal business hours. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event the city's work to review plans and grant a permit in a particular construction project is not proportionate to the fee provided in the inspection permit fee schedule, the director of public works may make a special determination to lower or waive the permit fee. 
(b)  Payment of fees. Permit fees shall be paid by the applicant prior to permit issuance. The building inspector shall collect all permit fees, keep an accurate account of all fees collected and turn all fees over to the city treasurer within 30 days of receipt. 
(c)  Delinquent permit penalty. Permit fees shall be doubled if any work is commenced prior to permit issuance. 
(d)  Waiver of permit fees. Permit fees shall be waived for buildings and structures owned by the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.08; Ord. No. 2015-O-29, 10-27-2015)  
Secs. 35-32—35-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING INSPECTOR AND BUILDING INSPECTION DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 35-51. - Department created; building official as department head. 
(a)  Code official. The city building inspection department is hereby created and the executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the building inspector. 
(b)  Department head. The building inspector shall be a department head as defined in section 16-1 and shall be fully covered as a fulltime employee under the provisions of said chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.03(1), (2))  
Sec. 35-52. - Appointment, removal and qualifications of building inspector. 
(a)  The building inspector shall be appointed by the common council and shall not be removed from office except for cause and after full opportunity to be heard on specific and relevant charges by and before the common council. 
(b)  The building inspector shall possess the necessary qualifications and inspector certifications required by the city and the state to supervise the general construction of buildings and enforce the provisions of this Code. The assistant building inspector and other appointed department employees shall possess necessary inspector certifications as mandated by state law or rule and other qualifications as required by the building inspector and the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.03(3), (6))  
Sec. 35-53. - Appointment of assistant building inspector and other department personnel. 
(a)  The building inspector is authorized to designate a qualified employee as assistant building inspector who shall exercise all the powers of the building inspector during the temporary absence or disability of the building inspector. 
(b)  The building inspector shall appoint such number of officers, technical assistants, inspectors and other employees as shall be necessary for the administration and enforcement of this Code and as authorized by the city council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.03(4), (5))  
Sec. 35-54. - Powers and duties of the building inspector. 
(a)  State statute reference. The building inspector shall be held to be the same officer as referred to in state law as building inspector, and who shall have the same powers and duties. The building inspector shall enforce all the provisions of this article and all other state laws and city ordinances relating to the construction, alteration, repair, removal, safety and use of buildings and permanent building equipment, except as otherwise specifically provided for by statutory requirements or as provided in this article. The building inspector shall have full power to pass upon any question arising under the provisions of this article subject to the conditions contained herein. 
(b)  Rule making authority. The building inspector shall have the power as necessary in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare, to adopt and promulgate orders and directives, to interpret and implement the provisions of this article to secure the intent thereof, and to designate requirements applicable because of local climatic or other conditions; but such rules shall not have the effect of waiving structural or fire performance requirements specifically provided in this article or violating accepted engineering practice involving public safety. The building inspector shall also have the power as necessary to establish department policies, initiate administrative procedures and adopt rules to ensure effective and efficient department operation. 
(c)  Permits, inspections and correction orders. The building inspector shall be responsible for the issuance of all permits required by this article and for the inspection of all work for which such permits have been issued. The building inspector shall enforce compliance with the provisions of this article and shall issue necessary notices and correction orders to ensure compliance with all code requirements for the health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
(d)  Recordkeeping. The building inspector shall keep official records of applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained in the official records so long as the building or structure to which they relate remains in existence unless otherwise provided by other regulations. 
(e)  Annual report. At least annually, the building inspector shall submit to the common council a written report and statement of operations in the form and content as shall be prescribed by the city administrator. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.04)  
Sec. 35-55. - Permit suspension or revocation. 
The building inspector may suspend or revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this article where the building inspector or authorized department official is denied access to the premises, where the applicant has willfully refused to correct a violation of the provisions of this Code, or in case of any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application or in the plans on which the permit or approval is based. No construction activity shall take place on a job site after suspension or revocation of the permit, except such work as the building inspector shall order be done as a condition precedent to the issuance of a new permit, or which the building inspector may authorize as reasonably necessary to protect work already completed on the job site, existing property, adjoining property and the general public. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.07(6))  
Sec. 35-56. - Restrictions on employees. 
An official or employee connected with the building inspection department shall not be engaged in or directly or indirectly connected with the furnishing of labor, materials or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of any building within the city, or the preparation of plans or of specifications thereof, unless that person is the owner of the building; nor shall such officer or employee engage in any work which conflicts with official duties or with the interest of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.03(7))  
Sec. 35-57. - Relief from personal responsibilities. 
(a)  The building inspector, assistant building inspector or other department employee charged with the enforcement of this Code, while acting on behalf of the city, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and the building inspector, assistant building inspector or department employee is hereby relieved of all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against any department officer or employee because of an act performed by that person in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this article, shall be defended by the legal representative of the city until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(b)  The building inspector or any subordinates shall not be liable for any costs in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this Code; and any officer of the building inspection department, acting in good faith and without malice, shall be free of liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.03(8))  
Sec. 35-58. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appealable matters. Any person aggrieved by an order, ruling or decision of the building inspector has a right of administrative appeal to the city zoning board of appeals pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7), (8) and (9). 
(b)  Procedure. The procedure for administrative appeals under this article shall follow the provisions of sections 22-642 and 22-643 which are incorporated and adopted herein by reference. Such appeals shall be commenced within 20 days of receiving an order, ruling or decision from the building inspector. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.16)  
Sec. 35-59. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Unlawful acts. No person shall in the city erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish, use or occupy any building or structure or equipment regulated by this article, or cause, permit or suffer the same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this article or fail to timely comply with any lawful order issued hereunder. 
(b)  Notice of violation and order. The building inspector may serve a notice of violation and order on any person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, removal, demolition, use or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of this article, or in violation of a detail statement or a plan approved thereunder, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this article. Such notice or order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. The building inspector may also suspend or revoke any permit for any building or structure on any property on which such noncompliance is discovered in accordance with section 35-55. 
(c)  Prosecution. If a notice of violation and order is not complied with promptly, the building inspector may request the city attorney to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to correct or abate such violation or require the removal or termination of the unlawful use of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this article or of the notice or order made pursuant thereto. In any court action or legal proceeding, the fact that a permit was issued shall not constitute a defense, nor shall any error, oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of the building inspector constitute a defense. 
(d)  Citations. In the event that any person fails or neglects to comply with a lawful order issued under the provisions of this article, the building inspector may issue a citation in accordance with chapter 18 imposing a forfeiture as provided in subsection (f) of this section. 
(e)  Injunctions and restraining orders. As a substitute for, or in addition to, forfeiture actions, the city attorney may, on behalf of the city, seek enforcement of any and all parts of this article by court actions seeking an injunction or restraining order against the person responsible for the violation for the purpose of ordering that person to do one or more, of the following: 
(1)  Restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from any further execution of work. 
(2)  Restrain or correct the erection, installation or alteration of such building or structure. 
(3)  Require the removal of work in violation of the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Prevent the occupation or use of the building or structure or part thereof erected, constructed, installed or altered in violation of, or not in compliance with, with the provisions of this article, or in violation of a plan or specification under which an approval, permit or certificate was issued. 
(f)  Forfeitures. See forfeiture/bond/deposit schedule for penalties for any person who shall violate or fail to comply with the provisions of this article or any lawful order of the building inspector issued pursuant thereto. 
(g)  Relationship to nuisance actions. No provisions of this article shall be construed to bar any private or public nuisance action to enjoin or abate the use or occupancy of any land or structure under state law. 
(h)  Assistance from other officials. The building inspector in the performance of his/her duties shall receive the assistance of the chiefs of the police and fire departments and of all other city officials, including the city attorney, in prosecuting violations hereof. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.17)  
Secs. 35-60—35-76. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 35-77. - Adoption of state codes by reference. 
The provisions of the following state codes and subsequent amendments and recodifications thereto are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in this article as if fully set forth. Violations of the provisions hereby adopted shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subject to enforcement and abatement procedures as set forth in section 35-59. 
(1)  Wis. Admin. Code SPS 316, Electrical Code. 
(2)  Wis. Admin. Code SPS 320-325, Uniform Dwelling Code, except Wis. Admin. Code SPS 320.05(1), 320.05 (3) and 320.05(5). 
(3)  Wis. Admin. Code SPS 361-365, Commercial Building Code. 
(4)  Wis. Admin. Code SPS 366, Existing Buildings. 
(5)  Wis. Admin. Code SPS 381-387, Plumbing Code. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.02(1); Ord. No. 2018-O-07, §§ 1—5, 2-13-2018) 
State Law reference— One- and two-family dwelling code, Wis. Stats. § 101.60 et seq.  
Sec. 35-78. - Referenced standards. 
(a)  Conformance of construction with the "Basic Building Code," a publication of the Building Officials and Code Administrators, Inc., and its appendicized references, as well as the Wisconsin Uniform Building Code, shall be prima facie evidence of safe construction. 
(b)  Only those standards of workmanship and safety which are within the scope of, but are not clearly described, in the city and state codes and are more clearly detailed or described in the referenced code shall be considered recognized standards of good workmanship and safety. No requirement of reference more stringent than, or in conflict with, the city building code shall be in force, nor shall any definition or term in conflict with those of the city or state codes be applicable to the city building code. 
(c)  Where any requirements of the referenced code are more stringent than the standards of workmanship and safety described or implied in the city or state codes, the city and state code requirements on the particular item shall apply. 
(d)  Major topics appearing in the referenced code and not appearing in either the city or state codes may be considered recognized standards of workmanship and safety, at the discretion of the building inspector. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.02(3))  
Secs. 35-79—35-99. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PERMITS GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 35-100. - Required; exemptions; compliance with construction standards. 
(a)  No person shall erect or construct any building or structure whatever or add to, enlarge, move, improve, alter, extend, convert or demolish any building or structure or cause the same to be done or commence any work covered by this article on any building or structure without first obtaining a building permit therefor from the building inspector except that building permits shall not be required for the following: 
(1)  Repairs required for the maintenance and upkeep of any building which do not exceed a cost of $2,000.00, do not involve a change in use, and do not affect the structural strength, fire hazard, exits, natural lighting or the replacement of a major piece of equipment. 
(2)  Residential accessory buildings and storage sheds not used to house motor vehicles and less than 64 square feet in floor area. 
(3)  Attached or detached uncovered wood decks with floor surfaces less than 24 inches above adjacent grade level. 
(4)  Satellite dishes and antennas intended for private residential use. 
(5)  Buildings and structures not within the scope of this Code. 
(b)  Construction referred to in this section shall comply with all applicable code sections and construction standards regardless of building permit requirements. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.05(1), (2))  
Sec. 35-101. - Electrical, plumbing and heating permits. 
No person shall commence any electrical, plumbing or heating work covered by this article without first obtaining an electrical permit therefor from the building inspector. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.05(3)—(5))  
Sec. 35-102. - Demolition permit. 
(a)  No permit or renewal of a permit for the demolition of any building or structure shall be issued without the approval of the zoning administrator. Upon receipt of a demolition permit application, the zoning administrator shall provide materials to the mayor and district alderpersons allowing a minimum of five days of comment. The application for demolition permit shall include a rationale for removal of the building along with a detailed plan for the future use of the property on which the building or structure is located. The zoning administrator shall not approve the demolition permit unless he or she determines that the demolition will not: 
(1)  Have an adverse impact to the historical or cultural significance of the property upon which the building or structure is located; 
(2)  Have an adverse impact upon properties adjacent to the property upon which the building or structure is located; 
(3)  Be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort or general welfare; or 
(4)  Impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property. 
(b)  If the zoning administrator declines to approve a request for a demolition permit, such demolition permit request shall be referred to the plan commission for recommendation and to the council for action. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the building inspector may issue a demolition permit without zoning administrator approval where the building inspector orders the building demolished, or where by fire or other natural causes, the building or structure has suffered damage in excess of 50 percent of its assessed value. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.05(7); Ord. No. 2013-O-01, § 1, 2-26-2013)  
Sec. 35-103. - Waiver of permits. 
If, in his/her opinion, a proposed alteration to a building or equipment is insignificant, or the equipment or part is being replaced through normal maintenance, the building inspector may waive the requirement of a permit. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.05(6))  
Secs. 35-104—35-134. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - APPLICATIONS AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTATION 
 
Sec. 35-135. - Permit applications. 
Application for a permit shall be made by the owner of the building or structure or an authorized agent and shall be made in writing upon a blank form furnished by the building inspector. The permit application shall contain the name, mailing address and phone number of the owner of the building and land, the name, mailing address and phone number of the engineer, architect, designer or contractor responsible for the work, a general description of the proposed work, location of the proposed work, the use and occupancy of all parts of the building or structure, and such other information as required by the building inspector to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.06(1))  
Sec. 35-136. - Plans required; review by other departments. 
(a)  Building plans, site plans and specifications shall accompany every application for a permit and shall be filed in duplicate with the building inspector. All plans submitted shall be legible, drawn to scale, fully dimensioned and shall contain sufficient information to determine compliance with this Code and all other applicable regulations. Plans shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of this article, shall bear the name of the architect, engineer or designer who prepared them, if any, and shall be of sufficient clarity to clearly indicate the nature and character of the work proposed. 
(b)  Building plans requiring review by other city departments or state agencies such as the city planning and zoning department, city plan commission or the department of commerce shall be reviewed and stamped "Approved" or "Conditionally Approved" by said departments or agencies prior to submittal for permits. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.06(2), (3))  
Sec. 35-137. - Quality of materials. 
When the quality of materials is essential for conformity to this article, specific information shall be given on plans submitted to establish such quality; and this article shall not be cited, or the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.06(4))  
Sec. 35-138. - Waiver of plans. 
The building inspector may waive the requirement for the filing of plans when the work involved is of a minor nature, when plans would not sufficiently show the nature and character of the work, or when the work is adequately described on the permit application. A detailed written description of all work proposed may also be substituted for building plans at the discretion of the building inspector. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.06(5))  
Sec. 35-139. - Amendment to plans. 
Subject to the limitations described in section 35-140, amendments to a plan, application or other record accompanying the same shall be filed at any time before completion of the work for which the permit is sought or issued. Such amendments are subject to the same review and approval process as the original plans and shall be deemed part of the original application. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.06(6))  
Sec. 35-140. - Time limitations. 
An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing unless such application has been diligently prosecuted or a permit shall have been issued; except that the building inspector may grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each if there is reasonable cause. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.06(7))  
Secs. 35-141—35-163. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - ISSUANCE 
 
Sec. 35-164. - Plan review and permit issuance. 
The building inspector shall examine all applications for permits, plans and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application, plans and specifications are in substantial conformity to the requirements of this article, with all applicable ordinances of the city, and with all laws and lawful orders of the state, the building inspector shall, upon receipt of the required fee, issue a permit for said work and shall sign, date and stamp the plans "Approved" or "Conditionally Approved." 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.07(2))  
Sec. 35-165. - Permit to start construction. 
The zoning administrator or designated appointee is authorized to issue a permit to start construction, for the construction of foundations or any other part of the building or structure, before the plans and specifications for the entire building or structure have been submitted, but work on any building shall not be commenced unless department approval has been granted or a permit has been issued. The holder of a permit to start construction shall proceed at the holder's own risk with the building operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.07(5))  
Sec. 35-166. - Distribution of approved plans. 
One set of approved plans and specifications shall be retained by the building inspector and one set of approved plans and specifications shall be returned to the applicant, which set shall be kept at the job site at all times until the work authorized thereby is completed and shall be made available for inspection by any department official. Such approved plans and specifications shall not be changed, altered or modified in any respect which involves any of the laws, ordinances or administrative rules referred to in section 35-165, or which involves the safety of the building or its occupants, except with the consent of the building inspector. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.07(2))  
Sec. 35-167. - Building permit card. 
With every building permit issued, the building inspector shall issue to the applicant an appropriate card properly filled out as evidence of permit issuance and the applicant shall post the card in a conspicuous place on the job site not more than 15 feet above the grade of the building. The card shall be unobstructed from public view and shall remain posted until all the work covered under the permit is completed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.07(3))  
Sec. 35-168. - Lapse of permit. 
A permit issued under the authority of this article shall have lapsed and be void unless building operations are commenced within six months from the date thereon and shall be completed within one year of commencement of building operations unless otherwise extended by the building inspector, to a maximum of 24 months. Any exterior portion of a building project which is visible to the public and which is not completed within the allotted 24-month period shall constitute a public nuisance. It is unlawful for a person to commence but fail to complete all repairs during the time in which the permit is valid. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.07(4))  
Sec. 35-169. - Permit authority. 
The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans or specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this article. No permit presuming to give the authority to violate or fail to comply with the provisions of this article shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which it authorizes is lawful. If errors shall, subsequent to the issuance of the permit, be discovered in the application, plans, specifications or execution of the work, the building inspector may require the correction of said errors in the application, plans, specifications or construction. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.07(7))  
Secs. 35-170—35-191. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE 
 
Sec. 35-192. - Architectural control commission approval, examination and review required. 
The city has created the Fitchburg Architectural Control Commission as provided in section 6-210. The commission shall examine all applications for building permits required under this article and, after review of the site plans for the proposed structure, addition or alteration, to determine whether or not a certificate of compliance shall be granted; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to applications for building permits regarding construction or alteration of one- and two-family dwellings. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, §§ 13.01, 13.02)  
Sec. 35-193. - Standards for issuance. 
A certificate of compliance shall be granted if and only if the architectural control commission shall, by a majority vote, find that the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  The proposed structure, addition, or alteration will, based upon the submitted plans and specifications, comply with all applicable building and zoning ordinances; 
(2)  The proposed structure, addition, or alteration will conform to the general development of the zoning district within which it is to be erected and with the character of the district as established by the city development plan; 
(3)  The exterior architectural appeal, including landscaping, and the functional plan of the proposed structure, addition, or alteration will not, when erected, be so at variance with or so similar to, the exterior architectural appeal and functional plan of structures already constructed or in the course of construction in the immediate neighborhood, or with the character of the district established by the city development plan, or any amendments or supplements, thereto, so as to cause substantial depreciation in the property values within said neighborhood or applicable district; and 
(4)  The exterior architectural appeal and functional plan of the proposed structure, addition, or alteration will not, within the discretionary judgment of the commission, be contrary to generally accepted design standards or to the underlying aesthetic values of the community, or in any manner contribute to decay or blight within the community. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 13.03)  
Sec. 35-194. - Certificate required for issuance of building permit. 
(a)  No building permit shall be issued by the building inspector unless and until the architectural control commission has granted a certificate that the proposed structure, addition, or alteration complies with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Where the commission fails to complete the action required herein within 21 days of the filing of the application for a building permit, the proposed structure, addition or alteration shall be deemed to be in compliance with this article and the building inspector shall issue a building permit if the proposed structure, addition, or alteration satisfies all other requirements of this article and any other law or regulation applicable thereto. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 13.04)  
Sec. 35-195. - Notice of rejection. 
If the architectural control commission determines that the proposed structure does not comply with the requirements of this article, it shall reject the application and give written notice of the rejection and reasons therefor to the applicant and the building inspector. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 13.05)  
Sec. 35-196. - Appeal. 
A rejection of an application for a building permit may be appealed to the common council in accordance with the procedures provided in section 24-13. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 13.06)  
Secs. 35-197—35-217. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - INSPECTIONS 
 
Sec. 35-218. - Required. 
(a)  Buildings shall be inspected at such times and in such manner as may be necessary to secure compliance with the laws, ordinances, rules and orders applicable thereto. The building inspector shall determine the number and types of inspections to be completed for each building project, but in no case shall any electrical, plumbing or heating installations be enclosed or any structural portion of any part of any building or structure be covered or concealed prior to completion of required inspections and approval by the building inspector, except as specifically provided for in section 35-219. 
(b)  After inspection, the building inspector may issue a certificate of compliance, or prescribe any changes necessary to such compliance, upon making of which changes the certificate may be issued. After the issuance of such certificate, no structural part of such building shall be changed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.09(1))  
Sec. 35-219. - Requests for inspections. 
The permit applicant or an authorized representative shall notify the building inspector after the completion of each phase of construction and shall request all inspections orally or in writing. The building inspector shall make every reasonable attempt to complete all requested inspections in a timely manner. Work shall not proceed until required inspections have been completed and approval has been granted by the building inspector, however, construction may proceed if an inspection is not completed within two business days after proper notification has been received unless otherwise agreed upon by the building inspector and the applicant. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.09(2))  
Sec. 35-220. - Inspection types. 
In general, the following inspections shall be completed for all building projects whenever applicable: 
(1)  Building sewer inspection. To be completed after building sewer is installed, while the water or air test is on, but before being covered or concealed. 
(2)  Footing inspection. To be completed after forms and required reinforcing are in place but before concrete is poured. 
(3)  Foundation inspection. To be completed after forms are removed but before backfilling. Drain tiles (when required) shall be in place and foundation waterproofing and insulation shall be applied. 
(4)  Rough inspection. To be completed for all electrical, plumbing and heating, ventilating and air conditioning installations and all general construction and framing work. Inspections shall be completed after all rough work is finished but before it is covered or concealed. 
(5)  Insulation/energy inspection. To be completed after insulation and vapor barrier are in place but before they are covered or concealed. 
(6)  Final inspection. To be completed for all electrical, plumbing and heating, ventilating and air conditioning installations and all general construction work after all work is finished but before use or occupancy of the building or part thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.09(3))  
Sec. 35-221. - Notification of inspection results. 
The building inspector shall inform the permit applicant and/or property owner of the results of all inspections completed. Notification of inspection results shall be in the form of a written notice posted in a conspicuous place at the job site, a written inspection report mailed to the applicant and/or property owner, or verbal communication between the inspector and the applicant, property owner, an authorized representative or other responsible party. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.09(4))  
Sec. 35-222. - Stop work order. 
Upon notice from the building inspector that work on any building or structure is being prosecuted contrary to the provisions of this article or in an unsafe or dangerous manner, such work may be ordered immediately stopped. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work; and shall state the conditions under which work will be permitted to resume. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the building or structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article and shall be subject to penalties and forfeitures as described in section 35-59. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.09(5))  
Sec. 35-223. - Right of entry. 
The building inspector, assistant building inspector or other authorized department employee may, at all reasonable times in performance of his/her duties, enter upon any public or private premises and make inspections thereof to determine compliance with the provisions of this article and may require production of the permit for any building, permanent building equipment, electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating or air conditioning work. In carrying out this authority the building inspector, assistant building inspector, or other authorized department employee shall comply with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0119, if applicable. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.09(6))  
Sec. 35-224. - Inspection disclaimer. 
Inspection findings are intended to report conditions of apparent noncompliance with code standards that are readily apparent at the time of inspection. The inspection does not involve a detailed examination of the mechanical systems or the closed structural and nonstructural elements of the building or premises. No guarantee or warranty of the premises, operation, use, or the durability of equipment or materials is expressed or implied. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.09(7))  
Secs. 35-225—35-241. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - CERTIFICATES OF USE AND OCCUPANCY 
 
Sec. 35-242. - New buildings. 
No building or structure hereafter erected shall be used or occupied in whole or in part until a certificate of use and occupancy shall have been issued by the building inspector. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.10(1))  
Sec. 35-243. - Alteration of buildings. 
No portion of any building or structure hereafter altered, enlarged, moved, improved or converted from one use to another, shall be used or occupied until a certificate of use and occupancy shall have been issued by the building inspector. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.10(2))  
Sec. 35-244. - Existing buildings. 
Upon written request from the owner of an existing building, the building inspector shall issue a certificate of use and occupancy provided there are no violations of law or orders of the building inspector pending and it is established that the alleged use of the building has heretofore legally existed. Nothing in this article shall require the removal, alterations, or abandonment of or prevent the continuance of the use and occupancy of a lawfully existing building unless such use is deemed to endanger public safety and welfare. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.10(3))  
Sec. 35-245. - Temporary occupancy. 
Upon request of the holder of a permit, the building inspector may issue a temporary certificate of use and occupancy for a building or structure, or part thereof, before the entire work covered by the permit shall have been completed, provided such portion or portions may be occupied safely prior to full completion of the building without endangering life or public welfare. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.10(4))  
Secs. 35-246—35-268. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - EXISTING BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 35-269. - Major alterations and repairs. 
The requirements specified in this division shall apply to all existing buildings which do not conform to the requirements of this article for new buildings. If alterations or repairs are made to any existing building, where deemed practicable by the building inspector, the entire building shall be made to conform to the requirements specified herein for new buildings. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.11(1))  
Sec. 35-270. - Change of use or occupancy. 
If the existing use or occupancy of any existing building or structure is changed to a use or occupancy which would not be permitted in a similar building hereafter erected, the entire building shall be made to conform to the requirements specified herein for new building; provided, the use or occupancy of only a portion or portions of the buildings need to be made to comply with such requirements, and provided further that the building inspector may approve any such change in the use or occupancy of any existing building or structure, even though such building is not made fully to conform to the requirements of this article, if, in his/her judgment, such a change in use or occupancy of the existing building or structure will not extend or increase any nonconformity or hazard of the building and provided further that such use or occupancy conforms to the provisions of chapter 22, pertaining to zoning, as shown by the approval of the zoning administrator and with article III of chapter 44, pertaining to the fire code, as shown by the stamp of approval of the fire chief or assistant fire chief. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.11(2))  
Sec. 35-271. - Structural alterations and repairs. 
Every alteration or repair to any structural part or portion of any existing building or structure shall, when deemed necessary for the safety of the occupants in the opinion of the building inspector, be made to conform to the requirements of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.11(3))  
Sec. 35-272. - Unsafe or unsightly buildings. 
(a)  Order to comply and notice. Whenever the building inspector finds that any building or structure, or any part thereof, is dangerous to life, or adjoining property, by lack of maintenance, defective construction, overloaded floors, decay, lack of guards against fire, general dilapidation or other cause, he/she shall order the owner or responsible tenant thereof to cause the same to be made safe or to be removed, as in the judgment of the building inspector may be necessary. The owner or responsible tenant of such building or structure shall thereupon immediately cause the same to be made safe, or to be removed, as ordered. 
(b)  Emergency measures. Where the public safety requires immediate action, the building inspector may enter upon premises with such assistance as may be necessary, and cause the building or structure to be made safe or to be removed, and the expense of such work may be recovered by the city in an action against the owner or tenant. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.12)  
Secs. 35-273—35-292. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - MOVING BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 35-293. - Permit required; conditions of approval. 
A permit shall be obtained from the building inspector prior to the moving of any building or structure within or into the city. Every permit to move a building or structure shall state all conditions to be complied with, designate the route to be taken, and limit of time for removal. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.13(1), (6))  
Sec. 35-294. - Compliance with codes and conformity with existing structures required. 
Buildings or structures moved within or into the city shall comply with the provisions of this article for new buildings and structures where deemed practical by the building inspector. The building or structure to be moved shall conform with the existing buildings in the area in which it is to be moved as determined by the city plan commission or city zoning department. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.13(2), (3))  
Sec. 35-295. - Unsafe or unfit buildings prohibited. 
No building or structure shall be moved within or into the city if deemed by the building inspector structurally unsafe. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.13(4))  
Sec. 35-296. - Bond required. 
Before a permit to move any building or structure is issued by the building inspector, the party applying therefore shall give a bond in the sum of $10,000.00 with good and sufficient sureties to be approved by the building inspector, mayor and city attorney, conditioned, among other things, that such party will save and indemnify judgments, costs and expenses which may in any way accrue against the city and keep the city harmless against all liabilities, judgments, costs and expenses in consequence of granting such permit. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.13(5))  
Sec. 35-297. - Time of moving; lighting; approved route. 
The removal of a building shall be continuous during all hours of the day, and day by day, and at night if the building inspector so orders, until completed, with the least possible obstruction to thoroughfares. Lighted lanterns shall be kept in conspicuous places at each end of the building during the night. The route and time of moving shall be approved, in writing, by the chief of police. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.13(7))  
Sec. 35-298. - Damage to streets and highways. 
Every person receiving a permit to move a building or structure shall within one day after reaching its destination, report the fact to the building inspector who shall report the same to the street commissioner who shall thereupon inspect the streets and highways over which the building was moved, or cause the same to be done, and ascertain their condition. If the removal of the building or structure has caused any damage to the streets or highways over which moved, the building mover shall forthwith place them in as good repair as they were before the permit was granted. Upon failure of the building mover to do so within ten days thereafter, to the satisfaction of the street commissioner, the street commissioner shall order the repair of the damage done to such streets and highways and hold sureties of the bond given by the building mover responsible for the payment of same. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.13(8))  
Secs. 35-299—35-329. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 35-330. - Permit required. 
A permit shall be obtained from the building inspector prior to the razing or demolition of any building or structure in the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.14(1))  
Sec. 35-331. - Barricade required. 
A snow fence or other approved barricade shall be provided around the site as soon as any portion of the building or structure is removed and shall remain during razing operations. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.14(2))  
Sec. 35-332. - Service connections. 
Before a building or structure may be demolished or removed, the owner or agent shall notify all utilities having service connections within the structure such as water, gas, sewer and other connections. All service connections and appurtenant equipment, such as meters and regulators, shall be removed or sealed and plugged in a safe manner. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.14(3))  
Sec. 35-333. - Restoration of site. 
Whenever a building or structure is razed or demolished hereunder, all debris and materials resulting from such demolition shall be removed from the premises, all basements and other excavations and depressions revealed or caused by such demolition shall be filled to the general grade of the premises, and all surfacing on such premises shall be removed unless intended to be used in connection with the proposed use of the premises. All appurtenant structures on the premises no longer useful for the intended use of the premises shall likewise be razed or demolished and the resulting debris removed from the premises. All resulting vacant areas shall be seeded or planted as required by the building inspector. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.14(4))  
Secs. 35-334—35-354. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 13. - SWIMMING POOLS 
 
Sec. 35-355. - Permit required; application and contents. 
No person shall construct, install, enlarge or alter any swimming pool without first obtaining a permit therefore from the building inspector. Application for a swimming pool permit shall be made on a form provided by the building inspector and shall be accompanied by plans, drawn to scale, showing the following: 
(1)  Proposed location of the pool on the lot or parcel, distance to lot lines, and distance to existing structures on the property. 
(2)  Location of any septic tank, drain field, sewer lines or water lines. 
(3)  Pool dimensions and proposed water depth. 
(4)  Type, height and location of proposed fences. 
(5)  Existing overhead wiring relative to the proposed swimming pool. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.15(1)—(4))  
Sec. 35-356. - Setback requirements. 
Swimming pool setbacks to property lines shall comply with section 22-56(h). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.15(5))  
Sec. 35-357. - Fences. 
All inground pools not enclosed within a permanent building shall be completely enclosed by a fence not less than four feet in height, of sufficient strength to prevent access to the pool, and so constructed as not to have voids, holes or openings larger than four inches in one dimension. Gates or doors in fences shall be closed and secured so as to prevent unlatching by persons outside the pool area at all times when the pool is not in actual use. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.15(6))  
Sec. 35-358. - Aboveground pools. 
Permanent access from grade to aboveground pools having stationary ladders, stairs, or ramps shall have safeguard fencing and gates equivalent to those required in section 35-357. Fencing of aboveground pools with removable ladders is not required so long as access to the pool is prevented and ladders are removed at all times when the pool is not in actual use. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.15(7))  
Sec. 35-359. - Portable pools. 
Portable pools over one foot in depth must be fenced as provided in section 35-357, or shall be drained or covered after each day's use in such a manner as to provide public safety. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 40.15(8))  
Chapter 37 - HOUSING CODE  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 37-1. - Intent. 
This chapter shall be construed liberally and justly to achieve public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued use and maintenance of multifamily structures and premises; provided, however, that duplexes and single-family dwellings used as rental property shall comply with articles III and IV of this chapter. The common council does not intend this chapter to preclude innovative dwellings or practices which do not pose a risk of harm to the public. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.01)  
Sec. 37-2. - Relationship to other regulations. 
(a)  The provisions in this chapter shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other ordinances or rules, including, but not limited to, city ordinances and the Wisconsin Administrative Code which prescribe standards other than are provided in this chapter. In case of conflicts among such standards, the more restrictive standard shall apply. 
(b)  Any repairs or alterations to a structure, or changes of use therein, which are caused, directly or indirectly, by the enforcement of this chapter shall be done in accordance with the applicable procedures and provisions of the building, plumbing, electrical, fire and other ordinances of the city and laws of the state. 
(c)  The provisions in this chapter shall not be construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the city or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any buildings which are dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.02(1), (2))  
Sec. 37-3. - Workmanship. 
All repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are required for compliance with this chapter shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner so as to secure the results intended by this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.02(3))  
Sec. 37-4. - Responsibility. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter or elsewhere in the city ordinances, the owner of the premises shall maintain such premises and any structures thereon in compliance with this chapter. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant, let to another for occupancy or use any premises or structure or portion thereof which do not comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.04)  
Sec. 37-5. - Rules of construction. 
Whenever the terms "dwelling unit," "multifamily dwelling," "premises," "residential building," "roominghouse," or "rooming unit," are used in this chapter, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words, "or any part thereof." 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.05)  
Sec. 37-6. - Definitions. 
Where terms are not defined in this section, they shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings as the context shall imply. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Accessory building or structure means a detached building or structure in a secondary or subordinate capacity from the main or principal structure. 
Apartment means one or more rooms with provisions for living, cooking, sanitary and sleeping facilities arranged for use by one family. 
Approved means approved by the building inspector. 
Basement means that portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade. 
Board means the city zoning board of appeals. 
Building means a fixed construction with walls, foundation and roof, such as a house, garage, etc. 
Building code means the city building, plumbing and heating, ventilating and air conditioning codes set forth in chapter 35. 
Building inspector means the city building inspector or his/her authorized representatives. 
City engineer means the city engineer or his/her authorized representatives. 
Clean means free from dirt, impurities, and/or extraneous matters that could cause the spread of disease. 
Dwelling means a place of abode, structure or building containing two or more dwelling units, excluding hotels or motels. The term "dwelling" may include, but is not limited to, any of the following: 
(1)  Boardinghouse. The term "boardinghouse" means a building arranged or used for lodging, with or without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a single-family unit. 
(2)  Multifamily apartment house. The term "multifamily apartment house" means a building or portion thereof containing more than two dwelling units and not classified as a one- or two-family dwelling. 
(3)  Two-family dwelling. The term "two-family dwelling" means a building containing two dwelling units. 
Dwelling unit means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, sanitation and plumbing. 
Extermination means the control and elimination of insects or rodents by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods and materials as approved under the guidelines of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the state department of public health and social services, or conducted by a state certified pest control technician. 
Family means an individual, two or more persons related by blood, marriage or legal adoption, including foster children, domestic servants and not more than four roomers or not to exceed five persons not so related, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit. 
Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Hotel means any building containing six or more guestrooms intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied, or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests. 
Infestation means the presence within or around a dwelling of any rodents and/or undesirable insects. 
Maintain, maintenance or maintained means acts of repair and other acts to prevent a decline in the condition of grounds, structures, and equipment such that the condition does not fall below the standards established by this subsection and other applicable statutes, codes and ordinances. 
Motel means the same as hotel. 
Native landscape means landscaping that utilizes plant material native to the area and climate and selected for adaptation to the particular site in question. 
Occupant means any person living and/or sleeping in a dwelling unit or having possession of a space within a building. 
Owner means any person, agent, property manager, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or city as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
Plumbing means the practice, materials, and fixtures used in the installation, maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures, appliances, and appurtenances within the scope of the plumbing code, adopted by reference in section 35-77, as from time to time amended. 
Plumbing fixture means a receptacle or device which is either permanently or temporarily connected to the water distribution system of the premises and demands a supply of water therefrom; or discharges used water, liquid-borne waste materials, or sewage either directly or indirectly to the drainage system of the premises; or which requires both a water supply connection and a discharge to the drainage system of the premises. 
Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings or structures thereon. 
Privacy means the existence of conditions which will permit an individual or individuals to carry out an activity commenced without interruption or interference, either by sight or sound. 
Properly connected means connected in accordance with all applicable codes and ordinances of this city; provided, however, that the application of this definition shall not require the alteration or replacement of any connection in good working order which does not constitute a hazard to life or health. 
Property manager means any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy. 
Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solids (except body wastes) including garbage, rubbish, ashes and dead animals. 
Residential buildings means a building in which sleeping accommodations, or sleeping accommodations and cooking facilities as a unit, are provided; and which is arranged, designed, used or intended to be used for residential occupancy by two or more families or lodgers, except when classified as an institution under a state or city building code. 
Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit use or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
Roominghouse means any residential building, or any part thereof, containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or property manager to more than five persons who are not members of the family. 
Rubbish means any combustible or noncombustible waste materials, except garbage, and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials whether or not recyclable. 
Safe means the condition of being reasonably free from danger and hazards which may cause accidents or disease. 
Structure means that which is built or constructed, including without limitation because of enumeration, buildings, for any occupancy or use whatsoever, fences, signs, billboards, fire escapes, chute escapes, railings, water tanks, towers, open grade steps, sidewalks or stairways, tents or anything erected and framed of component parts which is fastened, anchored or rests on a permanent foundation or on the ground. 
Used for includes the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," and "occupied for." 
Workmanlike state of maintenance and repair means that such maintenance and repair shall be made in a reasonably skillful manner. 
Yard means an open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building extending along the entire length of street, or rear or interior lot line. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.06)  
Secs. 37-7—37-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 37-31. - Jurisdiction for enforcement. 
Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, and in addition to the authority prescribed in other chapters of this Code, the building inspector is authorized to enforce all the provisions of this article, state statutes and rules, and all other laws or lawful orders relating to the maintenance, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, equipment or premises not in conflict herewith. The building inspector shall be the final authority on interpretation of this chapter except where such authority is specifically preempted by this article or by state or federal law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.38(1))  
Sec. 37-32. - Variances. 
A variance granted from any regulation or order of COMM under Wis. Stats. § 101.02, as amended, shall apply to an identical or similar regulation of this article if, in the opinion of the city engineer, the variance will not adversely affect the public safety and health. Such variance shall not apply to any provision of this article which obviously creates a higher standard of safety and health than the standard of safety and health established by the variance, nor shall any such variance apply to any provisions of chapter 22, pertaining to zoning, unless approved by the board. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.38(2))  
Sec. 37-33. - Inspections of existing structures. 
The building inspector may make inspections of existing buildings, structures or equipment to ascertain if the buildings, structures or equipment comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.38(3)(a))  
Sec. 37-34. - Right of entry. 
(a)  Authority of building inspector. The building inspector, upon presentation of proper credentials, may enter at any reasonable time, any building, structure or premises to enforce this article. 
(b)  Special inspection warrant. If any owner, occupant, or other person in charge of a structure subject to this article refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes with, restricts or obstructs entry and free access to any part of the structure or premises where inspection authorized by this article is sought, the building inspector or fire chief may apply for and obtain a special warrant pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0119. 
(c)  Access by owner or property manager. Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit shall give the owner or property manager thereof, or an agent or employee of the owner or property manager, access at reasonable times to any part of such structure or premises for the purpose of making an inspection or maintenance, repair or alterations as are necessary to comply with this article or with any lawful notice or order issued pursuant to this article. The owner shall give advance notice of intended entry in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 704.05. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.38(3)(b))  
Sec. 37-35. - Reinspections. 
When violations of this article are found to exist, the building inspector may determine, upon reinspection, whether all installations, alterations, repairs, or enlargements resulting from said corrections are permanent, substantial and have been performed in a workmanlike manner. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.38(3)(d))  
Sec. 37-36. - Assistance of other officials. 
The building inspector in the performance of his/her duties shall receive the assistance of the chiefs of the police and fire departments and, of all other city officials, including the city engineer and attorney in prosecuting violations hereof. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.38(3)(f))  
Sec. 37-37. - Relief from personal liability. 
Any building inspector, officer or designated employee who acts in good faith and without malice in the discharge of duties of enforcement of this article is relieved of all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of such acts or alleged failure to act. Further, the building inspector shall not be held liable for any costs in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted by the building inspector in the enforcement of this Subchapter. In any of these actions, the building inspector, officer or employee shall be defended or represented by the city attorney until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.38(3)(g))  
Sec. 37-38. - Voluntary compliance; warning notices. 
The building inspector shall endeavor to obtain voluntary compliance with this Code whenever feasible including issuance of warning notices to owners, operators and occupants whose names and addresses are known or can be obtained with reasonable diligence; provided, however, that failure to receive a warning notice shall not be a defense to prosecution of a violation of article V of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.20(5))  
Sec. 37-39. - Issuance of notice of violation. 
Whenever the building inspector determines or has reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of chapter exists or has occurred, or that a dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, the building inspector may give notice to the owner or the person responsible therefor, the occupant, or both, provided, however, that failure to issue or receive a notice shall not be a defense to prosecution of a violation of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.40(1))  
Sec. 37-40. - Issuance of order. 
Whenever the building inspector determines that a violation exists or has reasonable grounds to believe that a violation exists in any building or structure or in the use of any equipment covered by this chapter, the building inspector may order the owner or person responsible therefor, the occupant, or both, to correct the violation. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.40(2))  
Sec. 37-41. - Emergency orders. 
(a)  Whenever the building inspector acting in the enforcement of this article finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety, the building inspector may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding other provisions of this article, the order shall be effective immediately. 
(b)  Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith, but upon petition to the board, shall be afforded a hearing. After the hearing, depending upon the findings of the board as to whether the provisions of this article and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with, the board may continue the order, modify it or revoke it. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.38(3)(c))  
Sec. 37-42. - Citation. 
In the event that an owner or occupant has failed to comply with a notice and order issued, the building inspector shall issue a citation imposing a forfeiture, as provided in this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.40(3))  
Sec. 37-43. - Notice and order format. 
All notices and orders shall be in writing and: 
(1)  Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification. 
(2)  Include a description of the violation. 
(3)  Allow a reasonable time for correction of the violation and clearly indicate compliance date. 
(4)  Include a general description of the required remedial action. 
(5)  Advise the owner or occupant of the right of appeal to the zoning board of appeals within 30 days of issuance of the notice and order. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.40(4)(a))  
Sec. 37-44. - Service or delivery of notification. 
(a)  Notices and orders shall be served upon the owner, the property manager or the occupant of the premises, or their agents, provided that the notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner, agent, property manager or occupant if served either by mailing a copy to the person's last known address or by delivering a copy to the person or the registered agent personally, or if not found, by leaving a copy at his/her usual place of abode in the presence of some competent member of the family at least 14 years of age, who shall be informed of the contents thereof. 
(b)  If the owner has not filed with the register of deeds a current address or the name and address of the person empowered to receive service of process, it shall be deemed sufficient notice to the owner that violations have been found if copies of the notice and order are mailed to the last known address of the owner. 
(c)  When service has been completed as prescribed in this subsection, the notice shall be effective notice to anyone having an interest in the property whether recorded or not at the time of giving the notice and shall be effective against any subsequent owner of premises as long as the violation exists and there remains an official copy of the notice in a public file maintained by the building inspector. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.40(4)(b))  
Sec. 37-45. - Appeals. 
(a)  Board of zoning appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the building inspector to issue an enforcement notice or demand or to commence other enforcement activities under articles IV and V of this chapter has a right of administrative appeal to the zoning board of appeals under Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7), (8) and (9). 
(b)  Procedure. The procedure for administrative appeals under this article shall follow the provisions of sections 22-642 and 22-643, which are incorporated and adopted herein by reference. Such appeals shall be commenced within 30 days of receiving a notice and order under section 37-44, or within 30 days of receiving an order or citation under section 37-42. 
(c)  Action of board. The board shall affirm, modify, or reverse the decision or order of the building inspector. A concurring vote of two-thirds of the voting members present shall be required to modify or reverse said decision. Appeal of the action of the board shall be to circuit court. 
(d)  Resolutions of board. Every action of the board shall be by resolution and the appellant shall be notified in writing as to the action taken. 
(e)  Enforcement of decision. The building inspector, as appropriate, shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the board. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.41)  
Sec. 37-46. - Penalties. 
Penalties for violation of this article shall be as provided in section 1-21. Also, with regard to violations of article V of this chapter, as a substitute for or in addition to forfeiture actions, the city attorney may, on behalf of the city, seek enforcement of any and all parts of this chapter by court action seeking an injunction or restraining order against the person responsible for the violation for the purpose of ordering that person: 
(1)  To restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from any further execution of work. 
(2)  To restrain or correct the erection, installation, or alteration of such structure. 
(3)  To require the removal of work in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  To prevent the occupation or use of the structure or part thereof erected, constructed, installed or altered in violation of, or not in compliance with, the provisions of this chapter or in violation of a plan or specification under which an approval, permit or certificate was issued. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.42(1)—(3))  
Sec. 37-47. - Relationship to nuisance actions. 
No provision of this chapter shall be construed to bar any private or public nuisance action to enjoin or abate the use or occupancy of any land or structure under the laws of the state or ordinances of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.42(4))  
Secs. 37-48—37-67. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 
 
Sec. 37-68. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish minimum standards for the exterior property maintenance so as to preserve and promote the public interest. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.10)  
Sec. 37-69. - Maximum vegetation height. 
All improved lots subject to this article located in the urban service area shall be maintained free from plant growth in excess of eight inches. All noxious weeds shall be cut. Plant growth shall be defined as all grasses, annual plant and vegetation other than trees and shrubs; provided, however, that this shall not include cultivated flower or vegetable gardens, prairie grasses, or native landscapes. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.11(1))  
Sec. 37-70. - Mowing unimproved lots. 
Unimproved or vacant lots, under this article, located in the urban service area shall be mowed at least three times a year to a height of not more than six inches. Mowing shall occur at the following approximate times: mid to late May, July, late August or early September or when plant growth exceeds 24 inches in height. If the height of such vegetation is determined by the building inspector or the fire chief to pose a health, sanitary, or safety hazard, such officials may direct the subject property to be mowed more frequently and within five days of the date of the order. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.11(2))  
Sec. 37-71. - Native landscape. 
Any owner or operator of land in the city may apply for approval of a land management plan for a native landscape, one where the grasses exceed eight inches in height, with the building inspector. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.11(3))  
Sec. 37-72. - Application for natural lawn. 
Any owner or operator of land in the city may apply for approval of a land management plan for a natural lawn, one where the grasses exceed eight inches in height, with the department of planning and development. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.11(3)(a))  
Sec. 37-73. - Land management plan employed. 
(a)  The term "land management plan" means a written plan relating to management of the lawn which contains a legal description of the lawn upon which the grass will exceed eight inches in length, a statement of intent and purpose for the lawn, a general description of the vegetation types, plants, and plant succession involved, and the specific management and maintenance techniques to be employed. 
(b)  The management plan must include provisions for cutting at a length not greater than eight inches the terrace area, that portion between sidewalk and the street or a strip not less than four feet adjacent to the street where there is no sidewalk, and at least a three-foot strip adjacent to neighboring property lines unless waived by the abutting property owner on the side so affected. 
(c)  All lawn and grass areas shall be cut between June 30 and October 15 when the fire chief, in his/her discretion, feels there is cause for a fire hazard. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.11(3)(b))  
Sec. 37-74. - Revocation of the land management plan. 
The land management plan may be revoked for failure to comply with the requirements of sections 37-69 through 37-76. Notice of intent to revoke a land management plan shall be appealable to the urban design commission. All applications for appeal shall be submitted within 15 days of notice of intent to revoke a land management plan. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.11(3)(c))  
Sec. 37-75. - Application requirement. 
Each application for a land management plan shall be on a form provided by the building inspection department. A copy of the application shall be mailed by the applicant or given personally by the applicant to each of the owners of record, as listed in the office of the city assessor, who are owners of the property situated in whole or in part within 200 feet of the boundaries of the properties affected. The building inspection department shall provide the list of the property owners who are to be notified of the application. The applicant shall certify, under oath, on a form to the building inspection department, that such owners have been duly notified and the manner in which they have been notified. If, within 15 days of receipt of a copy of the application, at least 51 percent of such property owners file written objections to the application with the building inspections, the building inspection department shall deny. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.11(3)(d))  
Sec. 37-76. - Application for appeal. 
The owner or operator of land in the city may appeal from a decision of the building inspection department refusing to grant a land management plan. All appeals shall be to the plan commission of the city which shall hear such appeals once a month, March through September. All applications for appeal shall be submitted within 15 days of notice of denial of the land management plan. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.11(3)(e))  
Sec. 37-77. - Property grading. 
All courts, yards, or other areas on the premises shall be properly graded to divert water away from the building. Adjacent ground surface shall be sloped away from the structure with a grading of at least one-half inch per foot for a minimum of five feet or by other means such as eaves troughs and downspout extensions. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.11(4))  
Sec. 37-78. - Landscaping. 
Landscaping, planting and other decorative surface treatments, including common species of grass, shall be installed if necessary and maintained to present an attractive appearance in all court and yard areas. Planting shall be maintained so as not to present hazards to adjoining properties or to persons or vehicles traveling on public ways and shall be maintained so as to enhance the appearance and value of the property on which located and thereby the appearance and value of the neighborhood and city. Trees and shrubs over sidewalks less than seven feet and on street right-of-way less than 12 feet shall be cut. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.11(6))  
Sec. 37-79. - Graffiti. 
Any graffiti shall be removed by the property owner within 48 hours of notice or by the city at the owner's expense. If a property owner fails to remove graffiti within the time specified in the order, the building inspector may cause the graffiti removed. The building inspector shall keep an account of the expenses and report the amount to the city administrator and city clerk. The amount will be charged to each lot or parcel of land and entered in the tax roll as a special charge and collected in all respects like other charges upon real estate. Prosecution for failure to remove graffiti under this article shall not bar the city from charging owners for graffiti removal, nor shall charging owners for graffiti removal bar prosecution. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.11(7))  
Sec. 37-80. - Sidewalks. 
Where necessary to eliminate hazards or unsanitary conditions on paths, walks, driveways, parking lots, parking areas and other parts of the premises which are accessible to occupants upon notice from the department: 
(1)  Holes and excavations shall be filled and repaired within 30 days. 
(2)  Breaks, projections and obstructions shall be repaired and walks and steps replaced within 30 days. 
(3)  Icy conditions and uncleared snow shall be removed within 24 hours. 
(4)  All animal and pet feces shall be removed within 24 hours. 
(5)  Accessible walks shall provide convenient all weather access to buildings in all weather circumstances. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.11(8))  
Sec. 37-81. - Clean and sanitary condition. 
The interior of all buildings and structures and all exterior property areas shall be properly maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free from debris, rubbish or garbage, physical hazards, rodent harborage and infestation, and animal feces. All animal feces shall be removed within 24 hours. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.11(5))  
Secs. 37-82—37-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SECURITY FOR RENTAL PROPERTIES 
 
Sec. 37-106. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish minimum standards for the quantity, location and use of space in residential building units so as to preserve and promote the public interest. A suitable environment for safe, healthy, and desirable living can be enhanced by providing secure space and privacy for occupants of all residential buildings. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.20(1))  
Sec. 37-107. - Standards. 
Except as hereafter provided, no person shall as owner or operator let or sublet to another person or allow another to let or sublet to another person for occupancy, any dwelling unit for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein, which does not comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Each main entrance door into a dwelling unit shall be a solid core wood or metal door. 
(2)  Each main entrance door into a dwelling unit shall contain an approved door viewer (peephole), five feet in height and centered in the door. A second door viewer (peephole) shall be installed at four feet in all handicap accessible units. 
(3)  All doors into each dwelling unit shall be equipped with door hinges so arranged as to be inside the dwelling unit or with approved locking pin hinges or concealed hinges. 
(4)  All doors into each dwelling unit shall have a keyed deadbolt lock with a minimum one inch throw, which is openable with a key on the exterior side of the door and a knob on the interior side of the door. The strike plate shall be held in place by a minimum of two screws, 2½ inches in length. 
(5)  All windows where such windowsill is not more than 16 feet above grade and all other windows accessible by balconies, fire escapes, trees or other existing means shall be provided with sash fasteners. 
(6)  All double hung and sliding windows not more than 16 feet above grade and all other windows accessible by balconies, fire escapes, trees or other existing means shall be equipped with window ventilating sash fasteners to allow each window to be locked at one to five inches open. Such window ventilating bolts or locks shall be movable to permit the window to be fully opened from the inside of the dwelling unit. 
(7)  All sliding doors not more than 16 feet above grade and all other sliding doors accessible by balconies, fire escapes, trees or other existing means shall have a secondary locking device, locking pins or one-half inch diameter dowel of the proper length, or approved locking devices. A sliding door shall be installed so as to prevent the lifting and removal of the door from the exterior of the building. This shall be provided by the property owner or building manager. 
(8)  All sliding doors shall have the movable section of the door sliding on the inside of the fixed portion of the door. 
(9)  Lighting shall be provided in hallways, stairways, parking areas, alleys, and walkways. Said lights shall be lit from one hour before dusk and one hour after dawn. Laundry, furnace, similar nonhabitable workrooms shall be provided with a light fixture. Interior lighting shall provide a minimum of 1.0 watts per square foot. Exterior lighting shall provide a minimum of one footcandle for the exterior area within 20 feet of the building walls. 
(10)  All illuminated exit signs shall comply with Wis. Admin. Code § COMM 75.24(4) and they also need to comply with the chapter 44, pertaining to fire prevention and protection. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.20(2))  
Sec. 37-108. - Exceptions and alternatives. 
Section 37-107(1) shall apply only to new construction and to repair and replacement of existing doors. Alternative equivalent security devices to equally resist illegal entry may be substituted for any of the devices described in section 37-107, if approved in writing by the city building inspector. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.20(3))  
Sec. 37-109. - Landlord and tenant responsibilities. 
(a)  Landlord. Every owner or operator of a residential rental dwelling unit shall improve and maintain each dwelling unit under his/her ownership or control to comply with the standards set forth in sections 37-107 and 37-108. 
(b)  Tenant. No occupant of a residential rental dwelling unit shall remove, willfully damage or render ineffective any security device described in section 37-107 or 37-108 or approved by the building inspector under section 37-108. Each occupant of a residential rental dwelling unit shall exercise reasonable care to keep in a clean, effective and operable condition all security devices and features described in section 37-107 installed by the owner or operator. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.20(4)(a), (b))  
Sec. 37-110. - Emergency work. 
The owner or operator of a rental residential dwelling unit shall make available to the occupants the names of two or more persons that may be called to arrange for emergency work. The names with the telephone numbers shall be posted in a conspicuous place readily accessible to the occupants and shall be distributed to the occupants, in writing, at the time the lease or rental agreement is signed, and each time it is renewed or extended. The names with the telephone numbers shall be revised periodically to maintain accurate information at all times. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.20(4)(c))  
Secs. 37-111—37-133. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - MULTIFAMILY PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 
 
Sec. 37-134. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and welfare in all multifamily residential structures and premises as hereinafter provided, by: 
(1)  Establishing for all multifamily structures and premises minimum: 
a.  Property maintenance standards for basic equipment and facilities; 
b.  Light, ventilation, space heating and sanitation; 
c.  Safety from fire and other perils; 
d.  Space, use and location; and 
e.  Sanitary maintenance; 
(2)  Establishing minimum requirements for all existing multifamily buildings and structures for means of egress, fire protection systems and other equipment and devices necessary for life safety from fire; 
(3)  Providing for rehabilitation and reuse of existing multifamily rental structures and allowing differences between the application of the article requirements to new construction and the application of the article requirements to alterations and repairs; 
(4)  Fixing the responsibilities of owners, property managers and occupants of all rental multifamily structures; and 
(5)  Providing for administration, enforcement and penalties. 
(b)  Scope. This article applies only to rental multifamily dwellings. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.31)  
Sec. 37-135. - Alteration or repairs to existing structures. 
Alterations or repairs to any structure may conform to that required of a new structure without requiring the existing structure to comply with all the requirements for new construction provided such work conforms to that required by this article. Alterations or repairs shall not cause an existing structure to become unsafe or adversely affect the performance of the building. Alterations or repairs to an existing structure which are structural, or adversely affect any structural member or any part of the structure having a required fire resistance rating, shall be made with materials as required for a new structure. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.32(1))  
Sec. 37-136. - Other regulations applicable. 
This article establishes minimum requirements for the initial and continued occupancy and use of all structures and premises and does not replace or modify requirements otherwise established by law including city ordinances, which are additional or more stringent for the construction, repair, alteration or use of structures, equipment or facilities. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.32(2))  
Sec. 37-137. - Compliance required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish, use or occupy any structure or equipment, or cause same to be done, contrary to or in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.38(4))  
Sec. 37-138. - General maintenance requirements. 
Every owner, property manager or occupant, if the occupant has assumed responsibility under the terms of the written lease, shall either personally or by agent, improve and maintain all residential property within the scope of this article under his/her control to comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Every premises shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary and safe condition and comply with all applicable legal requirements of the state, the county and the city. 
(2)  Every interior floor, wall and ceiling including door and window assemblies shall be kept clean and in good repair, and shall be capable of affording privacy. Any sagging or bulging shall be properly repaired to a level or plumb position. All surfaces shall be free from serious cracking, irregularities, and peeling paint. A waterproof and hard surface shall be provided in spaces subject to moisture. 
(3)  Every foundation, roof, exterior wall, and floor shall be reasonably weather tight and rodent proof and shall be kept in proper repair and be capable of affording privacy. All inside and outside stairways, floors, roofs, foundations, bearing walls, and every porch and every appurtenance thereto, shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads that normal use may cause to be placed thereon; and shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair. All chimneys and breeching shall be so constructed and maintained so as to ensure that it safely and properly removes the products of combustion from the building. 
(4)  All exterior surfaces of buildings and fences made of materials not inherently resistant to deterioration shall be periodically coated with paint or other suitable preservative which provides adequate resistance to weathering. The exterior of every structure or accessory structure, including fences shall be maintained in good repair. The same shall be maintained free of broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling stone or brick, excessive peeling paint or other condition reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance to the end that the property itself may be preserved and fire and safety and hazards eliminated. The outside building walls shall not have any holes, loose boards, or any broken, cracked or damaged finish, which admit rain, cold air, dampness, rodents or insects. 
(5)  If gutters, leaders and down spouts are provided, they shall be maintained in good working condition so as to provide proper drainage of stormwater. This shall include being substantially free from rust and/or corrosion. 
(6)  Every window, exterior door and hatchway or similar device shall be so constructed to exclude insects during that portion of the year when there is a need for protection against mosquitoes, flies and other flying insects. 
(7)  Every doorway, window or other device used for ventilation and opening directly from a dwelling unit to outside space shall be supplied with properly fitting screens. 
(8)  Accessory structures on the premises of a dwelling shall be structurally sound, and be maintained in good repair. 
(9)  Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in good working condition, free from defects, leaks, and obstructions. 
(10)  Every dwelling unit and lodging room shall have direct access to at least two accessible unobstructed means of egress leading to a safe and open street, alley, or court connected to a street. Exterior stairways or platforms, or a combination thereof, will be permitted as second exits provided the platform or stairways terminate at a point not more than ten feet above the grade directly below the lowest platform. All stairways shall terminate at grade or a platform. Platforms shall have a minimum area of 14 square feet with a minimum dimension of three feet. All stairways and platforms shall be protected with handrails and guardrails as specified in Wis. Admin. Code § COMM 21.04(3) as directed by the type of occupancy in the building. 
(11)  Exterior doors, windows, sliding doors shall exclude rain as completely as possible and substantially exclude wind from entering the building. 
(12)  Every door, openable window, sliding door shall be capable of easily being opened, maintained in good condition, when closed fit reasonably well within its frame. 
(13)  Every outside stair, porch, and appurtenance attached thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads to which it is subjected as required by the building code and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. 
(14)  If the building inspection department finds that the electrical system in a building constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the building by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient outlets or defective fixtures, improper wiring, or deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the department shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard, and comply with housing code requirements. 
(15)  Cellars, basements, and crawl spaces shall be maintained reasonably free from dampness to prevent conditions conducive to decay or deterioration of the structure, as required by the building code. 
(16)  Every residential building that will accommodate transients, four or more families, 30 persons or contains more than six lodging rooms shall have signs at the emergency exit doors or other places as may be necessary to direct the occupant to the exit doorways. The signs shall be red illuminated translucent exit signs bearing the word EXIT or OUT in plain letters not less than five inches in height. 
(17)  The main entrance door into all lodginghouses and into all residential buildings with two or more dwelling units or lodging rooms where occupants of the separate dwelling units or lodging rooms share common bathroom or kitchen facilities shall be equipped with a positive locking guarded latch and with an approved self-closing device. An approved guard plate shall be affixed to the exterior side of the door if the director of the building inspection unit determines such a device is necessary to provide adequate security against illegal entry. All other doors into said buildings shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock complying with section 37-107(4). In cases where said buildings have an attendant or attendants responsible for the security of the building on duty 24 hours a day, they shall be exempt from the main entrance door-locking and self-closing requirements. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.33)  
Sec. 37-139. - Responsibilities of owners and occupants. 
Every owner, property manager or occupant if the occupant has assumed responsibility under the terms of a written lease, shall either personally or by agent, improve and maintain all residential property under his/her control to comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Except where the occupant has agreed to provide such service in writing, the owner or property manager shall hang and maintain all screens, screen doors, storm windows and storm doors required by this article. 
(2)  Every owner of a residential building containing two or more dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean, proper and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the residential building and premises thereof. The dwelling or dwelling unit shall be maintained free from hazards to health. The exterior of the premises and all structures thereon shall be kept free of all nuisances, and any hazards to the safety of the occupant, pedestrians and other persons utilizing the premises, and free of unsanitary conditions. 
(3)  Each occupant shall store and dispose of all rubbish, garbage, and refuse in full compliance with the ordinances and policies of the city governing solid waste, garbage and refuse storage, collection and recycling and shall not be allowed to accumulate or be stored in public use areas. 
(4)  Every owner of a dwelling unit shall supply facilities or containers for the sanitary and safe storage and disposal of rubbish, refuse and garbage. The containers and facilities shall fully comply with all city ordinances and regulations governing solid waste, refuse and recycling. 
(5)  Insect and rodent infestation. Every dwelling unit and the premises on which located shall be maintained without infestation. Any materials acceptable to the county department of health may be used for control of infestation. Materials stored outside the dwelling unit shall be stacked and maintained in a safe and orderly fashion. 
(6)  Where rodent or insect infestation exists in a multifamily building or in the shared or public parts of any premises, or in one dwelling unit in a multifamily building where the infestation is caused by the owner's failure to maintain the premises in a rodentfree or reasonably insectfree condition, the owner shall be responsible for extermination. 
(7)  An owner of a dwelling unit shall not accumulate or permit the accumulation of garbage, refuse or rubbish in a manner that may provide in or about the shared or public areas of a dwelling or its premises an infestation, menace to the public health and safety, or impediment to the ability of emergency vehicles to respond to the premises. 
(8)  Except where the occupant has agreed to provide such service in writing, the owner or property manager shall keep all landscaped lawns, hedges and bushes trimmed and from becoming overgrown and unsightly. Dead and dying trees and limbs or other natural growth which, by reason of rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm damage, constitute a hazard to persons in the vicinity thereof shall be kept pruned and trimmed to prevent such conditions. 
(9)  Smoke detectors shall be provided and kept in operating condition as required by Wis. Stats. § 101.65 and by city ordinance. 
(10)  The owner of any dwelling or apartment in which a cooking range and/or refrigerator are furnished for the use of the tenants as part of rental agreement shall keep such cooking range and/or refrigerator in good mechanical working condition. 
(11)  Every habitable room shall contain at least two separate remote outlets, one of which may be a ceiling-type or wall-type electrical light fixture. In every bathroom and laundry room there shall be provided at least one electrical outlet. 
(12)  It shall be the responsibility of the tenant to maintain supplied facilities in a clean and sanitary condition when contained within the tenant's dwelling unit. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.34)  
Sec. 37-140. - Minimum thermal light and ventilation standards. 
(a)  The owner of any dwelling unit shall provide heating, lighting and ventilation equipment and apparatus which are properly installed in accordance with article II of chapter 35, pertaining to the building code, and shall maintain such equipment and apparatus in a safe and good working condition. 
(b)  All doors required for ventilation and all windows shall be protected with insect screen equivalent to not less than 16 wire mesh. These devices shall be installed annually during May before June 1 and maintained until storm windows are installed in October before November 1. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.35)  
Sec. 37-141. - Minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities. 
(a)  No person may occupy as owner or occupant or let to another for occupancy, a dwelling or dwelling unit for the purposes of living, sleeping, bathing, cooking or eating therein, which does not comply with this article. Furthermore, no person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any space in a residential building unless it is clean, sanitary, fit for human occupancy, complies with the requirements of the building code (article II of chapter 35) and the zoning code (chapter 22) and the occupancy is limited to the maximum permitted by said codes. 
(b)  Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good working condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the building inspector. 
(c)  Every dwelling unit shall contain, within a room which affords privacy to a person within the room, a bathtub or shower in good working condition, lavatory and water closet and properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the building inspector. 
(d)  Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower required under subsections (b), (c) and (e) of this section shall be properly connected with both hot and cold water lines. 
(e)  Every dwelling shall have supplied water-heating facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition, are properly connected with the hot water lines required under subsection (d) of this section, and are capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than 120 degrees Fahrenheit. At no time shall the water temperature available at any kitchen sink, lavatory basin, or shower exceed 160 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(f)  Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from defects, leaks and obstructions. 
(g)  Every bathroom floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(h)  Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(i)  All spaces used or intended to be used for food preparation shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of garbage and refuse, including facilities for temporary storage when necessary. 
(j)  The owner of any dwelling unit who provides heat shall have a heating system that is able to maintain 67 degrees Fahrenheit (19 degrees Celsius) at any time of the day or night and any day of the year with all windows and doors closed. 
(k)  Every lavatory, bathroom, kitchen or kitchenette, dining room, laundry room, furnace room shall contain at least one approved ceiling- or wall-type electric light fixture equipped with sufficient lamps or tubes to provide no less than five foot candles at floor level at center of room. 
(l)  Flammable liquids storage prohibited. No dwelling, multifamily dwelling, dwelling unit, shall be located within a building containing any establishment which handles, dispenses, or stores flammable liquids with a flash point of 110 degrees Fahrenheit (43 degrees Celsius) or lower. 
(m)  Every door, window, sliding door, equipment and facilities shall be operational 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Exceptions: 
(1)  Air conditioners may be disconnected during the months of November through March. 
(2)  Heating systems may be turned off during the months of June through August when the weather allows the dwelling to reach 67 degrees. 
(3)  Rooms and equipment with set hours of operation, used for special events, or seasonal use. 
(n)  No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment, or utility which is required under this ordinance to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, dwelling unit or lodging room let or occupied by him/her except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs are in process, or during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of service is approved by an authorized inspector. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.36)  
Sec. 37-142. - Maximum density. 
(a)  A dwelling unit shall not be occupied by more than one family or more than four unrelated persons. The status of legal dependency shall be as defined in the Internal Revenue Code. 
(b)  Within each dwelling unit, each bedroom shall be occupied by no more than two unrelated persons. 
(c)  Landlords shall include the density limits established by this section in all new or renewal leases entered into after November 1, 1990. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 4.37)  
TITLE IV CITY SERVICES  
Chapter 40 - UTILITIES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 40-1—40-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 40-19. - Introduction and purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of these regulations is to regulate and control the operation and use of the public water system within the city utility district no. 1 in order to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community. The utility is designed to promote reasonably adequate water services for the community and to set forth equitable revenue systems so as to derive the maximum public benefit. 
(b)  The utility is subject to regulation by the public service commission of the state. This article enables the utility to comply with the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code ch. PSC 185, Standards for Water Public Utility Service, and any other state or federal law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.01)  
Sec. 40-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Board means the city board of public works. 
Curb stop means a water shutoff valve located between the curb and the property line. 
Customer means any person, owner or occupant, firm, partnership, corporation, municipality, cooperative organization, governmental agency, or political entity provided with water service by the city utility district no. 1. 
Delinquent account means an account which has a bill for an unpaid service after payment is due. 
Meter means an instrument installed to measure the volume and/or rate of flow of water delivered through it. 
Stop box means an appurtenance installed on each water service to locate and protect the curb stop. 
Unit of service means any residential or small commercial aggregation of space or area occupied for a distinct purpose such as a residence, apartment, store or office, which is equipped with one or more fixtures for rendering water supply, separate and distinct from other users. 
Utility means the city utility district no. 1. 
Utility classification codes means: 
(1)  Residential (includes private homes, duplexes, and apartment buildings three units and under). 
(2)  Commercial (includes all businesses, churches, and apartment buildings four units and over that are not individually metered). 
(3)  Industrial (includes manufacturing plants). 
(4)  Public (includes city properties, schools, and government). 
(5)  Irrigation consists of those customers who use a second meter to measure water for uses such as lawn sprinkling, gardening, watering outdoor plants, golf courses, swimming pools or other recreation areas, or washing of motor vehicles, boats trailers or the exterior of any building structure. 
Water lateral means the piping from the main to the curb stop. 
Water service pipe means the piping from the curb stop to the building. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.02)  
Sec. 40-21. - State plumbing code adopted. 
The provisions of Wis. Admin. Code, chs. COMM 81 to 86, inclusive, (state plumbing code) and all subsequent amendments thereto are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in this Code as if fully set forth. A copy of the current state plumbing code shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and kept permanently on file and open to public inspection. The regulations hereby adopted shall be administered by the board and the city plumbing and heating inspector. Violations of the provisions hereby adopted or any rule or order of the board or plumbing inspector adopted in compliance therewith shall be subject to the enforcement and abatement procedures of division 2 of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.046)  
Sec. 40-22. - Management and supervision of utility. 
(a)  Management. The utility shall be managed by the city board of public works. 
(b)  Supervision. The utility shall be supervised by a utility superintendent under the direction of the director of public works. It shall be the duty of the superintendent to supervise the operation of the utility and to comply with the ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city, the public service commission of the state, and applicable laws of the state. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.03(1), (2))  
Sec. 40-23. - Compliance with rules required for service. 
All persons now receiving a water supply from the utility, or who may hereafter make application therefor, shall be considered as having agreed to be bound by the water utility rules and regulations filed with the public service commission of the state and with the terms of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.03(3))  
Sec. 40-24. - Falsifying information. 
No person shall knowingly make any false statement, representation, record, report, plan, or other document filed with the city. Any person who violates this provision shall be subject to the penalties imposed under division 2 of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.14(4))  
Secs. 40-25—40-51. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 40-52. - Notice of violation and special order of remedy. 
Any person found in violation of this article or of any prohibition, limitation, or requirement contained herein, will be served by the board of public works with a written notice stating the nature of the violation and issuing a special order for the appropriate remedy thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.14(1))  
Sec. 40-53. - Appeal to board of public works for reconsideration. 
Any person who objects to any action or decision of the board or its designate shall first appeal to the board for reconsideration. 
(1)  A written notice of appeal shall be filed with the secretary of the board within 30 days of the date of the action or decision appealed from. 
(2)  The notice of appeal shall state the action or decision of the board or its designate appealed from. 
(3)  The secretary of the board shall schedule the appeal for consideration by the board at a meeting, open to the public, within 30 days of the filing of the notice of appeal. The secretary shall send notice of the time scheduled for the consideration of the appeal to the appellant at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
(4)  Within 30 days of the appeal hearing, the board shall affirm, modify, or reverse the action or decision. Notice of the final decision of the board shall be sent to the appellant. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.14(2)(A))  
Sec. 40-54. - Appeal to the city council. 
Any person who objects to any final decision of the board after appeal to the board may appeal to the city council. 
(1)  A written notice of appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within 14 days of the date when notice of the final decision of the board is mailed. 
(2)  The notice of appeal shall state the action of the board appealed from, shall specify the reasons stated by the board for taking such action, and shall specify why the appellant believes said action was inappropriate. 
(3)  The city clerk shall file the notice of appeal with the common council and shall schedule the appeal for consideration by the common council at a meeting open to the public, within 45 days of the filing of the notice of appeal. The clerk shall send notice of the time scheduled for the consideration of the appeal to the appellant and the secretary of the board. 
(4)  Within 30 days of the appeal hearing, the common council shall affirm, modify, or reverse the action of the board or shall refer the matter back to the board for further consideration. Notice of the decision of the common council shall be sent to the appellant and the board. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.14(2)(B))  
Sec. 40-55. - Application of state law. 
The provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 68 (municipal administrative procedure) shall not be applicable to any determination made pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.14(2)(C))  
Sec. 40-56. - Penalties for violations. 
See forfeiture/bond/deposit schedule for penalties for any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this article or any rule, order issued pursuant thereto. In addition to said forfeiture, the remedial provisions of Wis. Stats. § 236.31 and Wis. Stats. ch. 823 relating to public nuisances are incorporated and adopted herein by reference and shall be enforced when applicable. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.14(3))  
Sec. 40-57. - Claims for damages. 
(a)  No person shall enter a claim for damage against the city or the utility, or any officer thereof, for damage to any pipe fixture or appurtenance by reason of interrupted water supply, or variation of pressure, or for damage of any nature whatsoever caused by the turning off, or turning on either wholly or partially, of the water supply, or for the extension, alteration, or repair of any water main on the premises' water supply or for the discontinuance of the premises' water supply or for the violation of any rules or regulations of the utility. No claims will be allowed against the city or utility on account of the interruption of the water supply caused by the breaking of pipes or machinery, or by stoppage for repairs on account of fire or other emergency, and no claim shall be allowed for any damage caused by the breakage of any pipe or machinery. 
(b)  Owners or operators of motor vehicles will be held for the cost of repair of any hydrant damaged by being hit by a motor vehicle and the utility will not be responsible for the damage to the motor vehicle by reason of such accident. 
(c)  Contractors must ascertain for themselves the existence and location of all water mains and service pipes. Where they are removed, cut or damaged during any construction the contractor must at his/her own expense cause them to be replaced or repaired at once. They must not shut off the water service pipes from any consumer for a period exceeding six hours. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.13)  
Secs. 40-58—40-87. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CONNECTIONS  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 40-88. - Compulsory connection; exception. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section every owner of a parcel of land within the city shall install, at owner's expense, suitable plumbing facilities and connect to a utility-owned water main within 90 days after the date of written notice by the board when the following conditions exist: 
(1)  Parcel of land is located within the utility, adjacent to a utility water main that has been petitioned for, which contains a residential property serviced by a private well. 
(2)  Parcel of land is located within the utility, adjacent to a utility water main that has not been petitioned for, which contains a residential property serviced by a private well in violation of any of the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 809 (safe drinking water) regarding maximum contaminate levels and/or is serviced by a private well in violation of any of the well and pump installation requirements in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 812 (well construction and pump installation). 
(3)  Parcel of land is located within the utility, adjacent to a utility water main, which contains a building or other structure used for the conduct of any trade business, industry, or multifamily purpose currently served by a private well. 
(b)  A well operation permit, as defined in chapter 30, shall be maintained for every private well located on a property adjacent to a utility water main until the private well is abandoned. Failure to maintain a current well operation permit will result in mandatory connection to a utility water main and mandatory abandonment of the private well within 90-days of written notice by the board. 
(c)  As used in this subsection, the term "adjacent" means 50 percent or more of the frontage abuts upon a right-of-way or easement in which is installed a utility water main. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.04(1); Ord. No. 2009-O-35, § 1(10.04(1)), 1-12-192010)  
Sec. 40-89. - Temporary waiver. 
The board of public works may, upon application of the property owner, temporarily waive the compulsory connection requirement. A waiver may be granted for a period of up to three years but shall not be extended beyond that time. A waiver shall only be granted and continue in effect while the existing alternative water source is safe for human consumption and immediate connection would cause the property owner extraordinary hardships or expense. The granting of a temporary waiver shall not defer payment of, or the accrual of interest upon, any special assessments levied for the construction of the water supply system unless the assessment resolution specifically so provides. 
(1)  The owner's application for a waiver must be accompanied by a well operation permit as outlined in section 30-64. The board of public works may rescind its prior waiver grant and require connection to the public water system within 90 days, if the owner is unable to maintain a well operation permit. 
(2)  A temporary waiver grant applies only to the property owner receiving the waiver. In the event ownership of the property is subsequently transferred, the temporary waiver will automatically expire upon such transfer and the new owner must comply with the compulsory connection requirement within 90 days after date of written notification by the utility. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.04(1)(A))  
Sec. 40-90. - Exclusive agricultural land waiver. 
Upon application by the owner to the board, lands zoned for exclusively agricultural use (including A-1, A-2 and A-3 classifications) or for which a farmland preservation agreement has been recorded shall be granted a compulsory connection waiver. This waiver shall remain in effect for only so long as the property is either zoned for exclusively agricultural use or is covered by a recorded farmland preservation agreement. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.04(1)(B))  
Sec. 40-91. - State and county connection requirements applicable. 
The provisions of this article are not intended to interfere with, abrogate or alleviate the need for compliance with any connection requirements that may be imposed by the state, the county, or any agencies thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.04(1)(C))  
Sec. 40-92. - Application for connection permit required. 
Any person desiring to connect with the water system shall apply in writing to the utility on a form furnished by the utility. The application shall be made by the owner or his/her representative and shall include a statement giving the exact location of the premises to be served, the name of the owner, the purpose for which the service is to be used, the time when the work is to be done, the size of the supply pipe and meter desired, and such other information as may be required by the utility. Any special refrigeration or air conditioning water-consuming appliances shall be particularly noted on the application. The utility may deny any application where the required information is not provided. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.04(2))  
Sec. 40-93. - Connection permit requirements; pre-issuance inspection. 
No work of laying the water lateral and/or water service pipe shall be commenced or continued without the required connection permit being on the premises. At the time of connecting, the water lateral and/or water service pipe to the meter setting shall be inspected by the utility or its designate. Connection permits shall not be granted unless all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The premises to be served are situated on a lot or parcel within the utility and abutting on any street, alley, easement or right-of-way in which a utility water main is located, or, where the property owner has agreed to and fully complied with subdivision III of division 4 of this article for a main extension; and 
(2)  The property owner agrees to install a water service pipe from the curb stop to the unit of service according to all utility specifications; and 
(3)  The premises to be served will have adequate piping beyond the metering point. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.04(3))  
Sec. 40-94. - Multiunit dwellings. 
(a)  Multiunit dwelling 15 units or less. Multiunit dwellings 15 units or less shall be served by individual metered water services to each unit. Each meter and meter connection shall be a separate customer for the purpose of the filed regulations. The owner of a multiunit dwelling of 15 units or less has the option of either installing individual water laterals to each unit or installing the building lateral to a master meter room where the interior plumbing and meter settings are located for all units. The owner, by selecting the latter option, is required to provide interior plumbing and meter setting to enable individual metered service to each unit and individual disconnection without affecting service to other units. An access agreement shall be recorded, granting the utility access to the master meter room for maintenance of the meter and for disconnecting water services for nonpayment of utility bills. 
(b)  Multiunit dwellings 16 units or greater. Multiunit dwellings 16 units or greater have the option of being served by individual metered water services to each unit or by one master meter for the entire dwelling. The owner shall meet the requirements set forth in this section if the multiunit dwelling will be served by individual metered water services. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.04(4))  
Sec. 40-95. - Automatic fire sprinkler system plans required. 
The owner of any building in which an automatic fire sprinkler system is required pursuant to article III of chapter 44, pertaining to the fire code, shall submit, prior to installation of such system, two sets of plans for review and approval by the board and by the fire department. Such private fire protection systems shall be unmetered and shall be charged at the rates established in section 40-418. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.04(5))  
Sec. 40-96. - Separate metering of lawn sprinkler systems. 
The owner of a building who wishes to install a lawn sprinkler system may request that such system be metered separately from residential service. The owner, by selecting this option, is required to provide plumbing and meter settings to enable such service and to permit individual disconnection without affecting service to the residential unit or units. Each meter and meter connection will be a separate customer for the purpose of the filed rules and regulations. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.04(6))  
Sec. 40-97. - Minimum service contract period. 
The minimum service contract period shall be one year unless otherwise specified by special contract or in the applicable rate schedule. Where a customer, at his/her request, has been disconnected prior to expiration of his/her minimum contract period and his/her account is not delinquent and thereafter he/she requests the reconnection of service in the same or some other location, a reconnection charge shall be collected. The minimum contract period is renewed with each reconnection. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.04(7))  
Sec. 40-98. - Reconnection. 
A reconnection charge in accordance with the city fee schedule shall be required from customers whose services are disconnected because of nonpayment of bills when due, not including disconnection for failure to comply with deposit or guarantee rules. A customer shall be considered as the same consumer provided the reconnection is requested for the same location by any occupant of the premises or, if a place of business, by any partner or employee of the same business. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.04(7))  
Secs. 40-99—40-124. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Temporary Connections 
 
Sec. 40-125. - Application required. 
Any person desiring to connect to the utility water system on a temporary and limited basis shall make application to the utility for permission according to the following provisions of this subdivision. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.04(8))  
Sec. 40-126. - Metered supply. 
An applicant for temporary water supply on a metered basis shall obtain a permit from the utility and comply with the terms of the permit and be billed in accordance with the city fee schedule. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.04(8)(A))  
Sec. 40-127. - Unmetered services. 
(a)  Unmetered temporary use other than building or construction. Where a water meter cannot be installed immediately, service may be supplied temporarily on an unmetered basis upon written application to the utility. Such service shall be billed in accordance with the city fee schedule. 
(b)  Unmetered temporary construction use. When water is wanted on an unmetered basis for construction purposes, a written application shall be made to the utility. If the application is approved, payment for the water shall be made in accordance with the approved building and construction water service (unmetered) rate. For construction purposes, the water must be drawn from the service pipe which is carried inside the foundation wall. No connection with the service pipe at the curb shall be made. In no case will any employee of the utility turn on water for construction work unless the contractor first presents a permit. Upon completion of the construction work, the contractor must return the original permit to the utility, together with a statement of the actual amount of construction work performed. 
(c)  Isolated unmetered usage. When water is wanted on an unmetered basis for isolated purposes such as filling swimming pools, tanks or tank wagons, steam tractors or rollers, or portable steam boilers, written application therefor shall be made to the utility. If the application is approved, payment for the water shall be made in advance at the scheduled rates for general unmetered water service. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.04(8)(B))  
Sec. 40-128. - Hydrant connections. 
In cases where no other supply is available, permission may be granted by the utility to connect to a hydrant. No hydrant shall be used until it is equipped with a sprinkling valve. In no case shall any valve be set or moved except by a member of the utility. No valve will be set or moved until the applicant pays for the setting and for the water to be used at the scheduled rates in accordance with the city fee schedule. In the use of a fire hydrant supply, the hydrant valve will be set at the proper opening by the utility when the sprinkling valve is set. If the water is to be used through iron pipe connections, all such pipe installations shall have the swing joint to facilitate quick disconnection from the fire hydrant. When the applicant is finished using any hydrant, they shall notify the utility. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.04(8)(C))  
Sec. 40-129. - Deposits returned. 
The city may require a security deposit as a precondition for temporary connection to its water service or for use of city equipment incident thereto. All monies deposited as security for payment of charges arising from the use of temporary water supply on a metered basis, or for the return of a sprinkling valve wheel or reducer, shall be refunded to the applicant when the use of water has terminated, all charges have been paid, and the wheel and reducer have been returned undamaged. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.04(8)(D))  
Secs. 40-130—40-158. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Pipes and Protective Devices 
 
Sec. 40-159. - Water service laterals. 
The owner or applicant shall install the water service lateral at his/her own expense. Such installation by the owner or applicant shall be in accordance with the latest edition of the city's standard specifications for public works construction and shall be subject to inspection and approval in accordance with the chapter 24, regulating the division and subdivision of land. A nonrefundable permit fee shall be paid upon filing the application in accordance with the city fee schedule. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.05(1))  
Sec. 40-160. - Water service pipes. 
(a)  After the necessary application procedures are complete, the property owner shall install a water service pipe from the curb stop to the point of use not less than six feet below the surface of an established or proposed grade and according to all specifications of the utility. In addition, special protective coverings may be required where soil conditions and other factors are conducive to premature failure of the service. 
(b)  The applicant's plumber shall be responsible for connecting said service pipe to the curb stop and service. No plumber shall cover or permit the covering of any water service pipe until the installation has been inspected and approved by the utility. 
(c)  Water service pipes shall be installed in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code chs. COMM 81 through 86 (the state plumbing code). 
(d)  If the owner fails to repair a leaking or broken service pipe from the curb stop to the point of metering or use within such time as may appear reasonable to the utility, after written notice, the water will be shut off and will not be turned on again until the repairs have been completed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.05(2))  
Sec. 40-161. - Size of water supply pipes. 
All water supplies shall be of undiminished size from the district water main into the point of meter placement. Beyond the meter outlet valve the piping shall be sized and proportioned to provide, on all floors, at all times, an equitable distribution of water supply for the greatest probable number of fixtures or appliances operating simultaneously. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.05(3))  
Sec. 40-162. - Stop box and curb stop inspection. 
The utility shall inspect the stop box and curb stop prior to setting of the water meter to ascertain any damages incurred during construction of improvements on a given lot. If at that inspection, or any prior inspection it is found that the stop box and curb stop have been damaged, they shall be repaired by the utility and the full cost of said repair shall be paid by the property owner. If not paid within 90 days, the cost of said repairs shall be placed on the tax roll as a special tax against the property. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.05(4))  
Sec. 40-163. - Protective devices required. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of every premises receiving water supply shall apply and maintain suitable means of protection of the premises supply, and all appliances thereof, against damage arising in any manner from the use of the water supply, variation of water pressure, or any interruption of water supply. Particularly, such owner or occupant must protect water-cooled compressors or refrigeration systems by means of high pressure safety cutout devices. 
(b)  There shall likewise be provided means for the prevention of the transmission of water hammer or noise of operation of any valve or appliance through the piping of their own or adjacent premises. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.05(7))  
Sec. 40-164. - Division of service prohibited. 
(a)  No division of the water service of any lot or parcel of land shall be made for the extension and independent metering of the supply to an adjoining lot or parcel of land. 
(b)  No division of a water supply service shall be made at the curb stop for separate supplies therefrom for two or more separate premises having frontage on any street or public service strip whether owned by the same or different parties. 
(c)  In cases of group or commercial venture housing where all buildings are under one ownership, a large service may be installed and separate service pipes installed by the owner to serve separate units. Each separate service pipe shall have a utility approved curb stop and a separate meter located between the large service and the building. 
(d)  For new construction of group or commercial venture housing, master metering of groups of buildings shall not be allowed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.05(3))  
Sec. 40-165. - State plumbing regulations applicable. 
Plumbing shall be designed, constructed and installed in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code ch. COMM 82 (design, construction, installation supervision and inspection of plumbing). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.05(8))  
Secs. 40-166—40-183. - Reserved.  
Subdivision IV. - Meters 
 
Sec. 40-184. - Required. 
All new service connections to the water utility system shall be metered. Meters shall be provided, maintained and tested by the utility and the utility reserves the right to specify at any time, the size of a meter required and the amount of open space necessary for access. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.05(5))  
Sec. 40-185. - Consumer's duties. 
The consumer shall, at his/her expense, provide a suitable location and the proper connections for the meter. The applicant's plumber shall obtain the exact overall dimensions of the meter and shall set the couplings the proper distance apart to accommodate the meter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.05(5))  
Sec. 40-186. - Location. 
(a)  All meters are to be located just inside of the wall at which the service pipe enters the building. The service will be flushed, the meter set, and the water turned on without extra cost to the customer. The water shall not be turned on for a customer except by the utility. The applicant plumber must leave the water turned off except to test his/her work. Any covering placed over a meter shall be easily removable. If electric ground wires are attached to the water piping, they shall be connected outside the unions on the inlet side of the meter. 
(b)  Water meters will not be located in any pit or well or below any stairway, landing or platform unless there is provided a space not less than four feet above the centerline of the water meter supply line. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the customer to see that the meter inspector or repairman does not have to cause inconvenience to the customer when reading or replacing meters. Connections for water meters shall not be installed in any location that is or may be unclean, unsanitary, or in any manner hazardous to utility employees. 
(d)  Access to all meters, valves, nipples and other fittings shall be provided in a common room such that walls or partitions do not interfere with installation and repair of a meter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.05(5))  
Sec. 40-187. - Sealing required. 
All water meters installed by the utility shall be sealed; it is the responsibility of the customer that the seal remain intact. If it is necessary to break the seal, the utility shall be notified. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.05(5))  
Sec. 40-188. - Option for separate unit meters for multiunit dwellings. 
The owner of a multiunit dwelling has the option of being served by individual metered service to each separate dwelling unit of the building. By selecting this option, the owner is required to provide interior plumbing and meter settings to enable individual metered service to each unit and individual disconnection without affecting service to other units. Each meter will be a separate utility customer. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.05(5))  
Sec. 40-189. - Public works installation standards applicable. 
All connections to meters shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the city Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction and with Wis. Admin. Code chs. COMM 81 through 86 (the state plumbing code). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.05(6))  
Sec. 40-190. - Radio-read transponders. 
At the time of setting the meter, the utility may install a radio-read transponder. Such radio-read transponder shall be installed within ten feet of the meter. The register or transponder shall be provided, installed, maintained and tested by the utility. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.05(6))  
Sec. 40-191. - Meter accuracy testing. 
If a customer requests, the utility shall promptly make an accuracy test in addition to the periodic or installation test if 24 months or more has elapsed since the last complaint test of the same meter in the same location. If less than 24 months has expired, there will be a charge in accordance with the city fee schedule. If the meter is found fast in excess of two percent, any payment that was made for the test will be refunded and there will be an adjustment for past billings pursuant to Wis. Admin. Code §§ PSC 185.61 through 185.78. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.07(8))  
Sec. 40-192. - Repair of meters. 
Meters will be repaired by the utility and the cost of such repairs caused by ordinary wear and tear will be borne by the utility. Repair of any damage to a meter resulting from the carelessness of the owner of the premises, his/her agent, or tenant, or from the negligence of any one of them to properly secure and protect same, including any damage that may result from allowing a water meter to become frozen or to be injured from the presence of hot water or steam in the meter, shall be paid for by the customer or the owner of the premises. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.07(9))  
Secs. 40-193—40-222. - Reserved.  
Subdivision V. - Cross Connections 
 
Sec. 40-223. - Cross connection defined. 
In this section, the term "cross connection" means any physical connection or arrangement between two otherwise separate systems, one of which contains potable water from the city water system, and the other, water from a private source, water of unknown or questionable safety, or steam, gases, or chemicals, whereby upon loss of pressure or any pressure condition, there may be a flow from one system to the other. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.045(1))  
Sec. 40-224. - Prohibited. 
No person may establish or permit to be established or maintain or permit to be maintained any cross connection. No interconnection may be established whereby potable water from a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply, other than the regular public water supply of the city, may enter the supply or distribution system of the city, unless the private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of the supply shall have been approved by the utility and by the state department of natural resources under Wis. Admin. Code § NR 811.9(2). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.045(2))  
Sec. 40-225. - Inspections. 
(a)  By utility. The utility shall cause periodic inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water system where cross connection with the public water system is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and re-inspections shall be as established by the utility and as approved by the state department of natural resources. 
(b)  Owner to cooperate: inspection warrants. Upon presentation of credentials, a representative of the utility may request entry at any reasonable time to examine for cross connections any property served by a connection to the city's public water system. If entry is refused, the representative shall obtain a special inspection warrant under Wis. Stats. § 66.0119. Upon request by a representative of the utility, the owner, lessee or occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the utility any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on the property if the information is known to the owner, lessee or occupant. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.045(3))  
Sec. 40-226. - Disconnection for violations; emergency disconnections. 
(a)  The utility is authorized and directed to discontinue water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of this section exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water system. Except as provided in section 40-227, water service may be discontinued only after reasonable notice and opportunity for a hearing under sections 40-53—40-55. Water service to the property shall not be restored until the cross connection has been eliminated in compliance with this section. 
(b)  Emergency discontinuance of service. If it is determined by the utility that a cross connection or an emergency endangers public health, safety or welfare and requires immediate action, and a written finding to that effect is filed with the city clerk and delivered to the customer's premises, service may be immediately discontinued or ordered disconnected. The customer shall have an opportunity for a hearing under sections 40-53—40-55, within ten days of such emergency discontinuance. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.045(4), (5))  
Sec. 40-227. - Plumbing codes not superseded. 
This section does not supersede the state plumbing code or the city plumbing code, but is supplementary to them. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.045(6))  
Sec. 40-228. - Cross connection control policy. 
The utility shall have a cross connection control policy in addition to this ordinance. This policy, and subsequent amendments, shall be reviewed and approved by the board of public works. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-04, § 1, 4-10-2012)  
Secs. 40-229—40-247. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 40-248. - Effect of frost or freezing weather on installation. 
(a)  Installation of water main extensions will not be allowed when the ground is frozen unless the applicant agrees to pay for additional cost involved. The utility shall determine when frost conditions are encountered and will notify the owner or his/her authorized agent in advance when such condition is in effect. 
(b)  Any street or public service strip in which a main is to be placed should be graded to an established grade elevation as set and approved by the city engineer. Any additional cost involved in installing a main in a street or public service strip that is not to grade will be charged to, and made a lien upon, the property fronting on said extension. The contractor shall be responsible for maintenance and repair of any main extension for a period of one year after completion and approval unless specific written agreements specify otherwise. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.06(3))  
Secs. 40-249—40-274. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - New Subdivision and Land Division Extensions 
 
Sec. 40-275. - Application. 
Application for installation of water mains in subdivisions or land division as defined in chapter 24 shall be filed in writing with the board. The application shall set forth at least the following: 
(1)  Name and address of applicant; 
(2)  Name of subdivision or land division; 
(3)  Legal description of property; 
(4)  Map showing streets, lots and sizes of proposed mains and hydrants, and street laterals; 
(5)  Date of approval of plat or certified survey by city and department of commerce; and 
(6)  Date of approval of proposed mains by department of natural resources. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.06(2)(A))  
Sec. 40-276. - Payment. 
The installation of the water mains in new subdivisions or land divisions shall be made by the developer, or a contractor employed by the developer, all in accordance with the terms and provisions of the chapter 24, relating to the division and subdivision of land. Plans and specifications for construction of the water main extension shall be submitted to the city engineer for prior approval. The developer shall be responsible for the total cost of construction including any related engineering and legal fees incurred by the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.06(2)(B))  
Secs. 40-277—40-300. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Other Extensions 
 
Sec. 40-301. - Application. 
Written application for extension of a water main shall be made to the board by the owner of property to be benefitted, or his/her authorized agent in accordance with the city's special assessment policy. Water main assessments shall be calculated in accordance with the methods outlined in the city's special assessment policy. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.06(1)(A))  
Sec. 40-302. - Special assessments; customer contributions. 
(a)  If the cost of the extension is to immediately be collected through assessment by the city against the abutting property, the procedure set forth under Wis. Stats. § 66.0703 will apply, and no additional customer contribution to the utility will be required. If the city is unwilling or unable to make a special assessment, the extension will be made according to a written contract on a customer-financed basis as follows: 
(1)  The applicant will advance as a contribution in aid of construction the total amount equivalent to that which would have been assessed for all properties under subsection (a) of this section. The contribution must be paid in advance of construction. 
(2)  Part of the contribution required in this section will be refundable. When additional customers are connected to the extended main within ten years of the date of completion, contributions in aid of construction will be collected equal to the amount which would have been assessed under subsection (a)(1) of this section for the abutting property being served. This amount will be refunded to the original contributor. 
(3)  In no case will the contributions received from additional customers exceed the proportionate amount which would have been required under subsection (a)(1) of this section nor will it exceed the total assessable cost of the original extension. 
(4)  When refunds have reduced the original contribution of any contributor to the applicable assessment amount, no further refund will be made to that individual. 
(5)  The period during which refunds shall be made will be limited to ten years. If the water main extension was assessed when installed, nothing in this section precludes the utility from collecting the assessments beyond ten years of the date of completion. 
(b)  When a new customer is connected to an existing main, not financed by customer contributions, it shall not be considered as a main extension and no contribution may be collected from the customer. This provision applies only to mains installed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this subdivision is derived. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.06(1)(B)(1)—(3))  
Sec. 40-303. - Water main oversizing costs. 
Water mains greater than ten inches, installed for the benefit of the entire water distribution system, shall be considered transmission mains. The utility shall pay the incremental material and installation costs for the difference between a ten-inch water main and the size of the transmission main installed. Where it is necessary to oversize a facility in order to meet the needs of a specific use or uses, the cost of the over sizing will be directly assessed against the specific benefited properties. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.06(1)(B)(4))  
Secs. 40-304—40-324. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - CHARGES, BILLING AND PAYMENT  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Secs. 40-325—40-351. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Deposits 
 
Sec. 40-352. - New residential service. 
The utility may require a cash deposit or other guarantee as a condition of new residential service if, and only if, the customer has an outstanding account balance with the utility which accrued within the last six years, and which, at the time of the request for new service, remains outstanding and not in dispute. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.08(1))  
Sec. 40-353. - Existing residential service. 
The utility may require a cash deposit or other guarantee as a condition of continued service if, and only if, either or both the following circumstances apply: 
(1)  Service has been shut off or discontinued within the last 12 months for violation of these rules and regulations or for nonpayment of a delinquent bill for service which is not in dispute. 
(2)  Credit information obtained by the utility subsequent to the initial application indicates that the initial application for service was falsified or incomplete to the extent that a deposit would be required under these rules and regulations. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.08(2))  
Sec. 40-354. - Commercial and industrial service. 
If the credit for an applicant for commercial or industrial service has not been established to the satisfaction of the utility, they shall be required to make a deposit or otherwise guarantee to the utility payment of bills for service. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.08(3))  
Sec. 40-355. - Conditions of deposit. 
The provisions of Wis. Admin. Code § PSC 185.36(4) are incorporated and adopted herein by reference as conditions of deposit. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.08(4))  
Sec. 40-356. - Refund of deposits. 
The utility shall review the payment record of each residential customer with a deposit on file at not less than 12-month intervals and shall not require or continue to require a deposit unless a deposit could be required under the conditions stated above. In the case of a commercial or industrial customer, the utility shall refund the deposit after 24 consecutive months of prompt payment if the customer's credit standing is satisfactory to the utility. Payment shall be considered prompt if it is made prior to notice of disconnection for nonpayment of a bill not in dispute. Any deposit or portion thereof refunded to a customer shall be refunded by check unless both the customer and the utility agree to credit the regular bill or unless service is terminated, in which case the deposit with accrued interest at the current legal rate shall be applied to the final bill and any balance returned to the customer promptly. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.08(5))  
Sec. 40-357. - Other conditions. 
A new or additional deposit may be required upon reasonable written notice of the need therefor if such new or additional deposit could have been required under the circumstances when the initial deposit was made. Service may be refused or disconnected for failure to pay a deposit request as provided in the rules. When service has been disconnected for failure to make a deposit, or for failure to pay a delinquent bill, or for failure to comply with the terms of a deferred payment agreement, and satisfactory arrangements have been made to have service restored, a reconnection charge as specified in section 40-500 shall be paid by the customer as a condition to restoration of service. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.08(6))  
Sec. 40-358. - Guarantee contracts. 
(a)  The utility may accept, in lieu of a cash deposit, a contract signed by a guarantor satisfactory to the company, whereby payment of a specified sum not exceeding the cash deposit requirement is guaranteed. The term of a guarantee contract shall be two years, but shall automatically terminate after the customer has closed his/her account, or at the guarantor's request upon 30 days' written notice to the utility. 
(b)  Upon termination of a guarantee contract or whenever the utility deems same insufficient as to amount or surety, a cash deposit or a new or additional guarantee may be required upon reasonable written notice to the customer. Service to any customer who fails to comply with these requirements may be refused, or upon eight days' written notice, disconnected. The utility shall mail the guarantor copies of all disconnect notices sent to the customer whose account he/she has guaranteed unless the guarantor waives such notice in writing. 
(c)  In lieu of a cash deposit or guarantee, an applicant for new service who has an outstanding account accrued within the last six years with the utility shall have the right to receive service from the utility under a deferred payment agreement as provided in this section for the outstanding account balance. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.08(7))  
Secs. 40-359—40-389. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Water Service Charges 
 
Sec. 40-390. - General service charges, metered. 
The water service charge to each unit of service shall consist of a minimum quarterly charge and a volume charge. 
(1)  Minimum quarterly charges. The minimum quarterly charges shall be in accordance with the city fee schedule. 
(2)  Volume charge. The volume charge to be added to the minimum quarterly charge shall be in accordance with the city fee schedule. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.10(1))  
Sec. 40-391. - Building and construction water service charges. 
Metered service rates set forth above in section 40-390 shall apply to water service supplied during the building and construction period. Where service is furnished prior to meter installation the minimum quarterly charge will be applied until permanent service is established. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.10(2))  
Sec. 40-392. - General water service, unmetered. 
Where the water meter cannot be installed immediately, service may be supplied temporarily on an unmetered basis. Such service shall be billed in accordance with the city fee schedule. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.10(3))  
Sec. 40-393. - Failure to read meters. 
(a)  Where the utility is unable to read a meter after two successive attempts, the fact will be plainly indicated on the bill, and the minimum charge applied. The difference shall be adjusted when the meter is again read, that is, the bill for the succeeding quarter will be computed with the gallons or cubic feet in each block of the rate schedule doubled and credit will be given on that bill for the amount of the minimum bill paid the preceding month. 
(b)  Only in unusual cases or where approval is obtained from the customer shall more than two consecutive estimated bills be rendered. If the meter is damaged or fails to operate, the bill will be based on the average use during the past year unless there is some reason why the use is not normal. Such average use shall be the average of the most comparable recent quarter. If the customer has been a customer for less than one year, then such average use shall be the average of the available consumption history. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.10(4))  
Sec. 40-394. - Charges for water wasted due to leaks. 
Water losses that occur on the premises, which are registered by the water meter, shall be the responsibility of the customer. It is the sole responsibility of the customer to prevent leakage in all piping and fixtures on the premises at and beyond the metering point. The utility shall inform each customer at least once each year that it is the sole responsibility of the customer to prevent leakage in all piping and fixtures on the premises at and beyond the metering point, and that any leaks or other losses of water, registered by the meter will be billed at the filed rates. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.10(5))  
Secs. 40-395—40-416. - Reserved.  
Subdivision IV. - Fire Protection Service Charges 
 
Sec. 40-417. - Public fire protection service. 
Under Wis. Stats. § 196.03(3)(b), the city has chosen to have the utility bill the retail general service customers for public fire protection service. This service shall include the use of hydrants for fire protection service only and such quantities of water as may be demanded for the purpose of extinguishing fires within the service area. This service shall also include water used for testing equipment and training personnel. For all other purposes, the metered or other rates set forth, or as may be filed with the public service commission, shall apply. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.11(1))  
Sec. 40-418. - Private fire protection service, unmetered. 
(a)  Private fire protection service charges. Private fire protection service shall consist of unmetered connections to the main for automatic sprinkler system, stand pipes (where same are connected permanently or continuously to the mains), and private hydrants. Quarterly demand charges for private fire protection service shall be in accordance with the rate schedule in the city fee schedule. 
(b)  Billing procedures. Billing procedures for private fire protection service shall be the same as for general service. 
(c)  Combined service. Where a four-inch or larger connection is made to the main for private fire protection service, such service line may be tapped with a smaller size branch line for general service. This small branch line shall be metered and the water therefrom billed at the regular metered rate listed in section 40-390. The charge for private fire protection service will be that applicable to the size of connection to the main in accordance with the city fee schedule . Where "X" equals the unmetered private fire protection quarterly charge applicable to the size of connection, and "Y" is the quarterly minimum charge for general service, the quarterly charge for private fire protection service shall be (X-.30Y). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.11(2))  
Secs. 40-419—40-449. - Reserved.  
Subdivision V. - Public Buildings 
 
Sec. 40-450. - Water service to public buildings. 
(a)  Water service supplied to public buildings, schools, etc., shall be metered and the regular service rates applied. 
(b)  Water used for other public purposes such as flushing sewers, street sprinkling, flooding skating rinks, drinking fountains, filling swimming pools, etc., shall be metered where meters can be set to measure the service. Where it is impossible to measure the service, the gallons of water used shall be estimated based on the pressure, size of opening, and period of time water is allowed to flow. The estimated quantity shall be billed in accordance with the rate schedule the city fee schedule. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.12)  
Secs. 40-451—40-468. - Reserved.  
Subdivision VI. - Meter Reading and Billing 
 
Sec. 40-469. - Billing schedule. 
Water bills are issued quarterly in March, June, September, and December, and due and payable 20 days from date bill is issued. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.09(1))  
Sec. 40-470. - Combined metering. 
When a customer's premises has several buildings each supplied with service and metered separately, the full service charge will be billed for each meter separately, and the readings will not be cumulated. If these buildings are all used in the same business and are properly connected by the customer, they may be metered in one place. If the utility, for its own convenience, installs more than one meter, the readings will be cumulated for billing. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.09(2))  
Sec. 40-471. - Meter reading. 
Reading of utility meters begin on or about the tenth day of March, June, September, and December. Meter reading is performed by the utility crew and utility superintendent. Bills are issued within 14 days of reading. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.09(3))  
Secs. 40-472—40-495. - Reserved.  
Subdivision VII. - Delinquent Accounts 
 
Sec. 40-496. - Reasons for disconnection. 
Service may be disconnected or refused for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to pay a delinquent account or failure to comply with the terms of a deferred payment agreement. 
(2)  Violation of the utility's rules and regulations pertaining to the use of service in a manner which interferes with the service of others or to the operation of nonstandard equipment, if the customer has first been notified and provided with reasonable opportunity to remedy the situation. 
(3)  Failure to comply with deposit or guarantee. 
(4)  Diversion of service around the meter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.09(6)(A))  
Sec. 40-497. - Disconnection for delinquent accounts. 
(a)  A bill for service is delinquent if unpaid after the due date shown on the bill. The utility may disconnect service for a delinquent bill by giving the customer a written disconnect notice at least eight calendar days prior to disconnection, which may be included with the bill for service. For purposes of this rule, the due date shall not be less than 21 days after issuance. A charge will be collected in advance before service is reconnected for a customer who has been disconnected for nonpayment in accordance with the city fee schedule. 
(b)  The utility may disconnect without notice where a dangerous condition exists for as long as the condition exists. Service may be denied to any customer for failure to comply with the applicable requirements of the rules and regulations of the public service commission or of these rules and regulations, or if a dangerous or unsafe condition exists on the customer's premises. 
(c)  The utility shall notify the county department of social services at least five calendar days prior to any scheduled disconnection of residential service if the customer or responsible person has made a written request for this procedure. The utility shall apprise customers of this right upon application for service. If service to a residential customer which has been disconnected has not been restored within 24 hours after disconnection, the utility shall notify the city police department of the billing name and service address and that a threat to health and life might exist to persons occupying the premises. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.09(6)(B))  
Sec. 40-498. - Dispute procedures. 
(a)  Whenever the customer advises the utility prior to the disconnection of service that all or part of any billing as rendered is in dispute, the utility shall investigate the dispute promptly and completely, advise the customer of the results of the investigation, attempt to resolve the dispute, and provide the opportunity for the customer to enter into a deferred payment agreement when applicable in order to settle the dispute. 
(b)  After the customer has pursued the available remedies with the utility, he/she may request that the public service commission's staff informally review the disputed issue and recommend terms of settlement. 
(c)  Any party to the dispute after informal review may make a written request for a formal review by the board of public works. If the board of public works decides to conduct a formal hearing on the dispute, the customer shall pay 50 percent of the bill in dispute or post a bond for that amount on or before the hearing date. Failure to pay the amount or post the bond will constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing. 
(d)  Service shall not be disconnected because of any disputed matter while the disputed matter is being pursued under the dispute procedure. In no way does this relieve the customer from the obligation of paying charges which are not disputed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.09(7))  
Sec. 40-499. - Form of disconnection notice. 
The form of disconnection notice shall be in accordance with the rules of the state public service commission. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.09(8))  
Sec. 40-500. - Reconnection charges. 
No reconnection charge will be applied to the customer if disconnection occurred solely because of general operation and was in no way a result of circumstances specific to the customer or property involved. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.09(9))  
Sec. 40-501. - Deferred payment agreement. 
(a)  The utility shall offer deferred payment agreements to residential customers. The deferred payment agreement shall provide that service will not be discontinued for the outstanding bill if the customer pays a stated reasonable amount of the outstanding bill and agrees to pay a stated reasonable portion of the remaining outstanding balance in installments until the bill is paid. In determining what amounts are "reasonable," the utility shall consider the: 
(1)  Size of the delinquent account. 
(2)  Customer's ability to pay. 
(3)  Customer's payment history. 
(4)  Time that the debt has been outstanding. 
(5)  Reasons why the debt has been outstanding. 
(6)  Any other relevant factors concerning the circumstances of the customer. 
(b)  In the Deferred Payment Agreement, it shall state immediately preceding the space provided for the customer's signature and in bold face print at least two sizes larger than any other used thereon, the following: 
IF YOU ARE NOT SATISFIED WITH THIS AGREEMENT, DO NOT SIGN. IF YOU DO SIGN THIS AGREEMENT YOU GIVE UP YOUR RIGHT TO DISPUTE THE AMOUNT DUE UNDER THE AGREEMENT EXCEPT FOR THE UTILITY'S FAILURE OR REFUSAL TO FOLLOW THE TERMS OF THIS AGREEMENT. 
(c)  A delinquent amount, including late payment charges covered by a deferred payment agreement, shall not be subject to an additional late payment charge if the customer meets the payment schedule, including the current bill required by the agreement. A deferred payment agreement shall not include a finance charge. 
(d)  If an applicant for service has not fulfilled the terms of a deferred payment agreement, the utility shall have the right to disconnect service or refuse service in accordance with these rules. Under such circumstances, it shall not be required to offer subsequent negotiations of a deferred payment agreement prior to disconnection. 
(e)  Any payments made by the customer in compliance with a deferred payment agreement, or otherwise, shall be first considered made in payment of the previous account balance with any remainder credited to the current bill. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.09(4))  
Sec. 40-502. - Penalties for nonpayment and collection of unpaid bills. 
A late payment charge of one percent per month compounded monthly will be added to bills not paid within 21 days after issuance or by due date, whichever is later. All unpaid bills for water service which are due and outstanding as unpaid bills for water service which are due and outstanding as of October 15 shall be collected by the city treasurer in the manner provided by Wis. Stats. § 66.0809. The additional penalty provided by Wis. Stats. § 66.0809 shall apply to any delinquent amount due. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.09(5))  
Secs. 40-503—40-527. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - WATER USE REGULATIONS  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 40-528. - Cross connections prohibited. 
Every person owning or occupying a premises or building within the utility shall maintain the utility water supply free from any connection, either of a direct or of an indirect nature, with a water supply from a foreign source, or of any manner of connection with any fixture or appliance, whereby water from a foreign supply or the waste from any fixture, appliance, waste or soil pipe may flow, be siphoned or pumped into the piping of the utility water system. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.07(1))  
Sec. 40-529. - Operation and opening of city valves and hydrants prohibited. 
No person shall, without authority of the superintendent, operate any valve connected with the utility water distribution system, or open any fire hydrant connected with the distribution system, except for the purpose of extinguishing fire, or shall wantonly damage or impair the same. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.07(2))  
Sec. 40-530. - Protection and maintenance of stop boxes required; responsibility for leaks. 
The customer shall protect the stop box in his/her terrace and shall keep the same free from dirt and other obstructions. The utility shall not be liable for failure to locate the stop box and shut off the water in case of a leak on a customer's premises. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.07(3))  
Sec. 40-531. - Thawing of frozen services. 
(a)  Frozen services shall be thawed out by and at the expense of the utility except where the freezing was caused by contributory fault or negligence on the part of the customer such as reduction of the grade or undue exposure of the piping in the building or on customers' property, or failure to comply with utility specifications and requirements as to depth or service, lack of sufficient backfill, etc. 
(b)  Following the freezing of a service, the utility shall take such steps and issue such instructions as may be necessary to prevent the refreezing of the same service. No charge will be made for rethawing if the instructions are followed. In case it is necessary to allow the water to flow to prevent refreezing, the customer shall make provision for proper disposal of the waste water. For the period in which the water is allowed to run, the customer's bill shall be adjusted for the consumption exceeding the customer's average consumption. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.07(4))  
Sec. 40-532. - Inspection. 
During reasonable hours the utility shall have the right of access to the premises supplied with service, for the purpose of inspection or for the enforcement of this division and the requirements of the public service commission of the state. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.07(5))  
Sec. 40-533. - Notice of intent to vacate required. 
When premises are to be vacated, the utility shall be notified in writing at once, so that it may remove the meter and shut off the supply at the stop box. The owner of the premises shall be liable to prosecution for any damage to the property of the water department by reason of failure to notify the utility. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.07(6))  
Sec. 40-534. - Interruptions in service. 
The utility reserves the right to shut off the water in the mains temporarily, to make repairs, alterations or additions to the plant or system. Except in case of emergency repairs, whenever possible, the utility shall give notification, by newspaper publication or otherwise, of the interruption of service. No rebate will be allowed to customers for such temporary suspension of supply. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.07(7))  
Sec. 40-535. - Surreptitious use of water. 
When the utility has reasonable evidence that a customer is obtaining his/her supply of water, in whole or in part, by means of devices or methods used to stop or interfere with the proper metering of the water being delivered to his/her equipment, the utility reserves the right to estimate and present immediately a bill for service unmetered as a result of such interference and such bill shall be payable subject to a 24-hour disconnection of service. When the utility has disconnected the customer for any such reason, the utility will reconnect the customer upon the following conditions: 
(1)  The customer will be required to deposit with the utility an amount sufficient to guarantee the payment of the customer's bills for utility service to the utility. 
(2)  The customer will be required to pay the utility for any and all damages to its equipment on the customer's premises due to such stoppage or interference with its metering. 
(3)  The customer must further agree to comply with reasonable requirements to protect the utility against further losses. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.07(10))  
Secs. 40-536—40-563. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Water Shortages 
 
Sec. 40-564. - Water watch declaration and criteria. 
(a)  The director of public works may impose a water watch under the criteria set forth in this section. Such a water watch shall continue until it is determined by the director of public works that it is no longer necessary in order to avoid undue stress upon the resources and reserve capacity of the utility. 
(b)  Under a water watch the utility is urging all customers to implement voluntary lawn watering restrictions. Voluntary lawn watering restrictions may apply to all customers or customers on alternate sides of the street. They may be for all day or for specified times each day. 
(c)  Notice of a water watch shall be given to the mayor, common council and major news media that serve the city. 
(d)  A water watch shall be declared when necessary to maintain pumpage below a preset daily total amount, or to maintain demand on the system below a preset level, or to comply with an electrical utility request for voluntary cutback in peak load electrical usage. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.07(11)(A)(1))  
Sec. 40-565. - Water warning declaration and criteria. 
(a)  Declaration of a water warning. The mayor, upon the recommendation of the director of public works, may impose a water warning under the criteria set forth below. Such a water warning shall continue until it is determined that it is no longer necessary in order to maintain a sustainable water system. Under a water warning the mayor is authorized to implement mandatory lawn watering restrictions. Mandatory lawn watering restrictions may apply to all customers or customers on alternate sides of the street. They may be for all day or for specified times each day. Mandatory restrictions may also prohibit establishment of new lawns, either sodded or seeded. Notice of a water warning shall be given to the common council and major news media that serve the city as well as mailed to each customer. 
(b)  Criteria for a water warning. 
(1)  To avoid sustained low pressure; 
(2)  To maintain reservoir levels above preset fire reserve limits as determined by the utility if a Water Watch does is not effective; 
(3)  To compensate for a loss of one or more wells or towers; or 
(4)  To maintain a sustainable aquifer. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.07(11)(A)(2))  
Sec. 40-566. - Water emergency declaration and criteria. 
(a)  The mayor, upon the recommendation of the director of public works, may impose a water emergency under the criteria set forth in subsection (b) of this section. Such a water emergency shall continue until it is determined that the health and safety of the public will not be compromised. Under a water emergency the mayor is authorized to implement mandatory restrictions on any water uses of one or more classes of water users, wholly or in part. Under a water emergency nothing shall limit the ability of the mayor to terminate the supply of water to any or all customers upon the determination of the director of public works that an emergency termination of water service is required to protect the health and safety of the public. Notice of a water emergency shall be given to the common council and major news media that serve the city as well as hand distributed to each customer. 
(b)  Criteria for a water emergency: to maintain the health and public safety of the public. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.07(11)(A)(3))  
Sec. 40-567. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any mandatory restriction on water usage issued pursuant to this section or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $20.00 or more than $100.00. Each occurrence of violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 10.07(11)(B))  
Secs. 40-568—40-597. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SEWER  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 40-598. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  This article regulates the use of public and private sewers and drains, disposal of holding tank wastes into public sewers, and the discharge of waters and sanitary wastes into the public sanitary sewerage systems within the utility district no. 1 (the "utility"). 
(b)  It provides for and explains the method used for levying and collecting sanitary sewerage and wastewater treatment service charges, sets uniform requirements for discharges into the wastewater collection and treatment system of the utility provides for annexations and connections to the sewerage system of the utility and enables the utility to comply with administrative provisions, water quality requirements, toxic and pretreatment effluent standards and other discharge criteria which are required or authorized by the Madison Metropolitan Sewage District (the "MMSD"), state and federal law. 
(c)  The intent of this article is to preserve and obtain the maximum public use and benefit from utility facilities by regulating the characteristics of wastewater discharged to the sanitary sewerage system of the utility and to otherwise protect the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.01(1))  
Sec. 40-599. - Authority. 
This article is adopted pursuant to and in implementation of Wis. Stats. §§ 62.11(5), 62.18, and 66.0827, and in conformity with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the MMSD relating to installation, operation, supervision, protection, management and use of sewerage systems and facilities. The charges and fees hereafter set forth have been established pursuant to the requirements of Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0821, 66.0827 , 200.13 and 66.0703. If there is any conflict between this article and any applicable MMSD, state or federal law, rule or regulation, the most stringent shall control. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.01(3)) 
State Law reference— Power of common council, Wis. Stats. § 62.11; municipal sewers, Wis. Stats. § 62.18; municipal sewerage and stormwater systems, Wis. Stats. § 66.0821; utility districts, Wis. Stats. § 66.0827; metropolitan sewerage district financing, Wis. Stats. § 200.13; special assessments, Wis. Stats. § 66.0703.  
Sec. 40-600. - Definitions. 
The terms defined in the sewer use ordinance of the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District (MMSD) shall have the same meaning when used in this article unless otherwise defined herein or unless the context specifically indicates otherwise. Specifically, the meaning of the following terms used in this article shall be: 
Actual customer means the number of water meters serving a user. If a user's water consumption is not metered, the director shall estimate the number and size of the water meter that would otherwise be required to measure such consumption. The director's estimate shall be in accordance with generally accepted engineering practices. 
Applicable pretreatment standard means that most restrictive provisions contained in any pretreatment limitations or prohibitive standards (enacted by any federal, state or local governmental entity or the MMSD) and incorporated in this article, which applicable pretreatment standard shall be complied with by nondomestic wastewater users of the sewerage system. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biological oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter or pounds. Quantitative determination of BOD shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in "standard methods." 
Board means the city board of public works, which is the governing body of the city utility district no. 1. 
Building sewer means a sanitary sewer beginning at the immediate outside of the foundation wall of any building being served to its connection with a utility sanitary sewer or MMSD interceptor. 
Carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand (CBOD) means the quantity of oxygen used in the biochemical degradation of organic material in five days at 20 degrees Celsius when the oxidation of reduced forms of nitrogen is prevented by the addition of an inhibitor. This analytical procedure shall be performed in accordance with 40 CFR 136, or as EPA otherwise determines. 
City engineer means the engineer of the city or his/her designate. 
Combined sewer means a sewer designed to receive or receiving both wastewater and storm or surface water. 
Community, municipality or city means the City of Fitchburg. 
Community sewer means any sanitary sewer owned and/or operated by the city which is tributary to an intercepting sanitary sewer or treatment facility operated by the MMSD. 
Compatible pollutant means biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH, or fecal coli form bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (WPDES) permit issued to the MMSD for its Nine Springs Wastewater Treatment Facility, provided that said wastewater treatment facility was designed to treat such pollutants, and in fact does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree. 
Composite sample or flow proportional sample means a sample consisting of portions of a waste taken in proportion to the volume of flow of said waste. 
Director means the director of public works/city engineer or other authorized representative of the board. 
DNR or WDNR means the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
Domestic wastewater or sanitary sewerage means a combination of liquid and water-carried wastes and wastewater discharged from toilets, conveniences, or other sanitary plumbing facilities, which contain no incompatible pollutants exceeding the limitations set forth in section 40-687(a) and (b) and which contain no substances prohibited by the terms of this article or by the MMSD. 
EPA means the federal Environmental Protection Agency. 
Equivalent meters means the number of equivalent five-eighths-inch water meters and shall be based on the following: 
Meter Size (inches) 	Number of Equivalent 5/8-inch Meters 
5/8	1.0 
¾ 	1.0 
1 	2.5 
1¼ 	3.7 
1½ 	5 
2 	8 
3 	15 
4 	25 
6 	50 
8 	80 
10 	120 
12 	160 
 
Where a user does not have a water meter for measuring the user's water consumption, the director shall estimate the number and size of water meters that would otherwise be required to serve that user, based upon standard engineering practices; and the equivalent meters shall then be determined on this estimate. 
Federal Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972 (33 USC 1251 et seq.), also known as the Federal Clean Water Act or as implemented by Wis. Stats. chs. 280—283 or appropriate sections of the Wisconsin Administrative Code adopted pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 147, as well as any applicable guidelines, limitations and standards promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal act. 
Floatable oil means oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it is properly pretreated and does not interfere with the collection system. 
Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods or from the handling, storage or sale of food products and produce. 
Holding tank waste means the scum, liquid, sludge or other waste from holding tanks such as chemical toilets, campers, trailers, privies, septic tanks and other temporary holding facilities; and includes wastes from a soil absorption field. Such term is synonymous with the term "septage." The term does not include the waste from a grease trap. 
Incompatible pollutant means any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant. 
Industrial discharge or industrial waste means any water-borne solids, liquids or gaseous wastes, other than domestic wastewater, resulting from, discharging from, flowing from or escaping from any industrial user, including, but not limited to, cooling water and discharges from wastewater pretreatment facilities. The term "industrial discharge" or "industrial waste" includes any wastewater which is not sanitary sewage. 
Industrial user means any commercial or industrial user who makes, causes, or permits an industrial discharge into wastewater facilities of the utility or the wastewater facilities of the MMSD located within the corporate boundaries of the city. 
Intercepting sewer or interceptor means any sanitary sewer built or acquired by the utility. 
Interference means a discharge which alone, or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources that: 
(1)  Inhibits or disrupts the MMSD wastewater treatment process or operations of the sludge process, use or disposal; and 
(2)  Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the MMSD's WPDES permit (including any increase in the magnitude or duration of the violation) or of the prevention of the sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder: Section 405 of the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 USC 6901 et seq.), including the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (42 USC 6901 et seq.), the Clean Air Act (42 USC 7401 et seq.), and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act, also known as the Ocean Dumping Act (33 USC 1401 et seq. and 16 USC 1431 et seq.). 
Licensed disposer or licensed hauler means a person holding a license under Wis. Stats. § 281.48(3)). 
MMSD means the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District. 
MMSD intercepting sewer or MMSD interceptor means any sanitary sewer built or acquired by the MMSD. 
National categorical pretreatment standards means any regulation or order containing pollutant discharge limitations as promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Federal Clean Water Act, which limitations apply to one or more specific categories of industrial users. 
New source means any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Federal Clean Water Act, which will be applicable to such source, if such standards are thereafter promulgated provided that: 
(1)  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
(2)  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
(3)  The production or wastewater generating process of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. 
Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature or characteristics of the pollutant properties of the wastewater of a user prior to or in lieu of discharge to a public sewerage system. 
Private sewerage system means a sewerage system which is not owned or operated by the city or the MMSD or any other municipality. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. 
Public sewer or public sewerage system means a sewerage system owned or operated by the utility, MMSD, or other municipality. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, or institutions. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water. 
Sewerage system means all structures, appurtenances, conduits and pipelines by which wastewater is collected and disposed of, including the MMSD wastewater treatment works, except plumbing inside of and in connection with buildings and properties served, and except building sewers. 
Significant industrial contributor means a user that has a discharge flow which: 
(1)  Is greater than 10,000 gallons on any day of the year; 
(2)  Is greater than five percent of the total flow rate or design compatible pollutant loading received at the MMSD wastewater treatment plant and/or is subject to pretreatment standards for incompatible pollutants as defined in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 211 (general pretreatment requirements); or 
(3)  Has been notified in writing by the DNR, the MMSD or the utility that it is necessary to provide information concerning the concentration and quantity of the pollutants discharged. 
Slug load means any substance released at a discharge rate and/or concentration which causes interference to the wastewater treatment processes. 
Standard Methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation and is in compliance with 40 CFR 1346, "Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants," all as amended from time to time. 
Suspended solids (SS) means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "standard methods" and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
Total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) means the quantity of organic nitrogen and ammonia as determined in accordance with 40 CFR 136, or as the EPA otherwise determines. 
Total phosphorus (TP) means the quantity of total phosphorus as determined in accordance with 40 CFR 136, or as the EPA otherwise determines. 
Unpolluted water means water of a quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
User means any person who discharges, or causes to be discharged, domestic wastewater or industrial discharges or any other wastewater into the utility's sewerage system. 
User charge means the charges levied on the utility customers, municipalities and/or users of the wastewater facilities. The user charge is a component of the sewer service charge. 
Utility means the city utility district no. 1. unless preceded by MMSD (Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District). 
Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment and processes designed to collect, carry and treat domestic wastewater and industrial discharges. 
Wastewater parameters includes volume, BOD, suspended solids, actual customers, equivalent meters, and such additional parameters as may from time to time be determined by the utility. 
Wastewater treatment plant means an arrangement of devices and structures for treating domestic wastewater and industrial discharges. Sometimes used as synonymous with the terms "wastewater treatment" or "wastewater treatment works" or "water pollution control works." 
WPDES permit means a permit to discharge pollutants, obtained under the Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (WPDES) pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 147. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.02)  
Sec. 40-601. - Utility territory. 
(a)  Boundaries. The boundaries of the utility are as shown on the utility boundary map dated May 5, 2000, on file in the utility office, as from time to time amended in accordance with this article. 
(b)  Additions. Territory may be added to the utility by action of the common council pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 62.11(5) and 66.0827 after public hearing, review and recommendation of the board and compliance with the requirements of the MMSD. Territory which is not part of the city's urban service area as adopted and approved by the county regional planning shall not be eligible for attachment to the utility or connection to the sewers of the utility or the MMSD. 
(c)  Petition for annexation to utility. A petition for annexation of territory to the utility shall be filed in the office of the director and shall be accompanied by such information as required by the common council and by the board in order to act with respect to such petition. 
(d)  Connection charges and fees to added territory. Territory added to the utility in accordance with this section shall be subject to such connection charges or fees, including fees payable to the MMSD, as the common council and board may from time to time determine and file in the office of the director. Such connection charges or fees shall be paid by the petitioner or customers located in the added territory at such time or times as the board may determine. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.03)  
Sec. 40-602. - Use of revenues; repeal of inconsistent provisions. 
Revenues derived from the application of this article shall be used to defray the utility costs of operating and maintaining adequate wastewater collection and treatment systems and to provide sufficient funds for capital outlay, debt service costs and capital improvements of the utility and the MMSD. This article supersedes any previous ordinance and all prior rules or regulations of the utility or ordinances of the city that are inconsistent herewith. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.01(2))  
Sec. 40-603. - Special assessments. 
When authorized by resolution of the city council, the cost of any utility sewerage system work or improvement may be levied and collected by special assessment against benefitted property pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0703 or chapter 10, article II, division 6, or by connection charge. The allocation of interceptor connection charges shall be in accordance with the "Policy on Establishment and Allocation of Interceptor Connection Charges," an appendix to the city's policies and procedures for special assessments. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.11)  
Secs. 40-604—40-624. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTIONS 
 
Sec. 40-625. - Direct connection to MMSD intercepting sewers. 
Any person desiring to connect property located within the utility directly with any intercepting sewer of the MMSD shall make application to the MMSD commission for permission to make such connection. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.04(1))  
Sec. 40-626. - Connection to utility sewers. 
(a)  Generally. Any person desiring to connect property located within the utility to a utility sewer shall apply to the board for permission to make such connection. The board shall not grant permission for connection where the sewer owned by the utility is not adequately sized to transport the additional flow or the MMSD indicates that the wastewater facilities do not have available capacity. Industrial connections must be pre-approved by the MMSD. 
(b)  Combined sewers. No combined sewers shall be connected to the utility sewers. 
(c)  Application for connection of building sewer to utility sewer. No person shall connect a building sewer to a utility sewer without obtaining a permit as herein provided. Applications for permission to connect a building sewer to a sewer owned by the utility shall be made in writing to the utility. The application shall be made by the owner or the owner's representative and shall include a statement giving the exact location of the premises, the purpose for which the connection is to be used, the time when the work is to be done and such other information as may be required by the board or director. No work of laying the building sewer shall be commenced or continued without the required connection permit being on the premises. At the time of the connection, each building sewer shall be inspected by the plumbing inspector or the utility's designee. Copies of all industrial waste discharge permit applications shall also be approved by the MMSD prior to connection to any utility sewer. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.04(2))  
Sec. 40-627. - Connection of new community sewers to existing utility sewer. 
(a)  Generally. Any developer or builder desiring to construct a sewer which will subsequently be dedicated to the city and connected to an existing utility sewer or MMSD sewer, shall make application for permission to make such connection. No work of laying the proposed community sewer shall be commenced or continued without first obtaining written final approval of the plans and specifications by the director and the required connection permit. The connection permit shall be on the premises or in the hands of a professional engineer licensed to practice in the state at all times during construction. The board shall not grant permission for connection when the capacity of downstream collection is inadequate. 
(b)  Application. An application for permission to construct a new community sewer which will subsequently be dedicated to the city and connected to an existing utility or MMSD sewer shall be made as follows: 
(1)  The application is to be made to the utility in writing by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the state. 
(2)  The application shall describe the location of the requested connection, the character of the wastewater to be transmitted, the time when the work is to be done and such other information as may be required by the board or director; and shall include a statement that the design, construction, operation and maintenance of the system will be subject to the lawful rules and regulations of the board and that all necessary connection charges, as described in section 40-626 shall be paid. 
(3)  The application shall be accompanied by three sets of plans and specifications for the connecting system. The plans and specifications shall be prepared by a professional engineer, licensed to practice in the state and shall conform to state and local plumbing codes and the requirements of the state department of natural resources. 
(4)  Municipal water supply piping may be included in the plans and specifications submitted to the director. All elevations given on the plans submitted to the director shall be based upon datum of the City of Madison, which is 845.6 feet above mean sea level, or United States Geological Survey datum, and all bearings shown shall refer to the true north and south meridian. Every plan submitted shall bear a sign showing the direction of true north in relation to the plan. 
(5)  The plans and specifications shall be submitted to the director. The director shall review said plans and specifications for conformity with all design standards as periodically adopted and approved by rule or regulation of the board. A copy of the design standards as established by rule or regulation of the board shall be on file at all times in the office of the director. 
(6)  The director shall review the plans and specifications for conformity with all ordinances, administrative rules and regulations and for any other matter. The director shall then either approve, conditionally approve or reject the plans and specifications. The applicant shall be informed in writing of the action taken and, if the plans and specifications are approved conditionally or rejected, the conditions of approval or reasons for rejection shall be given in writing. 
(7)  Unless the time is extended by written agreement between the applicant and the director, the director shall complete the action required herein within 90 days of the filing of the plans and specifications. Failure to act within such 90 days shall constitute approval of the plans and specifications by the director. However, in no event shall construction proceed until all required approvals are granted. 
(8)  The director's approval of the plans and specifications and the issuance of the connection permit shall be conditioned upon approval by the MMSD and State of Wisconsin. When plans and specifications have been approved by the director, they shall be transmitted to the MMSD commission according to the MMSD ordinance. Any changes or additions to the plans and specifications which are required by an approving authority, other than the director, shall be submitted by the applicant to the director as said changes or additions are made. 
(c)  Connection fees. All outstanding charges, including special assessments and interest thereon, due against the land for local sewers, interceptors, force mains and lift stations previously installed by the utility, the MMSD or other authority shall be paid in full prior to connecting any community sewer to a utility sewer. In the case of community sewers, all costs of services performed by or on behalf of the district as described in section 40-628(a) shall also be paid prior to connection to a district sewer. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.04(3))  
Sec. 40-628. - Supervision and construction of sewers. 
(a)  Community sewers. 
(1)  Construction of community sewers within the utility shall be under the direction of a professional engineer licensed to practice in the state. Such engineer shall keep accurate records of the location, depth, and length of sewers as built; the number and location of manholes, if any; the location of any "Y" branches or slants; and the location of building sewers. 
(2)  The developer or builder shall be charged for engineering, inspection, consulting and legal services performed by or on behalf of the utility in conjunction with the design, inspection and review of private construction of a proposed community sewer to be subsequently dedicated to the city. Engineering, inspection, consulting and legal fees shall be the actual cost to the utility on the basis of submitted invoices plus twice the actual payroll cost for time spent by employees of the city. Such fees may be determined by the utility. 
(3)  Upon acceptance by the common council of the construction covered by the plans and specifications for the new community sewer, the developer shall furnish to the director digital CADD files in a format suitable to the director, two complete sets of correct prints, and one complete set of correct Mylar reproducibles. 
(4)  In accordance with this article and the provisions of chapter 24, pertaining to land division, the developer shall be responsible for performing replacement or acceptable repairs of any defective workmanship or materials that appear during the one-year guarantee period following completion and acceptance by the council of the project. 
(b)  Building sewers. All building sewers served by the utility shall be constructed and inspected as required by Wis. Admin. Code ch. COMM 82. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.04(4))  
Sec. 40-629. - Records of connection to community sewers. 
Records of building sewer connections or other connections to utility sewers shall be kept by the director and information regarding the same shall be furnished to the MMSD at such times as the MMSD may require. Information to be furnished regarding building sewer connections shall consist of the number of connections for the reporting period, the size of each connection, the nature or character of the user and such additional information as the MMSD may require. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.04(5))  
Sec. 40-630. - Prohibited connections. 
(a)  Septic tanks. No connection shall be made to any utility sewer if the connection pipe is carrying any contents from a septic or holding tank except a septic tank serving as a pretreatment process which has been required or permitted by the MMSD. 
(b)  Building foundation drains. No connection shall be made to any utility wastewater collection facility if the connection pipe is carrying flow from a building foundation drain. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.04(6))  
Sec. 40-631. - Mandatory connections. 
(a)  When required. Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section every owner of a parcel of land within the city shall install, at the owner's expense, suitable plumbing facilities and connect to a utility sewer whenever the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The parcel of land is located within the utility adjacent to a utility sewer; 
(2)  There is located upon such parcel a building or other structure used for human habitation, recreation or occupancy, or for the conduct of any trade, business or industry; and 
(3)  Such building or structure is being served by a private sewage disposal or treatment works. 
Such connection shall be made within 90 days after the date of written notice by the board. As used in this subsection, the term "adjacent" means 50 percent or more of the frontage abuts upon a right-of-way or easement in which is installed a utility sewer. 
(b)  Waiver. The requirement to connect to the public sewer system may be temporarily waived by the board by a unanimous vote of the entire membership upon application of the property owner and a finding by the board that there is no evidence of a condition hazardous to health and that immediate connection would cause the property owner extraordinary hardship and expense. The period of temporary waiver shall be established by the board, but in no event shall a waiver period exceed one year after installation of the sewer adjoining such parcel. The granting of a temporary waiver will not delay the collection of special assessments unless the board so provides. The owner's application for a waiver must be accompanied by proof, in a form acceptable to the board, that the private sewerage system is operating satisfactorily in accordance with all applicable utility, MMSD and state regulations. A temporary waiver grant applies only to the property owner receiving the waiver. In the event ownership of the property is subsequently transferred, the temporary waiver will automatically expire upon such transfer and the new owner must immediately comply with the compulsory connection requirement. 
(c)  Deferred connection of exclusive agricultural lands. Upon application by the owner to the board, lands zoned for exclusive agricultural use or for which a farmland preservation agreement has been recorded as provided in Wis. Stats. ch. 91 (farmland preservation), shall be granted a compulsory connection waiver. This waiver shall remain in effect only so long as the property is either zoned for exclusively agricultural use or is covered by a recorded agricultural use or is covered by a recorded farmland preservation agreement. 
(d)  Waiver not to negate other requirements. The provisions of this section do not abrogate or alleviate the need for compliance with any other connection requirements that may be imposed by the state or the MMSD. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.04(7))  
Sec. 40-632. - Connection charge. 
For each connection made to the public sewage system, there shall be paid to the utility a connection charge as provided in section 40-627(c). Any person failing to pay such charge shall be subject to the penalties provided in article IV, division 2 of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.04(8))  
Secs. 40-633—40-652. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CHARGES AND BILLING 
 
Sec. 40-653. - General service charges; annual adjustment. 
(a)  Service charges to each utility customer shall be based on the quantity and quality of wastewater discharged by the customer to the utility sewers and on the size of the water meter(s) serving that user, as from time to time established by the board as listed in the city's fee schedule in accordance with wastewater parameters established by the MMSD. 
(b)  Sewer service charges shall consist of MMSD user charges and debt service rates and utility user charges and debt service charges in accordance with the city's fee schedule, such that each customer will bear its proportionate share of the costs of administration, operation, maintenance and debt service of all wastewater collection and treatment services provided by the utility and the MMSD. 
(c)  The sewer rates will be adjusted yearly to reflect an increase or decrease in rates charged by the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District (MMSD). The adjustment will be effective for service rendered on or after December 15 of the year of the adjustment. The utility will provide notice to its customers of such charges in rates resulting from application of the purchased treatment adjustment. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.08(1))  
Sec. 40-654. - Service charge rates for domestic strength users. 
(a)  Service charges to each domestic strength user shall be determined and billed in accordance with the size of the water meters serving the user and the quantity of water used, as determined from regular water meter readings. The unit volume charge shall be derived from computations that allocate costs of collection and treatment on the basis of wastewater characteristics, including volume, CBOD, SS, TKN, and TP as supplied by the MMSD. 
(b)  As used in this section, "domestic strength" is defined as concentrations of/or less than the following: 
(1)  200 mg/l of CBOD (biochemical oxygen demand). 
(2)  250 mg/l of SS (suspended solids). 
(3)  40 mg/l of TKN (total Kjeldahl nitrogen). 
(4)  10 mg/l of TP (total phosphorus). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.08(2))  
Sec. 40-655. - Service charge rates for high strength users. 
Sewer service charges to each user with sewerage discharges in excess of domestic strength set forth in section 40-654 shall be calculated and billed on the basis of the measured quantity and quality of the wastewater discharged, taking into account the wastewater characteristics set forth in section 40-654, and on the size of the water meters serving the user. Wastes higher than normal domestic strength will be surcharged in accordance with the city's fee schedule. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.08(3))  
Sec. 40-656. - Service charge rate adjustments. 
Sewer service charge rates shall be reviewed by the board at least annually and be adjusted by the board whenever necessary to meet the utility cost of administration, operation, maintenance and debt service. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.08(4))  
Sec. 40-657. - Sewer service charge calculations. 
Sewer service charges for each utility customer shall be calculated based on the quantity and quality of wastewater contributed by such customer, as determined by the board, the number of actual customers and the equipment needed to provide service within the utility and such additional wastewater parameters as are established by the board. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.08(5))  
Sec. 40-658. - Biennial audit. 
The utility shall review, at least every two years, the wastewater contributions of its sewer users, the operation, maintenance, and replacement expenses of the wastewater collection facilities, and the sewer service charge system. Based on this review, the municipality shall revise the sewer service charge system, if necessary, to accomplish the following: 
(1)  Maintain a proportionate distribution of operation, maintenance, and replacement expenses among sewer users based on the wastewater volume and pollutant loadings discharged by the users; 
(2)  Generate sufficient revenues to pay the operation, maintenance, and replacement expenses of the wastewater collection facilities; and 
(3)  Apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the operation, maintenance, and replacement expenses attributable to that class of users for the next year and adjust the sewer service charge rates accordingly. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.08(6))  
Sec. 40-659. - Annual notification of sewer rates. 
The utility shall notify its sewer users annually of the sewer service charge rates. The notification shall show what portions of the rates are attributable to the operation, maintenance, replacement, and debt service costs of the wastewater collection facilities. The notification shall occur in conjunction with the regular bill or public notice in the official newspaper. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.08(7))  
Sec. 40-660. - Utility operation, maintenance and replacement accounts. 
All sewer service charge revenues collected for replacement costs shall be deposited in a separate and distinct fund to be used solely for replacement costs of the sewer collection system, including pump stations. All sewer service charge revenues collected for other operation and maintenance expenses shall also be deposited in a separate and distinct fund. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.08(8))  
Sec. 40-661. - Special charges. 
Whenever any user discharges waste into the utility sewers or sewerage system which causes physical damage to the utility wastewater facilities or which causes the utility to incur unusual additional costs, the utility may assess a special charge against such user for the work required to repair the facilities or to recover the unusual additional cost. Special charges shall be in addition to the service charges levied under this division and shall be billed directly to the user. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.09)  
Sec. 40-662. - Billing and collection. 
(a)  Billing and due date. Sewer service charges of the utility shall be billed quarterly, unless circumstances require delayed billing. Charges are due on or before 20 days of the date of issuance of the bill. Connection fees and other special charges not included in the service billing shall be billed as incurred and due within 20 days of billing. 
(b)  Late payment. A late payment charge of one percent per month, compounded monthly, will be added to bills not paid within 20 days of the date of the bill. 
(c)  Collection of delinquent payments. In addition to all other methods provided by law, delinquent payments may be collected as a special tax against the property served in the manner provided by Wis. Stats. § 66.0821. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.10)  
Secs. 40-663—40-682. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - USE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 40-683. - Prohibited waste disposal methods. 
(a)  Land disposal of nonfarm waste prohibited. No person shall place, deposit, spread or permit to be placed, deposited or spread on public or private property within the utility or any area under the jurisdiction of the utility any human or nonfarm animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. This does not prohibit the disposal of sewage sludge in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 204. 
(b)  Discharge into natural outlets prohibited. No person shall discharge to any natural outlet within the utility in any area under the jurisdiction of the utility any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with this article and all applicable federal, state and local statutes, ordinances and regulations. 
(c)  Privies, cesspools, etc., prohibited. No person shall construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, cesspool, holding tank or similar facility within the utility. Any such privy, privy vault, cesspool, holding tank or similar facility in existence at the time the provisions of this article with respect of mandatory connection to the utility sewers becomes effective shall be abandoned and filled in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code § COMM 83.33. Septic tanks and other similar effluent absorption systems may be constructed and maintained only as provided in article IV, division 1 of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.12)  
Sec. 40-684. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall discharge wastes to a utility sewer or MMSD intercepting sewer which cause or are capable of causing, either alone or in combination with other substances: 
(1)  A fire or explosion; 
(2)  Obstruction of flow or damage to the wastewater facilities; 
(3)  Danger to life or safety or welfare of persons; 
(4)  Air pollution as defined in Wis. Stats. § 144.01(1), as amended from time to time, and any regulations or orders of any regulatory agency issued thereunder; 
(5)  Prevention of effective maintenance or operation of the wastewater facilities; 
(6)  Any product of the utility treatment processes or any of the utility residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with reclamation processes; 
(7)  A detrimental environmental impact, a nuisance, or any condition unacceptable to any public agency having regulatory jurisdiction over the utility; 
(8)  Any sanitary sewer or the utility wastewater facilities to be overloaded; 
(9)  In the opinion of the director, excessive utility collection and treatment costs, or use of a disproportionate share of the utility facilities; 
(10)  Cause the utility to violate its WPDES permit. 
(b)  Specific. Prohibited discharges shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; 
(2)  Any wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction or in combination with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a danger to humans, flora or fauna, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the MMSD wastewater treatment plant; 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 10.0, or having other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, or treatment works personnel of the utility or MMSD; 
(4)  Solids or viscous substances including, but not limited to, such substances as ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, improperly shredded garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, cups, mill containers, either whole or ground by garbage grinders; 
(5)  Any wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fats or greases; 
(6)  Any wastewater which contains organo-sulfur or organo-phosphate pesticides, herbicides or fertilizers. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.05(1))  
Sec. 40-685. - Storm drainage and groundwater discharge restricted. 
(a)  Unpolluted waters. Stormwater, groundwater, rain water, street drainage, roof runoff or subsurface drainage shall not be discharged into utility sewers without prior approval by the director and the MMSD or into MMSD intercepting sewers without prior approval by the MMSD. Such approval shall be granted only when no reasonable alternative method of disposal is available. 
(b)  Polluted stormwater. Polluted stormwater runoff from limited areas may be discharged to a utility sewer upon approval by the director and the MMSD director, payment of applicable charges and fees and compliance with conditions required by the board and the MMSD. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.05(2))  
Sec. 40-686. - Prohibition of unpolluted waters. 
Unpolluted water, including, but not limited to: cooling water, process water or blow-down from cooling towers or evaporative coolers, shall not be discharged into utility sewers without prior approval of the board and the MMSD, or into intercepting sewers without prior approval of the MMSD. Such approval shall be granted when no reasonable alternative method of disposal is available and upon payment of applicable charges and fees and compliance with conditions as required by the board and MMSD. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.05(3))  
Sec. 40-687. - Limitations on discharge characteristics. 
(a)  Limitations related to treatment plant influent. Discharge to the utility sewerage system of the following described substances, materials, waters or waste shall be limited to the following concentrations or quantities, provided such concentrations or quantities will not harm the utility or MMSD sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment; will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; will not have an adverse effect on the MMSD sludge management program; will not endanger persons or property; will not cause air pollution or other detrimental environmental effects; and will not constitute a nuisance: 
(1)  Liquid having a temperature higher than 65 degrees Celsius (149 degrees Fahrenheit) or any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the utility treatment plant, thereby resulting in interference. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no case shall wastewater be discharged having a temperature that causes the to the utility treatment plant to exceed 40 degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit), unless the MMSD director certifies that the treatment plant is designed to accommodate such temperature; 
(2)  Wax, grease, oil, plastic or any other substance that solidifies or becomes discernibly viscous; 
(3)  Radioactive wastes which, alone or with other wastes, result in releases greater than those specified by current United States Bureau of Standards Handbooks, or which violate rules or regulations of any applicable regulatory agency; 
(4)  Wastewater containing more than 50 milligrams per liter of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or products of mineral oil origin; 
(5)  Wastewater containing more than 300 mg/l of oil or grease of animal or vegetable origin; 
(6)  Wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation; 
(7)  Wastewater which contains in excess of any of the following constituents in a 24-hour flow proportionate sample made up of an aggregate of the total discharge from all of the outfalls of the industrial user: 
a.  0.25 mg/l cadmium; 
b.  0.5 mg/l hexavalent chromium; 
c.  10.0 mg/l total chromium; 
d.  10.5 mg/l copper; 
e.  5.0 mg/lead; 
f.  0.02 mg/l mercury; 
g.  0.3 mg/l selenium; 
h.  3.0 mg/l silver; 
i.  8.0 mg/l zinc; 
j.  2.0 mg/l nickel; 
k.  0.1 mg/l cyanide. 
Samples shall be collected over the period of discharge if the discharge is less than 24 hours in duration. 
(8)  Industrial discharges exceeding applicable national categorical pretreatment standards, or state standards; 
(9)  Any substance with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solution; 
(10)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair; or 
(11)  Any discharge prohibited or limited by the MMSD by alteration, amendment or modification of the limitations established in section 5.2.1 of the MMSD ordinance determined by the board to be necessary to meet the objectives of this article or the conditions of the MMSD's WPDES permit. 
(b)  Discharge into utility sewerage system prohibited. No person shall cause or permit a discharge into the utility sewerage system that would cause, or significantly contribute to, either directly or indirectly, a violation of the conditions of the MMSD's WPDES permit and any modification or re-issuance thereof. 
(c)  Limitations superceded. Upon promulgation of National Categorical Pretreatment Standards for a particular industrial user subcategory, the federal standards (if more stringent than the limitations imposed under this article) shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article; and such industrial user shall comply with the said federal standards upon notification by MMSD of the applicable requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.05(4))  
Sec. 40-688. - No dilution of industrial discharge. 
Dilution of an industrial discharge for purposes of reducing the pollutant characteristics or concentrations to below the limitations established in this section, or below other applicable pretreatment standards, is prohibited. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.05(5))  
Sec. 40-689. - Accidental discharge of prohibited wastewater. 
Any person who accidentally discharges into the utility sewerage system wastes or wastewater prohibited under this article shall immediately report such a discharge to the director and the MMSD. Such report shall describe the location, time and volume of the discharge, and the type of waste or wastewater discharged. Within 15 days of such discharge, a detailed written statement describing the cause of the discharge and the measure taken to prevent a future occurrence shall be submitted to the director and the MMSD. Such reporting shall not relieve the person causing the accidental discharge from any penalties imposed by this article. Where the director or MMSD deems necessary, industrial users shall provide facilities to prevent accidental discharges or spills of wastes or wastewater prohibited under this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.05(6))  
Sec. 40-690. - Alternatives to acceptance of wastewater. 
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the utility sewers, in excess of those limitations enumerated in section 40-687(a) and (b), the board shall, as directed by the MMSD: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment; 
(3)  Control the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)  Recover the increased costs of handling and treating such wastes. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.05(7))  
Sec. 40-691. - Industrial discharges. 
Industrial users shall comply with the provisions of sections 5.5 through 5.8 of the MMSD Sewer Use Ordinance No. 84-001 and all amendments thereto. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.05(8))  
Sec. 40-692. - Sand and grease trap installations. 
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be installed at repair garages, gasoline stations, car washes, and other industrial or commercial establishments, where necessary in the opinion of the board or MMSD to prevent discharge of sand, flammable wastes, oil or grease in amounts exceeding the limits of this section. All such traps shall be constructed and maintained by the owner at the owner's expense, in accordance with the state plumbing code and the specifications of the director, and shall be readily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.05(9))  
Secs. 40-693—40-712. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - MEASUREMENT AND SAMPLING 
 
Sec. 40-713. - Monitoring of wastewater. 
Wastewater characteristics and constituents shall be monitored to determine compliance with this article and the ordinance of the MMSD and to facilitate and equitable system of service charges. New users planning to discharge industrial waste shall submit a request to discharge form to the director and to MMSD at least 60 days prior to the planned discharge. 
(1)  New users. 
a.  A new user who expects to discharge, or who is capable of discharging wastewater having constituents or characteristics different from domestic wastewater shall install a monitoring facility. 
b.  Existing users planning to add to or change their industrial waste discharge shall submit a request to discharge form to the director and to MMSD at least 60 days prior to the planned discharge. 
(2)  Existing users. An existing user whose discharges are different from domestic wastewater may be required by the district to install a monitoring facility. Construction of such facility shall be completed within 90 days after the user has been notified in writing by the board, unless the board and the MMSD grant an extension of time. 
(3)  Voluntary monitoring. In addition to those required to monitor, any user who so desires may install and operate monitoring facilities and report its wastewater characteristics for billing purposed in accordance with this article. 
(4)  Monitoring facilities. All monitoring facilities shall be constructed at the owner's expense in accordance with plans approved by the board and the MMSD. The monitoring facility shall contain the necessary flow monitoring and sampling equipment to facilitate the observation, sampling and measurement of wastes and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(5)  Waiver. The requirements of subsections (1), (2) and (4) of this section may be waived only by special written permission of the MMSD director and the board. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.07(1))  
Sec. 40-714. - Inspections. 
(a)  Access for inspection, observation, measurement, etc. Agents of the utility or of the MMSD shall be allowed access to all monitoring facilities and property served by the utility for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing of discharges to the utility sewers and MMSD wastewater facilities; or for the purpose of inspection of records kept by industrial users relating to pretreatment requirements or reporting thereof. 
(b)  Agents to bear credentials. Agents of the utility exercising authority under this subsection shall bear proper credentials and identification. 
(c)  What information to constitute public record. Any effluent data submitted or supplied to the utility by any person or user is a public record within the meaning of Wis. Stats. § 19.21. All other information submitted to the utility shall be a public record unless the information is entitled to confidential treatment pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 283.55 and Wis. Admin. Code § NR 2.19. The utility may require any industrial user to provide information about industrial processes which may have an effect on the nature or composition of the industrial discharge and such information will be kept confidential if the requirements of the aforesaid statutes and administrative rule are satisfied. Any information or data obtained by the utility which is confidential or constitutes a trade secret shall not be disclosed to unauthorized persons. 
(d)  Surveys. In accordance with Wis. Stats. § 200.11 and this article, the MMSD director or his/her authorized or employees shall be permitted to enter upon any lands in the utility for the purpose of making surveys or examinations. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.07(2))  
Sec. 40-715. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  User information. In order to carry out its responsibilities under this article, or the ordinances, rules and regulations of the MMSD, the director may require a user to provide information concerning, but not limited to: 
(1)  Volume, time and peak rate of discharges; 
(2)  Chemical analysis of discharges; 
(3)  Raw materials, processes and products relevant to discharge characteristics; 
(4)  Discharges of specific wastes such as sludge, oil, solvent, oil, or incompatible pollutants; 
(5)  Plot plans of sewers on the user's property showing locations of sewers, monitoring facilities, and pretreatment facilities; 
(6)  Details of pretreatment facilities; and 
(7)  Details of systems to prevent losses of materials through spills to the utility sewers. 
(b)  Reports of discharges requiring pretreatment. If any significant industrial user discharges any incompatible pollutants which require pretreatment prior to the discharge to the utility sewage system, the quality and quantity of the discharge shall be reported to the MMSD and the utility quarterly by March 15, June 15, September 15, and December 15. 
(c)  Measurement and testing standards. All measurements and test analyses of the characteristics of wastewater shall be determined or performed in accordance with "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" and/or established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(h) of the Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1314, and contained in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto, or with any other test procedures approved by the EPA. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the EPA. Where 40 CFR 136 does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the EPA publication, "Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents or Priority Pollutants, April 1977," and analytical procedures approved by the EPA. 
(d)  Reports to be signed. Any reports required to be submitted by an industrial user pursuant to the provisions of this article, shall be signed by the authorized representative of such user. The authorized representative shall be the chief operating officer of such user if a corporation, or a partner of such user if a partnership, or the sole owner of such user if a sole proprietorship. 
(e)  Reporting period. The reporting period shall not include the 30 days immediately preceding the day the report is due. All analyses shall be done on representative 24-hour composite samples taken during a typical operating day. 
(f)  Retention of user records. Each industrial user shall retain and preserve for no less than three years any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence, and other information relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analysis made by or on behalf of the industrial user in connection with its industrial discharge. All such records pertaining to matters which are the subject of any enforcement proceedings under this article or the subject of any litigation involving the utility or the MMSD shall be retained and preserved by the industrial user until such proceedings or litigation have been finally concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to appeals therefrom have expired. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.07(3))  
Secs. 40-716—40-743. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - DISCHARGE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 40-744. - Discharge into community sewers. 
No person, including a licensed disposer, may discharge any holding tank wastes or any other liquid, gaseous or solid wastes determined by the director to be detrimental to the public sewerage system or to utility employees or to the process of sewage treatment, directly into a manhole or other opening in a public sewer, unless such person has been issued a permit for such discharge by the MMSD, which permit has been approved by the board. Such permit shall state the location, volume and characteristics of the discharge. The director shall record and report the volume and nature of all such discharges to the MMSD quarterly. The person making the discharge shall pay a charge or fee, based on the characteristics of the discharge. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.06(1))  
Sec. 40-745. - Limitations on discharge of holding tank wastes and other wastes. 
Any holding tank waste or other waste permitted to be discharged under this section shall be of domestic origin or contain compatible pollutants only. The person or licensed disposer making the discharge shall comply with the provisions of any and all applicable rules including this article. Without intending to limit the application of other provisions of this article, such person or licensed disposer shall not deposit or drain any gasoline, oil, acid, alkali, grease, rags, volatile or flammable liquids or other deleterious substances into any manhole, utility or MMSD sewer; nor shall such person or licensed disposer allow any grease, earth, sand or other solid materials to pass into any part of the utility or MMSD sewerage system; nor shall such person or licensed disposer discharge any liquid, gaseous or solid wastes determined by the director to be detrimental to the sewerage system or to the utility employees or to the process of sewage treatment. No discharges shall be permitted directly into any utility or MMSD interceptor sewers unless the MMSD so authorizes. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.06(2))  
Sec. 40-746. - Permits to discharge holding tank wastes. 
(a)  Permit application, term. No person or licensed disposer shall discharge wastes described in section 40-744 or 40-745 directly into the utility sewers unless the person or licensed disposer making the discharge has been issued a permit by the director. All applications for a permit shall be in writing; shall contain such information as the director deems appropriate; and shall be submitted to the director no later than September 1 of each year. No permit shall be issued without prior approval of the MMSD director. No permit once issued shall be assignable or transferrable by the person receiving the same. Permits shall be valid for a period of one year, beginning on October 1 of the year of issuance and expiring on September 30 of the succeeding year. No holder of a holding tank waste disposition permit shall acquire any vested right or privilege by reason thereof. This section does not permit connection of building sewers carrying septic or holding tank wastes to utility sewers. 
(b)  Permit conditions. If the director and/or the MMSD director determine to issue a permit, such permit may be issued upon such terms and conditions as the issuers may provide; but any such permit shall provide at a minimum the following: 
(1)  The permit shall be conditioned upon the holder's faithful compliance with the provisions of this article and the MMSD sewer use ordinance, as amended from time to time, and any other applicable ordinances of the city. 
(2)  The agreement of the holder thereof to indemnify the MMSD, the utility and the city from and against any and all liability for injury or damage arising out of or related to the activities of holder in exercising the rights granted. The board may require the holder of such permit to post a bond written by a bonding company, licensed to transact business in the state, to guarantee performance of the holder thereunder. 
(3)  Evidence that the holder thereof has in full force and effect sufficient worker's compensation insurance, public liability and property damage insurance. 
(c)  Fee. In the event the director issues a permit under this section, the board may require the applicant to pay an annual fee in such reasonable amount as it may determine as a condition precedent to the issuance of such permit. 
(d)  Summary revocation. Any permit issued under this division may be summarily revoked by the board for violation of the terms or conditions thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.06(3))  
Sec. 40-747. - Special provisions applicable to licensed disposers. 
Any licensed disposer making application for a permit to discharge holding tank wastes into the utility sewers under section 40-746 shall, in addition to complying with all provisions of section 40-746, comply with the following provisions which shall be deemed incorporated into any permit issued to such disposer: 
(1)  The utility shall have the right to reject and refuse to accept holding tank wastes from the licensed disposer if: 
a.  Treatment of the waste would cause the utility or MMSD's sewerage systems to exceed its operating design capacity or to violate any applicable effluent limitations or standards, water quality standards or any other legally applicable requirements, including court orders or MMSD, state or federal statutes, rules, regulations or orders; 
b.  The waste is not compatible with the utility or MMSD's sewerage systems; 
c.  The licensed disposer has not applied for and received a permit under this section to dispose of the waste or the licensed disposer fails to comply with the permit so issued; 
d.  The licensed disposer fails to comply with waste disposal rules promulgated from time to time by the MMSD or the board; or 
e.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this subsection, the licensed disposer may discharge wastes offered for disposal which are not within the prohibitions set forth in subsections (1)a through d of this section. 
(2)  Reasonable terms and conditions for holding tank waste disposal imposed by the board or MMSD relating to the following: 
a.  Specific quantities, locations, times and methods for discharge of such wastes into the utility sewers; 
b.  Requirements to report the source and amount of such wastes placed in the utility sewers; and 
c.  Requirements that the licensed disposer analyze representative samples of the waste placed in the utility sewers in order to determine the characteristics of the waste and the compatibility of the waste with the utility and MMSD's sewerage system. Analysis of such waste from exclusively residential sources shall not be required. 
(3)  If the utility sewers can accept some, but not all, of the holding tank wastes offered for disposal, the director may accept such waste which is generated within the geographic boundaries of the utility before accepting such wastes which are generated outside of the boundaries of the utility. 
(4)  Provided the conditions of this section are satisfied, the director shall grant to a licensed disposer a permit to discharge holding tank wastes. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.06(4))  
Sec. 40-748. - Penalty for violation. 
See forfeiture/bond/deposit schedule for penalties for any person or licensed disposer violating the terms or conditions of a permit issued under this section or using or permitting the use of the utility sewers for a use for which a permit may be issued under this division without first obtaining a permit or continuing such use after notice of revocation of a permit. All forfeitures recovered by the city under this section shall be paid into the general account of the commission for the benefit of the utility. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.06(5))  
Secs. 40-749—40-779. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - SPECIAL ORDERS, APPEALS AND PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 40-780. - Special orders. 
In the event of any known or threatened violation of the provisions of this article or any other rule or regulation promulgated by the board , the director may issue a special order in the name of the city directing the person causing or responsible for the violation to comply with such ordinance, rule or regulation within a specified time. All special orders shall be in writing and shall specifically state what action is required to comply with the order. Service and proof of service of any special order shall be made in the manner provided for service of summons in the county circuit court. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.21(1)  
Sec. 40-781. - Emergency orders. 
The director, city plumbing inspector or other person designated in writing by the board is hereby authorized and empowered to issue special orders in the name of the utility in an emergency to prevent damage to the utility sewers from misuse; injury to employees of the utility; interference with the process of sewage collection, treatment or disposal; or substantial risk to the public health, safety and welfare. A special order is effective and enforceable upon service. Service shall be made as provided in section 40-780. Special orders shall be in writing and shall specifically state the action required, and the time allowed for compliance. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.21(2))  
Sec. 40-782. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by a special or emergency order may secure a review of such order by filing a written notice of appeal with the board within 30 days of the date of the order appealed stating the grounds of the appeal and attaching a copy of the order appealed. The procedure on appeal shall be as set forth in sections 40-783 through 40-786. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.21(3))  
Sec. 40-783. - Notice of hearing. 
The executive secretary of the board shall schedule a public hearing on the appeal to be held within 30 days of the filing of the notice of the appeal. The executive secretary shall mail notice of the time scheduled for consideration of the appeal to the appellant at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.21(3)(A))  
Sec. 40-784. - Conduct of hearing. 
In the case of appeals from orders of the city engineer or plumbing inspector, the appeal shall be conducted as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 68.11 and 68.12. In the case of an appeal from an order of the board, the review shall be conducted as provided in Wis. Stats. § 68.09. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.21(3)(B))  
Sec. 40-785. - Decision. 
Within 30 days of the appeal hearing the board shall affirm, modify or reverse the action or decision appealed. Written notice of the board's decision shall be mailed to the applicant. In the case of appeals from orders of the city engineer or plumbing inspector, the board's decision shall be final. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.21(3)(C))  
Sec. 40-786. - Appeal to zoning board of appeals. 
Any person objecting to the decision of the commission on review of a board order may appeal to the city zoning board of appeals by filing written notice with the secretary of such board within 14 days of the date when notice of the final decision of the board is mailed. 
(1)  The notice of appeal shall be in writing and shall state the action appealed from, shall attach a copy of the board's written notice of decision and shall specify why the appellant believes said action was inappropriate or incorrect. The notice shall be accompanied by the fee established pursuant to chapter 22 for appeal to the zoning board of appeals. 
(2)  The secretary of the zoning board shall file the notice of appeal with such zoning board and shall schedule the appeal for consideration at a meeting open to the public within 15 days of the filing of the notice unless extended by written agreement of the appellant and the board. The written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to the appellant and to the board of public works. 
(3)  The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 68.11 and 68.12. 
(4)  The decision of the zoning board of appeals on appeal shall be in writing and state the reasons therefor and shall be a final determination as provided in Wis. Stats. § 68.12. A concurring vote of all members of the zoning board is necessary to reverse any order, requirement or decision of the board. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.21(3)(D))  
Sec. 40-787. - Stay of order during appeal. 
Except when the board or the zoning board shall determine, on application, and on notice to the appellant and the board, that a stay of the order will cause imminent danger to life or health, the order shall be stayed during the pendency of the appeal. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.21(4))  
Secs. 40-788—40-812. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 40-813. - When allowed. 
Where a utility sanitary sewer is not available within the city, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this article and the state plumbing code as adopted by section 40-21 and with all federal, state and local statutes, ordinances and regulations. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.13(1))  
Sec. 40-814. - Permits required. 
Before starting construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the county sanitarian and a written permit signed by the county sanitarian and a written permit signed by the city plumbing inspector. Application for such permit shall be made on forms furnished by the county environmental health department and the plumbing inspector. The applicant shall supplement application by any plans, specifications, and other information required by the sanitarian or plumbing inspector. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.13(2))  
Sec. 40-815. - Approval required prior to use. 
No person shall use a private wastewater disposal system for disposal of wastewater until the installation is approved by the county sanitarian and the plumbing inspector, who shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of the construction. The applicant for the permit shall notify the sanitarian and the plumbing inspector when the work is ready for final inspection before any underground portions are covered. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.13(3))  
Sec. 40-816. - Holding tanks prohibited for new construction. 
Except as provided hereunder, no person shall on or after September 24, 1980, construct or install a holding tank or any similar facility to serve any building constructed within the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.13(4)(A))  
Sec. 40-817. - Holding tanks for existing buildings only where necessary to prevent health and safety problems. 
Installation of holding tanks to serve any building in existence on September 24, 1980, may be permitted only in accordance with the following procedure and conditions: 
(1)  Permit required. A person desiring to install a holding tank system to serve a building which existed on September 24, 1980, shall file with the city clerk an application for a holding tank permit along with a nonrefundable application in accordance with the city's fee schedule. The application shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, and shall contain the name and address of the applicant, the name and address of the owner of the property, the location of the proposed holding tank and buildings to be served thereby and a complete explanation as to why the installation of a holding tank is necessary to prevent health and safety problems. 
(2)  Review of application. The city clerk shall forward the application to the board for consideration and report to the city council. Upon receiving the report of the board, the common council shall approve, conditionally approve or reject the application. One copy of the application shall be returned to the applicant with written notification endorsed thereon of the council's action and the date thereof. If approved conditionally or rejected, the conditions of approval or reasons for rejection shall be attached thereto. 
(3)  Proof of council approval; pumping/maintenance agreement and escrow fund required before permit issuance. No holding tank permit shall be issued until the applicant files with the city clerk the following items: 
a.  Proof of common council approval; and if, conditionally approved, proof that the conditions have been satisfied; 
b.  A properly executed holding tank pumping/maintenance agreement satisfactory to the city attorney which shall be binding on the applicant and the owner of the premises and on their successors, heirs and assigns. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.13(4)(B))  
Sec. 40-818. - Term of permit and agreement. 
The term of the holding tank permit and pumping/maintenance agreement shall be for such period as specified by the city council; provided, however, that the permit may be rescinded or revoked by the council, after notice and hearing upon a determination that any of the provisions of this article or conditions imposed on the permit have been violated or, at any time, if the use of the property is discontinued for a period of 12 months. The permit and the obligations and conditions of the accompanying agreement shall automatically transfer during the term of the permit to any successors or assigns of the applicant. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.13(4)(C))  
Sec. 40-819. - Exception and waiver. 
(a)  Where in the judgment of the common council it would be inappropriate to strictly apply the provisions of this article because extraordinary or undue hardship would result, the council may allow holding tanks which would otherwise be prohibited by this section or waive or modify the requirements of this article to the extent deemed just and proper. 
(b)  Relief shall be granted under subsection (a) of this section only where it will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare and is necessary to remedy a situation where extraordinary or undue hardship would otherwise occur. A unanimous vote of the entire membership of the common council is required to grant any such exception or waiver. No waiver shall be granted to any property within the utility which can be served by utility sewers. 
(c)  Any exception or waiver which is granted pursuant to this article shall be made in writing and shall state the reasons therefor and conditions of such exception or waiver. The common council may require an agreement as a condition of granting an exception or waiver. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.13(4)(D))  
Sec. 40-820. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
Nothing set forth in this article shall be construed as or is intended to be a waiver or release of any other agreements, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, where this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall govern. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.13(4)(E))  
Sec. 40-821. - Connection to public sewer. 
At such time as public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, a connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article and any septic tanks, holding tanks and other similar private effluent absorption systems shall be abandoned and filled in accordance with the provisions of state plumbing code. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.13(5))  
Sec. 40-822. - Operation and maintenance of private disposal facilities. 
The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city or the utility. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.13(6))  
Sec. 40-823. - Applicability of utility and county regulations. 
Nothing contained in this article shall interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the county environmental health department, the state or the district. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.13(7))  
Secs. 40-824—40-854. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 40-855. - Falsifying of information. 
No person shall knowingly make any false statement, representation, record, commission or report, plan, or other document filed with the utility, the board or the MMSD, or falsify, tamper with or knowingly render inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article or MMSD Sewer Use Ordinance No. 84-001. Any person who violates this provision shall be subject to the penalties imposed under this division. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.14)  
Sec. 40-856. - Enforcement authority. 
This article shall be enforced by the board and the director. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.20(1))  
Sec. 40-857. - Penalties for violations. 
See forfeiture/bond/deposit schedule for penalties for any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this article or any rule, order or special order of the board or of the plumbing inspector. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.20(2))  
Sec. 40-858. - Violation constitutes a public nuisance. 
Any violation of the provisions of this article or any other rule, regulation or special order promulgated by the board shall constitute a public nuisance subject to injunction and abatement in accordance with the procedures of Wis. Stats. § 823.02. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.20(3))  
Sec. 40-859. - Restitution. 
Any person found in violation of this article or any other rule, regulation or special order shall pay to the utility such damages, losses or expenses as may be sustained by the utility as the result of the violation, together with such costs as may be collectible by law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.20(4))  
Sec. 40-860. - Remedies cumulative. 
The remedies provided by this division shall be in addition to all other remedies provided by this article or by any other law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.20(5))  
Sec. 40-861. - Duty of city attorney to prosecute. 
It shall be the duty of the city attorney, upon receipt of competent evidence from the director or plumbing inspector that a violation of this article constitutes a threat to the public health and safety, to commence an action in the county circuit court to abate such violation and nuisance. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.20(6))  
Sec. 40-862. - Notice of violation. 
Whenever, the director or plumbing inspector shall determine that a violation of any provision of this article or any rule or regulation promulgated by the board has occurred or is threatened, the director or plumbing inspector shall give written notice to the violator or other responsible person for stating the nature of the violation and the required remedy. Such notice may be in the form of a special order as provided in article III, division 7 of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.20(7))  
Sec. 40-863. - Emergency suspension of service to industrial users. 
The board may suspend wastewater treatment service to an industrial user whenever it appears to the board that an actual or threatened industrial discharge presents or threatens an imminent or substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons; a substantial danger to the environment; an interference with the operation of the MMSD wastewater treatment plant; or violates any pretreatment limits imposed by this article. The board shall notify such industrial user in the event of a determination to suspend wastewater treatment service hereunder and such user shall cease all such discharges as soon as practicable. Actions under this subsection shall be implemented by issuance of special orders under article III, division 7 of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 9.20(8))  
Secs. 40-864—40-889. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - STORMWATER UTILITY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 40-890. - Introduction. 
(a)  Authority. This article is adopted under the authority granted by Wis. Stats. chs. 62 and 66, including but not limited to Wis. Stats. §§ 62.04, 62.11, 62.16, 62.175, 62.18, 66.0621, 66.0809, 66.0811, and 66.0821. 
(b)  Findings and purpose. The city finds that the management of stormwater and other surface water discharges within and beyond the city is a matter that affects the health, safety, and welfare of the city, its citizens and businesses, and others in the surrounding area. Failure to effectively manage stormwater affects the sanitary sewer utility operations of the city by, among other things, increasing the likelihood of infiltration and inflow into the sanitary sewer system. Surface water runoff may cause erosion of lands, threaten residences and businesses with water damage, and create environmental damage to the streams and other water bodies within and adjacent to the city. The cost of operating and maintaining the city stormwater management system and financing the necessary repairs, replacements, improvements, and extensions thereof should, to the extent practicable, be allocated in relationship to the impact on and services received from the system. In order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, the city hereby exercises its authority to establish a stormwater utility and establish the rates for stormwater management services. 
(c)  Applicability. This article applies to all parcels within the incorporated boundaries of the city. 
(d)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or interfere with any existing easement, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations, ordinances or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, wherever this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall govern. 
(e)  Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be liberally construed in favor of the city and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by state law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 35.01) 
State Law reference— Intent and construction of general charter law, Wis. Stats. § 62.04; common council, Wis. Stats. § 62.11; street grades and service pipes, Wis. Stats. § 62.16; sewer and water extensions in certain municipalities, Wis. Stats. § 62.175; municipal sewers, Wis. Stats. § 62.18; municipal revenue obligations, Wis. Stats. § 66.0621; municipal public utility charges, Wis. Stats. § 66.0809; municipal public utility revenues, Wis. Stats. § 66.0811; sewage and stormwater systems, Wis. Stats. § 66.0821.  
Sec. 40-891. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
Best management practice means a practice, technique, or measure that is an effective, practical means of preventing or reducing soil erosion or water pollution, or both, from runoff both during and after land development activities. These can include structural, vegetative or operational practices. 
Board means board of public works. 
Credit means a fee reduction that a stormwater utility customer may receive for implementing practices that reduce the city's cost for managing stormwater runoff. 
Customer means any person, owner or occupant, firm, partnership, corporation, municipality, cooperative organization, governmental agency, or political entity provided with stormwater management services by the city stormwater utility. 
Developed property means any property where: 
(1)  A certificate of occupancy has been issued, construction has been completed, or a final inspection performed if no such certificate was issued; or 
(2)  Construction is at least 50 percent complete and construction is halted for a period of three or more months. 
Director means the director of public works or his/her designee. 
Duplex means any residential space identified for habitation attached to only one other residential space or as classified by the city building code. 
Equivalent runoff unit (ERU) means the impervious area of a property relative to the statistical average impervious area of "single-family homes" within the city. One ERU is equal to 3,700 square feet of impervious surface. 
Grid reinforced pervious pavement system means a grid paving system designed to provide both load support and infiltration. 
Impervious area means a surface as measured on a horizontal plane which has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by rain water. It includes, but is not limited to, all areas covered by structures, roof extensions, patios, porches, driveways, loading docks, parking lots, sidewalks, and semi-impervious surfaces such as compacted clay and gravel which are used as driveways or parking lots. Vegetated or gravel driveways or parking lots which utilize a grid reinforced pervious pavement system approved by the director shall not be included as impervious area. 
Multifamily means any residential space identified for habitation attached to two or more residential spaces or as classified by the city building code. 
Nonresidential means a developed lot or parcel not exclusively residential, including, but not limited to, transient rentals (such as hotels and motels), commercial, industrial, institutional, and governmental properties and parking lots. 
On-site stormwater management system means a system designed to both mitigate flood impacts and provide adequate treatment of pollutants in stormwater runoff that has been constructed on the parcel for which the customer is billed. It includes, but is not limited to, rain gardens, cisterns, infiltration trenches, pretreatment systems, and wet basins. 
Parcel means the legal unit of land division as recorded by the county register of deeds. Multiple contiguous parcels with the same owner shall be considered to be one parcel for the purposes of calculating billing units. 
Public stormwater system means all public storm sewers, drainage conduits, drainage conveyances, roadside ditches, curb and gutter, and public greenways, and all improvements thereto which by this section are constituted as the property and responsibility of the stormwater utility, to be operated to, among other things, conserve water, control discharges necessitated by rainfall events, incorporate methods to collect, convey, store, absorb, inhibit, treat, use or reuse water to prevent or reduce flooding, environmental degradation and water pollution or otherwise affect the quality and quantity of discharge from such system. 
Rain garden means a shallow depression planted with deep rooted native prairie, wet prairie, or wetland vegetation, designed to infiltrate stormwater. 
Single-family means any residential space identified for habitation not attached to any other residential space or as classified by the city building code. 
Stormwater management services means the tasks required to control stormwater runoff to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, and comply with state and federal regulations. It includes, but is not limited to, street sweeping, erosion control, stormwater basin improvements and maintenance, culvert and storm sewer maintenance, stormwater testing, stormwater management planning and related public education. 
Stormwater utility means the utility established under this article for the purpose of managing stormwater and imposing charges for the recovery of costs connected with such stormwater management services. 
Undeveloped means a parcel with no impervious area. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 35.02; Ord. No. 2014-O-06, § 3, 3-25-2014)  
Sec. 40-892. - Creation and supervision. 
The city hereby establishes a stormwater utility. The operation of the stormwater utility shall be subject to the review of the city council. The director of public works shall be responsible for the maintenance and management of the stormwater utility under direction of the board of public works. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 35.03(1))  
Sec. 40-893. - Authority. 
The city, acting through the stormwater utility, may acquire, construct, lease, own, operate, maintain, extend, expand, replace, clean, dredge, repair, conduct, manage, and finance such facilities, operations, and activities, as are deemed by the city to be proper and reasonably necessary for a system of storm and surface water management. These facilities may include, but are not limited to, surface and underground drainage facilities, storm sewers, watercourses, ponds, ditches, and such other facilities relating to collection, runoff, and retention as will support a stormwater management system, whether such facilities are owned and operated directly by the city or are provided under statutory or contractual provisions and furnishings of which facilities create or impose a cost or charge upon the city for the services afforded by such facilities. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 35.03(2))  
Sec. 40-894. - Transfer of assets and outstanding debt. 
Effective January 1, 2002, the following assets and debts of the city are hereby transferred to the stormwater utility: 
(1)  The land rights and improvements of the city, or such rights determined to exist, for the following components of the public stormwater system: 
a.  Storm sewers, catchbasins, and culverts; 
b.  Retention and detention ponds, and related appurtenances; 
c.  Access structures; 
d.  Greenways. 
(2)  Debt service on all outstanding general obligation debt issued for stormwater management purposes. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 35.03(3))  
Sec. 40-895. - Enterprise account. 
The city shall separately account for the stormwater utility finances. The stormwater utility shall prepare an annual budget, which is to include all operation and maintenance costs, costs of borrowing, and other costs related to the operation of the stormwater utility. The budget is subject to approval by the city council. Any excess of revenues over expenditures in a year shall be retained in a segregated fund which shall be used for stormwater utility expenses in subsequent years. Stormwater utility fees collected shall be deposited in the stormwater enterprise fund and shall be used for no other purpose. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 35.03(4))  
Sec. 40-896. - Annual stormwater management/maintenance report. 
Each applicant who is granted a stormwater management permit, and who has signed a maintenance agreement for the best management practice on the property, shall submit to the director an annual report reviewing the condition of that practice and the maintenance performed during the past calendar year. This report shall be submitted and sealed by a professional engineer currently licensed in the State of Wisconsin or alternate certification approved by the city. Where a recorded maintenance agreement exists, the annual report should provide documentation that maintenance was performed in accordance with the annual inspection requirements of the recorded maintenance agreement on file with the city. If a stormwater management permit was grated but no maintenance agreement has been recorded, the property owner shall work with a professional engineer to develop a maintenance plan and submit the plan and subsequent annual review reports to the city. 
This report shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Documentation of the completion of the required annual maintenance, including copies of receipts from agents hired to perform the work and date the work was completed; 
(2)  Photos of the treatment device post completion of required maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-06, § 3, 3-25-2014)  
Secs. 40-897—40-923. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CHARGES 
 
Sec. 40-924. - Service areas. 
In order to fairly and equitably reflect the variability in costs of providing stormwater management services to customers the city shall be organized into two service areas. A map, available in the office of the city clerk, shall be maintained by the stormwater utility showing the limits of the service areas. All lots and parcels within the city shall be classified into one of the following service areas: 
(1)  Urban service area. 
(2)  Rural service area. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 35.04(1))  
Sec. 40-925. - Customer classification. 
For the purpose of imposing the stormwater utility charges, all lots and parcels within the city shall be classified into one of the following customer classes: 
(1)  Residential, Single-Family Unit. 
(2)  Residential, Duplex Unit. 
(3)  Residential, Multifamily Unit. 
(4)  Nonresidential. 
(5)  Undeveloped. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 35.04(2))  
Sec. 40-926. - Measurement of impervious area. 
The director shall be responsible for determining the impervious area of a parcel based on the best available information, including but not limited to, data supplied by the city assessor, aerial photography, site or building plans submitted by the property owner, or actual on-site surveys. The director may require additional information as necessary to make the determination. The number of ERUs shall be updated by the director based on any additions to the impervious area of a parcel as approved through the building permit process. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 35.04(3))  
Sec. 40-927. - Intensity of development factor. 
For the purpose of imposing stormwater utility charges which reflect the customers relative impact on the public stormwater system, all parcels within the city shall be assigned an intensity of development factor. All single-family and duplex parcels shall be assigned an intensity of development factor of one. The intensity of development factor for nonresidential and multifamily parcels shall be determined from the percentage of impervious area of the parcel according to the following table: 
Multifamily and Nonresidential Percentage of Impervious Area 	Intensity of Development Factor 
0—9.9% 	0.6 
10—54.9% 	1.0 
55—69.9% 	1.7 
70—89.9% 	2.9 
>90% 	4.8 
 
The percentage of impervious areas shall be determined as follows: Impervious Area of Parcel ÷ Total Area of Parcel. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 35.04(4))  
Sec. 40-928. - Rates. 
The fee structure as from time to time established by the board and listed in the city fee schedule may be modified by resolution. The fee shall be charged as follows: 
(1)  The city-wide rate shall be charged to all customers in both the urban service area and the rural service area. 
(2)  The urban service area base rate shall be charged only to customers in the urban service area. 
(3)  The urban service area intensity rate shall be charged only to customers in the urban service area. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 35.04(5))  
Sec. 40-929. - Fee calculation. 
The fees for each customer classification shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  Residential, single-family in urban service area: 
1 ERU x (City-Wide Rate + Urban Service Area Base Rate + Urban Service Area Intensity Rate) 
(2)  Residential, single-family in rural service area: 
1 ERU x (City-Wide Rate) 
(3)  Residential, duplex in urban service area: 
1 ERU per parcel x (City-Wide Rate + Urban Service Area Base Rate + Urban Service Area Intensity Rate), or 
½ ERU per unit x (City-Wide Rate + Urban Service Area Base Rate + Urban Service Area Intensity Rate) 
(4)  Residential, duplex in rural service area: 
1 ERU per parcel x (City-Wide Rate), or 
½ ERU per unit x (City-Wide Rate) 
(5)  Residential, multifamily in urban service area: 
[(Impervious Area of Parcel ÷ Impervious Area of 1 ERU) x (City-Wide Rate + Urban Service Area Base Rate)] + [(Impervious Area of Parcel ÷ Impervious Area of 1 ERU) x Intensity of Development Factor x Urban Service Area Intensity Rate] 
(6)  Residential, multifamily in rural service area: 
(Impervious Area of Parcel ÷ Impervious Area of 1 ERU) x (City-Wide Rate) 
(7)  Nonresidential in urban service area: 
[(Impervious Area of Parcel ÷ Impervious Area of 1 ERU) x (City-Wide Rate + Urban Service Area Base Rate)] + [(Impervious Area of Parcel ÷ Impervious Area of 1 ERU) x Intensity of Development Factor x Urban Service Area Intensity Rate] 
(8)  Nonresidential in rural service area: 
(Impervious Area of Parcel ÷ Impervious Area of 1 ERU) x (City-Wide Rate) 
(9)  Undeveloped parcels shall not be charged. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 35.04(6))  
Sec. 40-930. - Billing method. 
The charges established hereunder will be billed quarterly on the utility bill to customers in the urban service area. The charges established hereunder will be billed annually on the utility bill to customers in the rural service area. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 35.04(7)(A), (B))  
Sec. 40-931. - Penalties for nonpayment; collection of unpaid bills. 
A late payment charge of one percent per month compounded monthly will be added to bills not paid within 21 days after issuance or by due date, whichever is later. All unpaid bills for stormwater service which are due and outstanding as unpaid bills for stormwater service which are due and outstanding as of October 15 shall be collected by the city treasurer in the manner provided by Wis. Stats. § 66.0809(3). The additional penalty provided by Wis. Stats. § 66.0809(3) shall apply to any delinquent amount due. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 35.04(7)(C))  
Sec. 40-932. - Credits. 
(a)  Credits to a stormwater utility bill may be considered for multifamily and nonresidential customers who own and properly maintain on-site stormwater management systems that control the quantity of stormwater runoff and/or control the quality of runoff utilizing a design that has been approved by the director. 
(b)  A credit may be considered for single-family and duplex customers who utilize on-site stormwater management systems that control stormwater runoff quantity and/or quality utilizing a design that has been approved by the director. 
(c)  The board shall approve and the director shall keep on file a set of written criteria for issuing credits. These criteria will include eligible best management practices and their corresponding credit amounts. Criteria may be amended or updated from time to time, as seen fit by the director. 
(d)  The customer shall be responsible for submitting any requests for credit in writing to the director. The customer shall provide all supporting documentation, surveys, and engineering reports as may be necessary to document the justification for the request for credit. 
(e)  A credit may be granted in full, in part, or denied at the discretion of the director based on the supporting materials included with the credit application. The amount of any credit issued to a customer shall be proportional to the amount the on-site stormwater management system reduces the customer's impact on the public stormwater system. 
(f)  The city grants stormwater utility credits to the ratepayer of record - the person who pays the stormwater bill for the property. If approved, the credit will be deducted from the city stormwater bill for the utility account provided. 
(g)  The city may revoke the credit, require payment of previous credits, and impose civil penalties if any of the following conditions occur: 
(1)  The application for credit or accompanying documentation is inaccurate or falsified; 
(2)  The private stormwater management system is unsafe or illegal; 
(3)  The property does not comply with city building, plumbing or stormwater requirements; or 
(4)  The city is denied an opportunity to conduct a limited site inspection of the stormwater systems. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 35.04(8); Ord. No. 2014-O-06, § 3, 3-25-2014)  
Sec. 40-933. - Utility charge changes. 
Any future changes in the service areas, customer classifications, intensity of development factors, billing unit calculations, rates, or credits shall be made by resolution or ordinance of the city council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 35.04(9)(F))  
Secs. 40-934—40-954. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - APPEAL AND REVIEW 
 
Sec. 40-955. - Adjustment to measured impervious and parcel areas. 
Property owners may submit to the director site and building surveys or other documentation which more accurately describes the impervious area or total area of a parcel. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 35.04(9)(A))  
Sec. 40-956. - Appeals to the director. 
Whenever the customer advises the director that all or part of any billing, including determination of impervious area, as rendered is in dispute, the director shall investigate the dispute promptly and completely, advise the customer of the results of the investigation, attempt to resolve the dispute, and provide the opportunity for the customer to enter into a deferred payment agreement when applicable in order to settle the dispute. 
(1)  The director may request the customer to provide survey, measurements, or other supporting material as may be necessary for completion of the review of the request in a timely manner. 
(2)  Within 30 days of the appeal, written notice of the decision of the director shall be sent to the appellant. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 35.04(9)(B))  
Sec. 40-957. - Appeals to the board of public works. 
Any person who objects to any action or decision of the director or his/her designee shall first appeal to the board for reconsideration. 
(1)  A written notice of appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within 30 days of the date of the action or decision appealed from. 
(2)  The notice of appeal shall state the action or decision of the director or his/her designee being appealed. 
(3)  The secretary of the board shall schedule the appeal for a formal hearing by the board at a meeting, open to the public, within 30 days of the filing of the notice of appeal. The secretary shall send notice of the time scheduled for the consideration of the appeal to the appellant at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
(4)  Within ten days of filing a written notice of appeal, the customer shall pay 50 percent of the bill in dispute or post a bond for that amount on or before the hearing date. Failure to pay the amount or post the bond will constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing. In no way does this relieve the customer from the obligation of paying charges which are not disputed. 
(5)  Within 30 days of the appeal hearing, the board, by majority vote, shall affirm, modify, or reverse the action or decision. Notice of the final decision of the board shall be sent to the appellant. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 35.04(9)(C))  
Sec. 40-958. - Appeals to the city council. 
Any person who objects to any final decision of the board after appeal to the board may appeal to the city council. 
(1)  A written notice of appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within 30 days of the date when notice of the final decision of the board is mailed to the customer. 
(2)  The notice of appeal shall state the action of the board appealed from, shall specify the reasons stated by the board for taking such action, and shall specify why the appellant believes said action was inappropriate. 
(3)  The city clerk shall file the notice of appeal with the common council and shall schedule the appeal for consideration by the common council at a meeting open to the public, within 45 days of the filing of the notice of appeal. The clerk shall send notice of the time scheduled for the consideration of the appeal to the appellant and the secretary of the board. 
(4)  Within 30 days of the appeal hearing, the city council, by majority vote, shall affirm, modify, or reverse the action of the board or shall refer the matter back to the board for further consideration. Notice of the decision of the common council shall be sent to the appellant and the board. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 35.04(9)(D))  
Sec. 40-959. - Granting of refund or adjustment. 
If a decision or determination of the director or board is reversed or modified the board shall grant a refund or adjustment to the aggrieved party, prorated and retroactive to the billing date on which an application for fee adjustment was filed with the secretary of the board. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 35.04(9)(E))  
Chapter 41 - SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate offense industries, Wis. Stats. § 66.0415, littering, Wis. Stats. § 287.81; storage of junked vehicles, Wis. Stats. § 175.25; municipal authority for removal of rubbish, Wis. Stats. § 66.0405; water and sewage, Wis. Stats. § 281.01 et seq.; transportation and disposal of animal carcasses, Wis. Stats. § 95.72; prohibitions on land disposal and incineration, Wis. Stats. § 287.07; disposal of batteries, Wis. Stats. §§ 287.07, 287.185; solid waste facilities, Wis. Stats. § 289.01 et seq.; hazardous waste management, Wis. Stats. § 291.001 et seq.; open burning, Wis. Stats. § 289.51. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 41-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved construction and demolition reuse/recycling facility means a facility approved pursuant to guidelines set forth by the city whose practices cause the recycling or reuse of construction and demolition debris. 
Brush means any woody material over one-quarter inch but less than six inches in diameter from a tree, bush or plant, including, but not limited to, tree branches, small trees, prunings, and trimmings. 
Clean wood means wood that has not been rendered non-recyclable by the application or attachment of liquids or solids such as paint, stains, varnish and excessive metals as determined by approved recycling facility. 
Construction means the assembly of materials to form a new building 
Construction and demolition debris means materials resulting from the construction, remodeling, repair and demolition of utilities, structures, buildings, and roads, including but not limited to the following: bricks, concrete, and other masonry materials; soils; rocks; wood, including painted, treated, and coated wood and wood products; wall coverings; plaster; drywall; aluminum and vinyl siding; plumbing fixtures; non-asbestos insulation; roofing shingles and other roof coverings; reclaimed asphalt pavement; glass; plastics; electrical wiring, and piping or metals incidental to any of those materials, blocks, broken concrete, plaster, wire and wood lath, timbers and wood building products and other similar non-putrescible materials. This term does not include materials that are contaminated by lead, asbestos, or other hazardous materials in such a way as to render recycling illegal or impossible, or materials which the city engineer, from time to time, may indicate are no longer able to be readily reused/recycled in an economically viable manner. 
Contractor means any person, other than the property owner, who is responsible for the construction, demolition, or remodeling of a building, or any part thereof, and where such work requires the issuance of a building, plumbing, electrical, HVAC or demolition permit under the Fitchburg Municipal Code of Ordinances. Demolition means the demolition or dismantling of a building, but does not include the systematic dismantling of part of a building for alteration, maintenance, remodeling or repair. 
Electronic device means a device that requires electric current or electromagnetic fields to function and that contains a circuit board. 
Hauler means the person specifically authorized by the common council to collect refuse and recyclables, and dispose of the same. 
Household sharp medical waste means sharps and any type of product capable of puncturing or lacerating the skin that is designed or used to treat, diagnose, or prevent a disease or medical condition, including, but not limited to, scalpels and hypodermic needles. 
Major appliance means a residential or commercial air conditioner, boiler, clothes dryer, clothes washer, dehumidifier, dishwasher, humidifier, freezer, furnace, microwave oven, oven, pressure tank, refrigerator, stove or water heater. 
Materials recovery facility means a facility that is used for the storage, processing, and recovery of recyclables. 
Multiple-family dwelling means a building containing five or more residential units, including those which are occupied seasonally. 
Noncontaminated recyclable plastic bag shall mean any bag made of plastic film that does not remain soiled by organic or non-organic materials and is able to be recycled in the Dane County area. Plastic film types subject to this provision include Society of the Plastics Industry (SPI) code #2 - high density polyethylene (HDPE) and SPI code #4 - low density polyethylene (LDPE). 
Nonresidential facilities and properties. 
(1)  The term "nonresidential facilities and properties" means commercial, retail, industrial, institutional and governmental facilities and properties. 
(2)  The term "nonresidential facilities and properties" does not include multiple-family dwellings. 
Person includes any individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, local governmental unit, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 66.0131(1)(a), state agency or authority or federal agency. 
Recyclables means aluminum containers; corrugated paper or other containerboard; foam polystyrene packaging; glass containers; magazines; newspaper; office paper; rigid plastic containers, including those made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS and other resins or multiple resins; steel containers; waste tires; and bi-metal containers as described further below: 
(1)  Aluminum container means a container made of aluminum. 
(2)  Bi-metal container means a container for carbonated or malt beverages that is made primarily of a combination of steel and aluminum. 
(3)  Containerboard means corrugated paperboard used in the manufacture of shipping containers and related products. 
(4)  Magazines means magazines and other materials printed on similar paper. 
(5)  Mixed paper means miscellaneous household paper, including junk mail, school paper, brown paper bags, magazines, gift, shoe, and cereal boxes, and similar material. 
(6)  Newspaper means a newspaper and other materials printed on newsprint. 
(7)  Office paper. 
a.  The term "office paper" means high-grade printing and writing papers from offices in nonresidential facilities and properties. Printed white ledger and computer printout are examples of office paper generally accepted as high grade. 
b.  The term "office paper" does not include industrial process waste. 
(8)  Plastics means any of the following plastic products and containers labeled with recycling arrows and the Society of the Plastics Industry (SPI) code No. 1 through No. 7 described as follows: 
a.  SPI code No. 1 is PETE, polyethylene terephthalate. 
b.  SPI code No. 2 is HDPE, high-density polyethylene. 
c.  SPI code No. 3 is PVC, polyvinyl chloride. 
d.  SPI code No. 4 is LDPE, low-density polyethylene. 
e.  SPI code No. 5 is PP, polypropylene. 
f.  SPI code No. 6 is PS, polystyrene or EPS, expanded polystyrene; commonly called "block polystyrene" 
g.  SPI code No. 7 is other resins or multiple resins. 
Recycle means any process by which materials are diverted from final disposal as solid waste at a permitted landfill and instead are collected, separated and/or processed into raw materials for new, reused or reconstituted products, or for the recovery of materials for energy production processes. 
Refuse means any solid waste not included in the list under the term "recyclables" that is allowed to be disposed of in a sanitary landfill. 
Remodeling means any improvement or alteration made to buildings that do not involve the complete demolition and reconstruction of the building. 
Reuse means: 
(1)  The on-site use of reprocessed construction and demolition debris including bricks, concrete, other masonry materials, soil and rock used as fill, if such on-site use is authorized in writing by the city engineer; 
(2)  The off-site redistribution of a material which would otherwise be disposed of, for use in the same or similar manner; or 
(3)  The use of non-toxic wood as an alternative fuel source. 
Sanitary landfill means a facility that is designed and constructed to receive refuse. 
Sharps means medical equipment or clinical laboratory articles that may cause punctures or cuts. Sharps include, but are not limited to, contaminated, unused and disinfected items listed in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 526.05(1). 
Sharps container means a leakproof, rigid, puncture-resistant container that is taped closed or tightly lidded to prevent the loss of the sharps waste. 
Solid waste means any refuse, recyclables, or other salvageable materials that are removed from a property when deemed no longer needed. 
Waste oil means used motor oil, transmission fluid or other lubricating oil. 
Waste tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose because of wear, damage or defect. 
Yard waste means leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.06(10); Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 1, 5-22-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-03, 3-26-2013)  
Secs. 41-2—41-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - REFUSE COLLECTION 
 
Sec. 41-21. - Schedule. 
(a)  The department of public works and the hauler shall establish the time of collection of refuse and recyclables, and the clerk shall publish the collection schedule at any time when the collection schedule is changed. 
(b)  All persons having refuse and recyclables shall place the same in containers or watertight bags as herein required at the required collection point not sooner than 24 hours prior to the regularly scheduled collection time and no person shall permit refuse or recyclables or containers thereof to accumulate or remain at the curbline longer than 12 hours thereafter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.06(18)(a); Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 1, 5-22-2012)  
Sec. 41-22. - Placing refuse and recyclables for collection. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specifically directed or authorized by the director of public works under section 41-21, containers for refuse and recyclables from all residential premises shall be placed at the curbline adjacent to the street designated in the published collection schedule. Containers of refuse and recyclables from all commercial, industrial, school or church premises shall be placed to the rear of the premises in a suitable enclosure. 
(b)  The director of public works may direct or authorize the placing of containers for refuse and recyclables in a manner different than that provided herein in order to facilitate a more reasonable mode of collection from particular premises. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.06(18)(b); Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 1, 5-22-2012)  
Sec. 41-23. - Preparation of refuse and recyclables for collection. 
All refuse and recyclables set out for collection shall be placed in the approved city refuse or recycling carts or watertight bags. No container or bag placed for collection shall exceed 32 gallons in capacity or 50 pounds in net weight, except for such containers as provided by the hauler. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.06(18)(c); Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 1, 5-22-2012)  
Sec. 41-24. - Household sharp medical waste disposal. 
Household sharp medical waste shall be disposed of in accordance with the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 526 and shall not be deposited in any other place or manner in the city than as provided in this section: 
(1)  Acceptable means of disposing of household sharp medical waste under this article include disposal in a sharps container or a heavy plastic container and delivery of the sealed container to a sharps collection station or other person authorized under Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 526 to accept such waste. 
(2)  Containers for household sharp medical waste or loose household sharp medical waste shall not be mixed with refuse or recyclables. 
(3)  The hauler shall refuse to pick up any refuse or recyclables containing household sharp medical waste. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.06(19); Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 1, 5-22-2012)  
Sec. 41-25. - Placement for collection. 
(a)  No person shall place any refuse or recyclables on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public or private property unless the same shall be placed in appropriate containers or bags for city collection at the times and in the manner as herein provided. 
(b)  No person shall place for collection any refuse or recyclables at the curbline or alley adjacent to any premises not owned or occupied by such person without permission. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.06(20); Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 1, 5-22-2012)  
Sec. 41-26. - Ownership of recyclable materials. 
(a)  All residential recyclable material collected and deposited, as provided in this section, shall be the property of the city. 
(b)  Recyclable materials collected privately for businesses and apartments are the property of those entities. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except the hauler or licensed waste haulers collecting recyclable materials privately for businesses and apartments, to collect or remove any recyclable materials that have been placed at the curb or in a container adjacent to a home or nonresidential building for the purposes of collection for recycling. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.06(21); Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 1, 5-22-2012)  
Sec. 41-27. - Items not to be placed for pick up. 
No person shall dump, deposit or place at the curbline adjacent to any street or public alley for collection by the city or for any other purpose any of the following: 
(1)  Stone, concrete, rubber, earth or sod. 
(2)  Lead-acid batteries. 
(3)  Waste tires. 
(4)  Containers over 32 gallons or over 50 pounds, except containers provided by the hauler or licensed waste haulers collecting refuse or recyclables privately for businesses and apartments. 
(5)  Tree trunks or stumps. 
(6)  Garbage or rubbish in such a manner as will permit strewing by animals or vandals prior to collection. 
(7)  Hazardous and toxic wastes. 
(8)  Chemicals, paint or flammable liquids. 
(9)  Explosives. 
(10)  Construction debris. 
(11)  Carcasses. 
(12)  Infectious waste, sharps or medical waste, as defined in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 500 and household sharp medical waste. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.06(22); Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 1, 5-22-2012)  
Sec. 41-28. - Permit required for deposit of waste from outside city. 
It shall be unlawful to deposit refuse or recyclables from outside the city within the city unless authorized by permit from the common council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.06(23); Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 1, 5-22-2012)  
Sec. 41-29. - Right of city to inspect. 
For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this article, the director of public works or his/her designee may inspect recyclable materials separated for recycling, postconsumer waste intended for disposal, recycling collection sites and facilities, collection vehicles, collection areas of multiple-family dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties, and any records relating to recycling activities, which shall be kept confidential when necessary to protect proprietary information. No person may refuse to allow access to the director of public works or his/her designee who requests access for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. No person may obstruct, hamper, or interfere with such an inspection. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.06(24); Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 1, 5-22-2012)  
Sec. 41-30. - Violations, citations and penalties. 
Any person who violates a provision of this article may be issued a citation by the director of public works or his/her designee to collect forfeitures. The issuance of a citation shall not preclude proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the same or any other matter. Proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the same or any other matter shall not preclude the issuance of a citation under this section. Penalties for violation of this article shall be as provided in section 1-21. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.06(24)(b); Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 1, 5-22-2012)  
Secs. 41-31—41-48. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RECYCLING STANDARDS AND PROCEDURE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 41-49. - Findings. 
(a)  The common council of the city hereby finds and determines that: 
(1)  There is an increasing necessity to conserve natural resources, and to reduce the need for landfill space for the citizens of the city; 
(2)  Newspapers, glass, motor oil, aluminum and tin cans, white goods, plastics, mixed paper, office paper, containerboard, brush, and yard waste comprise a substantial portion of residential and business solid waste material; 
(3)  In an age of shortage, conservation of recyclable materials is an important public concern; 
(4)  Newspapers, glass, aluminum and tin cans, oil, white goods, plastic, mixed paper, office paper, containerboard, yard material, waste tires and lead-acid batteries are items which can be separated from other solid waste materials and recycled without imposing an undue burden upon residents and businesses of the city; and 
(5)  Residents, taxpayers and businesses of the city benefit from the reduction of the volume of solid waste materials collected by the city and transported and deposited in available, authorized landfill sites. 
(b)  The common council further finds and ordains that: 
(1)  Improper disposal of household sharp medical waste, such as hypodermic needles, poses a significant health risk to workers in the waste disposal industry; 
(2)  Safe disposal of household sharp medical waste is possible through inexpensive, easily obtained means, without posing an undue burden on users of household sharp medical waste; and 
(3)  Removal of household sharp medical waste from the city's waste stream is beneficial to residents of the city as well as the city's waste hauler and users of the county landfill. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.06(1); Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 1, 5-22-2012)  
Sec. 41-50. - Purposes. 
The purposes of this article are to: 
(1)  Promote recycling, composting, and resource recovery through the administration of an effective recycling and waste reduction program, as provided in Wis. Stats. § 287.11 and Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 544; 
(2)  Promote safe disposal of household sharp medical waste consistent with the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 526; and 
(3)  Promote sound and safe solid waste collection and disposal practices within the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.06(2); Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 1, 5-22-2012)  
Sec. 41-51. - Authority. 
This article is adopted as authorized under Wis. Stats. § 287.09 and under the city's municipal authority under Wis. Stats. ch. 66 and elsewhere to regulate solid waste within the city. All references to state statutes and administrative regulations in this article shall refer to such statutes and regulations as they may be hereafter amended and renumbered. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.06(3); Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 1, 5-22-2012)  
Sec. 41-52. - Interpretation. 
(a)  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be held to be the minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by state law. 
(b)  Where any terms or requirements of this article may be inconsistent or conflicting, the more restrictive requirements or interpretation shall apply. 
(c)  Where a provision of this article is required by state statute or by a standard in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 526 or 544 and where the article provision is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the state statute and the Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 526 or 544 standards, in effect on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.06(5); Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 1, 5-22-2012)  
Sec. 41-53. - Applicability. 
The requirements of this article apply to all persons within the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.06(7); Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 1, 5-22-2012)  
Sec. 41-54. - Administration. 
The provisions of this article shall be administered by the director of public works or his/her designee. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.06(8); Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 1, 5-22-2012)  
Secs. 41-55—41-81. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PREPARATION AND COLLECTION 
 
Sec. 41-82. - Separation of recyclables. 
Occupants of single-family and two-unit to four-unit residences, multiple-family dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties shall separate the following materials from postconsumer waste: 
(1)  Lead-acid batteries; 
(2)  Major appliances; 
(3)  Electronic devices; 
(4)  Waste oil and oil filters; 
(5)  Yard waste; 
(6)  Brush; 
(7)  Waste tires; 
(8)  Noncontaminated recyclable plastic bags; 
(9)  Aluminum containers; 
(10)  Bi-metal containers; 
(11)  Corrugated paper or other containerboard; 
(12)  Foam polystyrene packaging; 
(13)  Glass containers; 
(14)  Magazines; 
(15)  Newspaper; 
(16)  Office paper; 
(17)  Mixed paper; 
(18)  Plastic containers; and 
(19)  Steel containers. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.06(11); Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 1, 5-22-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-03, 3-26-2013)  
Sec. 41-83. - Care of separated recyclables. 
To the greatest extent practicable, the recyclable materials separated in accordance with section 41-82 shall be substantially clean and kept free of contaminants such as food or product residue, oil or grease, or other nonrecyclable materials, including, but not limited to, household hazardous waste, medical waste and agricultural chemical containers. Recyclables shall be stored in a manner which protects them from wind, rain and other inclement weather conditions until such time as the materials are set at the curb for collection. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.06(12); Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 1, 5-22-2012)  
Sec. 41-84. - Management of lead acid batteries, major appliances, waste oil, yard waste, brush, tires, and noncontaminated recyclable plastic bags. 
Occupants of single-family and two- to four-unit residences, multiple-family dwellings and non-residential facilities and properties shall manage lead acid batteries, major appliances, waste oil, yard waste, brush, tires, and noncontaminated recyclable plastic bags as follows: 
(1)  Lead-acid batteries shall be recycled at private businesses where purchased or at private recycling centers. 
(2)  Major appliances shall be recycled at private businesses where purchased or at private recycling centers. The hauler shall also provide collection service for major appliances for a separate charge which shall be paid by the party disposing of said appliance. 
(3)  Electronic devices shall be recycled at private businesses where purchased or at private recycling centers. The hauler shall also provide collection service for electronic devices for a separate charge which shall be paid by the party disposing of said electronic device. 
(4)  Waste oil and oil filters shall be recycled at private businesses where purchased, at private or public recycling centers, or through the county. 
(5)  Yard waste shall be composted or land applied through local public or private recycling centers. Residents are encouraged to compost yard waste on site. 
(6)  Brush shall be recycled through local public or private recycling collection methods. Residents are encouraged to chip brush on site and use the chips as mulch. 
(7)  Waste tires shall be recycled at private businesses where purchased or at private recycling centers. The hauler shall also provide collection service for waste tires for a separate charge which shall be paid by the party disposing of waste tires. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.06(13); Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 1, 5-22-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-03, 3-26-2013)  
Sec. 41-85. - Preparation and collection of recyclables. 
Except as otherwise directed by the director of public works, occupants of single-family and two-unit to four-unit residences shall do the following for the preparation and collection of the separated materials specified in section 41-82: 
(1)  Aluminum, bi-metal, glass, plastic, and steel containers shall be rinsed free of any substantial product residue, and placed loosely in the approved city recycling containers or taken to an approved local recycling drop-off site. 
(2)  Corrugated paper or other containerboard shall be placed within the approved city recycling cart or taken to an approved local recycling drop-off site. Corrugated paper and other containerboard shall be kept free from contamination by oil, grease, and food. 
(3)  Foam polystyrene packaging shall be taken to an approved local recycling drop-off site. 
(4)  Mixed paper shall be placed within the approved city recycling cart or taken to an approved local recycling drop-off site. 
(5)  Newspaper shall be placed within the approved city recycling cart or taken to an approved local recycling drop-off site. Newspaper shall not be tied. 
(6)  Office paper shall be placed within the approved city recycling cart or taken to an approved local recycling drop-off site. 
(7)  Noncontaminated recyclable plastic bags shall be separated and recycled in accordance with the rules, procedures and schedules specified by the public works director, or such items may be disposed of in any other lawful manner, including through merchant-provided drop off locations. No person shall mix or permit the mixing of noncontaminated recyclable plastic bags with refuse or other recyclables. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.06(14); Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 1, 5-22-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-03, 3-26-2013)  
Sec. 41-86. - Responsibilities of owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings. 
(a)  Owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings shall do all of the following to recycle the materials specified in section 41-82: 
(1)  Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials. 
(2)  Notify tenants in writing at the time of renting or leasing the dwelling and at least semiannually thereafter about the established recycling program, including: 
a.  Reasons to reduce and recycle solid waste; 
b.  Which materials are collected; 
c.  How to prepare the materials in order to meet the processing requirements; 
d.  Collection methods or sites; 
e.  Locations and hours of operation; and 
f.  A contact person or company, including a name, address and telephone number. 
(3)  Provide for collection of the materials separated from the solid waste by the tenants and the delivery of these materials to a recycling facility. 
(4)  Recyclables shall not be placed in containers with solid waste. 
(b)  Provide space for recycling for public buildings. 
(1)  Any new residential building with five units or more in the city must make space considerations and accommodations for recycling within the building in each apartment, on every floor or in a central area within the building, and on the grounds accessible to collection vehicles. The space required by this section is that space which is sufficient to allow for items mandated for recycling in section 41-82. 
(2)  A person in the city owning or occupying a new building or a building that is remodeled or expanded by 50 percent or more in floor area, shall provide a designated area for the separation, temporary storage and collection of refuse and recyclables either within or adjacent to the building. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.06(15); Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 1, 5-22-2012)  
Sec. 41-87. - Responsibilities of owners or designated agents of nonresidential facilities and properties. 
(a)  Owners or designated agents of nonresidential facilities and properties shall do all of the following to recycle the materials specified in section 41-82: 
(1)  Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials. 
(2)  Notify in writing, at least semiannually, all users, tenants and occupants of the properties about the established recycling program. 
(3)  Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid waste by the users, tenants and occupants and the delivery of the materials to a recycling facility. 
(4)  Notify users, tenants and occupants of: 
a.  Reasons to reduce and recycle solid waste; 
b.  Which materials are collected; 
c.  How to prepare the materials in order to meet the processing requirements; 
d.  Collection methods or sites; 
e.  Locations and hours of operation; and 
f.  A contact person or company, including a name, address and telephone number. 
(5)  Recyclables shall not be placed in containers with refuse. 
(6)  Provide space for recycling for public buildings. 
(b)  A person in the city owning or occupying a new building or a building that is remodeled or expanded by 50 percent or more in floor area, shall provide a designated area for the separation, temporary storage and collection of refuse and recyclables either within or adjacent to the building. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.06(16); Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 1, 5-22-2012)  
Sec. 41-88. - Prohibitions on disposal of recyclable materials separated for recycling. 
No person may dispose of in a solid waste disposal facility any of the materials specified in section 41-82 which have been separated for recycling, except waste tires may be burned for recovery of energy in a solid waste treatment facility. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.06(17); Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 1, 5-22-2012)  
Sec. 41-89. - Right of city to inspect. 
For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this article, the director of public works or his/her designee may inspect recyclable materials separated for recycling, postconsumer waste intended for disposal, recycling collection sites and facilities, collection vehicles, collection areas of multiple-family dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties, and any records relating to recycling activities, which shall be kept confidential when necessary to protect proprietary information. No person may refuse to allow access to the director of public works or his/her designee who requests access for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. No person may obstruct, hamper, or interfere with such an inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-18, § 1, 12-11-2012)  
Sec. 41-90. - Violations, citations and penalties. 
Any person who violates a provision of this article may be issued a citation by the director of public works or his/her designee to collect forfeitures. The issuance of a citation shall not preclude proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the same or any other matter. Proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the same or any other matter shall not preclude the issuance of a citation under this section. Penalties for violation of this article shall be as provided in section 1-21. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-18, § 1, 12-11-2012)  
Secs. 41-91—41-108. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - UNLAWFUL WASTE DISPOSAL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 41-109—41-129. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DUMPING 
 
Sec. 41-130. - Property owners not to permit dumping without city approval. 
No person owning, controlling or occupying real estate within the city shall permit or allow the dumping of garbage, ashes, rubbish, miscellaneous wastes, or other substances upon said real estate without first having been granted a permit therefore by the common council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.05(1)(a); Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 1, 5-22-2012)  
Sec. 41-131. - Illegal dumping prohibited. 
No person shall dump, dispose, deposit or store refuse or recyclables in the city outside of a licensed sanitary landfill facility on either private or public lands, except as provided in sections 41-82 and 70-88. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.05(1)(b); Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 1, 5-22-2012)  
Sec. 41-132. - Owner's consent required. 
No person shall dump or deposit any garbage, ashes, rubbish, miscellaneous wastes, manure or other substances upon private property unless the written consent of the owner or his/her authorized agent shall first be obtained and filed with the common council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.05(1)(c); Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 1, 5-22-2012)  
Sec. 41-133. - Disposal of construction related debris. 
No person shall dispose of rocks, trees, brush, stumps, waste building material or other debris from land development, building construction, street grading, installation of underground utilities, upon the surface of the land in the city unless approved by the owner and city building inspector or city engineer. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.05(1)(d); Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 1, 5-22-2012)  
Sec. 41-134. - Property owners not to permit disposal of construction related debris. 
No landowner shall permit the accumulation of rocks, trees, brush, stumps, waste building material or other debris from land development, building construction, street grading, installation of underground utilities, upon the surface of the land in the city for a period of more than 15 days, unless such accumulation is related to a construction activity approved for the site or area by the city building inspector or city engineer. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.05(1)(e); Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 1, 5-22-2012)  
Secs. 41-135—41-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION REUSE/RECYCLING 
 
Sec. 41-151. - Applicability and reuse/recycling requirements for construction and demolition projects. 
(a)  Recycling and reuse requirement for certain multi-family dwellings and commercial buildings. 
(1)  All projects subject to this subsection shall be required to recycle or reuse construction or demolition debris produced on-site as part of construction, demolition or moving permit activities by meeting the following requirements: 
a.  The owner or contractor on a project that is issued a permit with an application date on or after the effective date of this section shall cause to be recycled or reused at least 70 percent of the construction and demolition debris produced on-site, as measured by weight or volume. 
(2)  The following types of projects are subject to this subsection: 
a.  The construction or demolition of a multi-family dwelling constructed using concrete and steel supports. 
b.  The construction or demolition of a commercial building where the total square footage of the space involved is over 1,000 square feet. 
c.  Any moving of building projects, which require a permit. 
(b)  Recycling and reusing requirements for certain multi-family dwellings, residential buildings and remodeling projects. 
(1)  The owner or contractor on a project subject to this subsection shall cause to be recycled or reused all of the following construction or demolition debris produced on-site as part of construction, demolition, or remodeling permit activities: 
a.  Wood that has not been rendered no recyclable by the application or attachment of paint, stains, varnish, or other liquids or solids; 
b.  Non-toxic metals; 
c.  Clean drywall scrap materials; 
d.  Corrugated cardboard; and 
e.  Shingles. 
(2)  The following types of projects are subject to this subsection: 
a.  The construction or demolition of multi-family dwellings using wood frame construction. 
b.  The construction or demolition of a single-family, two-family or three-family dwelling. 
c.  Except for roofing projects, the remodeling of a residential or commercial building where the total value of the project is $20,000.00 or greater. 
d.  Any roofing project that includes the tear off of the roofing materials shall reuse or recycle 100 percent of asphalt shingles and clean wood. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 2, 5-22-2012)  
Sec. 41-152. - Construction and demolition reuse/recycling plan. 
(a)  Construction and demolition reuse/recycling plan. Each person who applies for a construction and demolition reuse/recycling permit shall submit a construction and demolition reuse/recycling plan to the city engineer or his/her designee. The construction and demolition reuse/recycling plan shall include an estimate of total construction or demolition debris that will be created on-site and describe how much will be reused/recycled (by weight or volume). No building permit shall be issued unless the applicant submits the construction and demolition reuse/recycling plan to the city engineer. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  The city maintains the right to suspend requirements of section 41-151 if the market for recyclable materials changes and makes compliance unattainable, as determined by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 2, 5-22-2012; Ord. No. 2019-O-19 , §§ 1, 2, 8-27-2019)  
Sec. 41-153. - Certification. 
(a)  Within 60 days of completion of a project, certification of compliance shall be made by the owner or contractor in the form and manner prescribed by the city engineer. Report shall include: 
(1)  A list of the construction and demolition debris materials that were reused or recycled; 
(2)  Information on where the construction and demolition debris were recycled or how reused; 
(3)  A statement from the owner or contractor that the documentation supporting compliance with this section exists and will be maintained for two years from submission of the report; 
(4)  A statement from the owner or contractor certifying that the information in the report is truthful and accurate. 
(b)  It shall be sufficient proof of compliance if the owner or contractor maintains records of the following for two years from submission of the report; and provides copies upon request: 
(1)  Weight tickets from the owner or contractor that show the amount of debris from the project taken to an approved recycling facility; and 
(2)  Weight tickets from the owner or contractor that show the amount of debris from the project taken to a landfill; or 
(3)  Proof of achievement of applicable green building certification credit resulting in the same limits for construction and demolition reuse/recycling of section 41-152 (reuse/recycling requirement): 
a.  LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) for New Construction MR Credit 2; 
b.  LEED for Homes MR Credit 3.1 - 1.5 points; 
c.  GBH (Green Built Home); or 
d.  Other green building certification acceptable to the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 2, 5-22-2012)  
Secs. 41-154, 41-155. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-O-19 , §§ 3, 4, adopted August 27, 2019, repealed §§ 41-154 and 41-155. Former §§ 41-154 and 41-155 pertained to refunds and use of construction and demolition reuse/recycling deposits and derived from Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 2, adopted May 22, 2012.  
Sec. 41-156. - Violations. 
Each violation to the provisions of this article shall be subject to the general penalty set forth in subsection 1-21(b). Each day in violation of the provisions of this article shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 2, 5-22-2012)  
Sec. 41-157. - Effective date. 
Chapter 41 as recreated by Ord. No. 2013-O-03 shall take effect on the day after publication of Ord. No. 2013-O-03. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-16, § 2, 5-22-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-03, 3-26-2013)  
Chapter 42 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SERVICES 
(RESERVED)  
Chapter 44 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Police and firefighting services generally, Wis. Stats. § 213.01 et seq.; municipal police and fire departments, Wis. Stats. § 62.13; regulation of fireworks, Wis. Stats. § 167.10; regulation of hazardous substances, Wis. Stats. § 167.11; negligent handling of burning material, Wis. Stats. § 941.10; unsafe burning of buildings, Wis. Stats. § 941.11; interfering with firefighting, Wis. Stats. § 941.12; false fire alarms, Wis. Stats. § 941.13; town fire wardens, Wis. Stats. § 26.13; authority of local fire chief and inspector regarding multifamily dwellings, Wis. Stats. § 101.976; mutual aid agreements, Wis. Stats. § 175.46; firefighter pay, Wis. Stats. § 213.12; police power of fire chief, Wis. Stats. § 213.095; emergency medical services personnel, Wis. Stats. § 256.15; definitions of fire chief, fire department, and firefighter, Wis. Stats. § 880.01; open burning, Wis. Stats. § 289.51; fire inspections, prevention, detection, and suppression, Wis. Stats. § 101.14. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 44-1—44-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 44-19. - Established; personnel. 
The city fire department consists of a fire chief, deputy chief-fire prevention and such number of firefighters as shall from time to time be provided for by the common council and appointed by the fire chief with the approval of the board of police and fire commissioners. The department is organized under Wis. Stats. § 62.13, operates pursuant to the laws of the state and ordinances of the city, under the direct supervision of the fire chief, who is responsible for the program of fire defense and prevention for the citizens and property within the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.01)  
Sec. 44-20. - Fire chief. 
(a)  Head of department. The fire department shall be under the direction of the fire chief, subject to the lawful written orders of the mayor and city council. 
(b)  Appointment and removal. The chief of the fire department shall be appointed by the city board of police and fire commissioners for an indefinite term, subject to suspension or removal by the board for cause under Wis. Stats. § 62.13(5) and the rules and regulations of the board. The chief shall be selected on the basis of demonstrated qualifications in fire prevention, control and management. 
(c)  Duties and responsibilities. The chief shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  To appoint, assign and promote individuals to firefighter and other subordinate positions within the department in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 62.13, the personnel policies of the city, the rules and regulations of the board and the policies and procedures of the department. Appointments of firefighters shall be made by promotion when this can be done to advantage, otherwise from the eligible list prepared by the board. Firefighter appointments are subject to approval by the board. 
(2)  To administer the city fire department under the supervision of the mayor and city council. It will be the responsibility of the mayor to ensure that the chief carries out proper planning, coordination and control within the fire department as well with other departments of the city in accordance with law and policies established by the city council. 
(3)  To administer and enforce all laws relating to fire prevention and control, including the provisions of this article. 
(4)  To develop organizational structure, policies, and procedures to achieve the goals of the department. 
(5)  To develop policies to provide for operation of the department at the highest levels of safety and health for all members. The prevention of accidents, injuries, and occupational illnesses shall be primary considerations at all times. This concern for safety and health applies to all members of the department and to any other persons who may be involved in department activities. 
(6)  To develop and administer the annual department budget in accordance with chapter 2, finance. 
(7)  To provide the mayor and common council with projections of needs and goals spanning five, ten, and 20 years. These reports should be adjusted as frequently as changing conditions dictate and shall include predicted annual budget requests for personnel, equipment and capital expenditures. 
(8)  To identify the need for, negotiate and draft mutual and/or automatic aid agreements with agencies of other communities. Such agreements shall be submitted to the mayor and common council for review, consideration and approval. 
(9)  To maintain liaison with other city departments on matters of importance to the goals of the fire department. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.03)  
Sec. 44-21. - Firefighters. 
(a)  Selection. Firefighters shall be selected by the chief with the approval of the board in accordance with subsection (c)(1) of this section. 
(b)  Compensation. Persons receiving permanent appointments as firefighters shall receive such compensation as from time to time established by the city council. Such compensation may be based upon participation in department activities including, fire response and training. Except for failure to participate, compensation rates shall not be reduced without previous recommendation of the board. 
(c)  Layoffs, dismissals and reemployment. 
(1)  When it becomes necessary, because of need for economy, lack of work or funds, or for other just causes, to reduce the number of subordinates, the emergency, special, temporary, parttime or provisional subordinates, if any, shall be dismissed first, and thereafter subordinates shall be dismissed in the order of the shortest length of service in the department. 
(2)  When it becomes necessary for reasons stated in subsection (c)(1) of this section to reduce the number of subordinates in the higher positions or offices, or to abolish any higher positions or offices in the department, the subordinates affected thereby shall be placed in a position or office in the department less responsible according to his/her efficiency and length of service in the department. 
(3)  The name of a subordinate dismissed for any cause set forth in this section shall be left on an eligible reemployment list for a period of two years after date of dismissal. If any vacancy occurs, or if the number of subordinates is increased, in the department, such vacancy or new positions shall be filled by persons on such list in inverse order of dismissal. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.04)  
Secs. 44-22—44-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FIRE PREVENTION BUREAU 
 
Sec. 44-46. - Created; administration. 
(a)  Created. To assist in the performance of the responsibilities and duties placed on the fire chief, a bureau of fire prevention is hereby created within the city fire department. 
(b)  Administration. The fire prevention bureau shall operate under the supervision of the chief. The chief shall designate a member of the department as deputy chief-fire prevention. The deputy chief-fire prevention shall be responsible for direct administration and enforcement of the city fire prevention code. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.05(1), (2))  
Sec. 44-47. - Appointment of deputy chief-fire prevention, fire inspectors. 
The deputy chief-fire prevention shall be designated on the basis of the candidate's demonstrated qualifications in fire prevention, investigation and public fire safety education. The fire chief may also designate such number of inspectors as shall be authorized by the mayor and city council. Inspectors shall be selected on the basis of demonstrated qualifications in fire prevention investigation and public fire safety education. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.05(3))  
Sec. 44-48. - Duties. 
The members of the bureau of fire prevention shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  To enforce all laws and ordinances of the city relating to prevention of fires, storage, sale and use of combustible, flammable or explosive materials, installation and maintenance of automatic suppression fire alarm and other fire extinguishing equipment; and means and adequacy of exit in case of fire from factories, schools, hotels, roominghouses, multiple-family dwellings, hospitals, churches, halls, theaters, amphitheaters, and all other places in which numbers of persons work, live or congregate, from time to time for any purpose. 
(2)  To investigate the origin, cause and circumstances of every fire occurring within the city. 
(3)  To maintain fire cause and loss records. 
(4)  Such other duties as may be imposed by law or required by the chief or mayor. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.05(4))  
Sec. 44-49. - Fire records. 
The deputy chief-fire prevention shall keep a record of all fires within the city and all facts concerning the same. Such record shall be made monthly from reports completed under the provisions of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.05(5))  
Sec. 44-50. - Annual report. 
The deputy chief-fire prevention shall make an annual report to the mayor of activities of the bureau of fire prevention and any recommended amendments to the city fire prevention code and shall submit this report to the chief for review and approval before filing with the mayor. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.05(6))  
Sec. 44-51. - Fire investigations administered. 
The fire prevention bureau shall investigate the origin, cause, and circumstances of every fire occurring in the city. Such investigation shall begin immediately upon the occurrence of a fire. The deputy chief-fire prevention shall take steps to obtain physical evidence, notify the proper law enforcement authorities and cooperate with other agencies as required. Every fire shall be reported in writing to the fire prevention bureau within two days of its occurrence. Such report shall be submitted as prescribed by the deputy chief-fire prevention, and shall contain a statement of all facts relating to the origin, cause, and circumstances of such fire, the extent of the damage and such other information as may be required. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.05(7))  
Sec. 44-52. - Permit inspections. 
The fire prevention bureau shall inspect and approve all locations and objects for any use or structure requiring a permit under article III of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.05(8))  
Sec. 44-53. - Periodic fire inspections. 
The fire prevention bureau shall inspect all premises classified as public occupancies on a periodic basis to determine compliance with the laws and ordinances applicable to fire prevention. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.05(9))  
Sec. 44-54. - Corrective orders. 
Whenever any fire inspector finds any of the following conditions, the inspector shall order removal of the dangerous matter, obstruction or remedy of the condition: 
(1)  Combustible or explosive matter; 
(2)  Dangerous accumulations of rubbish or flammable material; 
(3)  Obstructed means of exit; 
(4)  Obstructions likely to interfere with operations of the department or egress of occupants in case of fire; 
a corrective order shall be served upon the owner and occupant of the premises by delivering a copy to the occupant personally or leaving it with any person of suitable age and discretion in charge of the premises or, in case no such person is found upon the premises by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on or near the entrance of said premises. The owner of the premises shall be served personally or by delivering a copy of the order to a person of suitable age and discretion at the owner's residence or place of business or, if such owner is absent from the city, by mailing a copy by certified mail to the owner's last known post office address. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.05(10))  
Sec. 44-55. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by any of the following decisions of the fire chief or deputy chief-fire prevention may appeal to the zoning board of appeals within 30 days after the decision and shall be entitled to review in accordance with the rules of procedure for the board of appeals except those rules specifically related to zoning appeals: 
(1)  Rejection of an application for any required permit, certificate or approval; 
(2)  Revocation of any permit or certificate previously issued; 
(3)  Conditioning issuance of any required permit certificate or approval upon compliance with any requirements other than those established by this chapter or by any other applicable state, federal, county or city law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.05(11))  
Secs. 44-56—44-83. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - AUTHORITY OF FIRE OFFICIALS 
 
Sec. 44-84. - Control at scene. 
The fire chief or department official conducting operations in connection with the extinguishment and control of any fire, explosion or other emergency shall have full authority to direct all operations of fire extinguishment or control and to take the necessary precautions to save life, protect property and prevent further injury or damage as provided in Wis. Stats. § 213.095. In the pursuit of such operations, including the investigation of the cause of such emergency, the chief or department official may control or prohibit the approach to the scene of such emergency by any person. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.06(1))  
Sec. 44-85. - Access barriers at scene of emergency. 
The chief or official in charge of an emergency scene shall have the authority to establish fire line barriers to control access in the vicinity of such emergency, and to secure any street, alley or fire lane. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.06(2))  
Sec. 44-86. - Obstruction of operations prohibited. 
No person shall obstruct the operations of the department in connection with extinguishing any fire or responding to other emergencies. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.07(1))  
Sec. 44-87. - Disobedience of fire officials. 
No person shall disobey any lawful command of the fire official in charge of the emergency, or any lawful order of a police officer assisting the fire department at any fire or other emergency. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.07(2))  
Sec. 44-88. - Crossing or removing fire line barriers. 
No unauthorized person shall cross a fire line barrier or remove, unlock, destroy or tamper with any barricade or sign which has been lawfully installed by the fire department or by its order or is under its control. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.07(3))  
Secs. 44-89—44-119. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 44-120. - Required. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section all permits required under this chapter or the codes adopted herein shall be required under this Code and shall be obtained from the fire chief or his/her designee. 
(b)  Building plan check. The owner or applicant for a building permit for a multiple dwelling, commercial, manufacturing or public assembly unit shall pay a plan check to offset actual costs incurred by the fire department for inspection and review of plans and on-site inspection during the planning and construction period of the development or construction. 
(c)  Exceptions. The following permits shall not be required under this Code: 
(1)  Combustible dust-producing operations. 
(2)  Compressed and liquefied gases. 
(3)  Flammable and combustible liquids. 
(4)  Flammable finishing. 
(5)  Pyroxylin plastics. 
(6)  Welding cutting and other hot work. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.29(1))  
Sec. 44-121. - Fees. 
Fees as set forth in the annual budget fee schedule shall be paid to the city treasurer for the permits certificates, approvals and other functions performed under this Code with an application for permit approval, certificate and any required inspection. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.29(2))  
Secs. 44-122—44-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - FIRE PROTECTION CHARGES 
 
Sec. 44-141. - Scope. 
Due to the continuing increase in the cost of providing adequate fire protection to the city, a fire protection fund is to be established to assist in the provision of this service. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.30(1))  
Sec. 44-142. - Impositions. 
The city shall impose a fee for service rendered by the fire department which imposes a financial burden above the level of service established by the common council in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Standby charges. The fire chief may charge a standby fee for costs incurred by the city that are necessitated by a need for special fire protection and prevention devices provided for special functions general public safety at emergency and nonemergency situations. The fee will be based on the schedule as adopted pursuant to section 44-143. 
(2)  User fee. The fire chief may charge a fee based on actual cost incurred by the city for any service performed by the fire department where the service requires a recall of additional fire personnel or the use of specialized equipment or resources to terminate an emergency. 
(3)  State and federal mandated duties. The fire chief may bill the offices or agencies of the state or the United States actual costs incurred for the performance of duties mandated by them. This charge will be based on the schedule as adopted pursuant to section 44-143. 
(4)  Fire cause determination fee. The fire chief may charge a fee for all costs incurred by the fire department for providing service as the result of actions that are determined to be a violation of the fire prevention code. This fee will be based on the schedule as adopted pursuant to section 44-143 and shall be payable by the person. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.30(2))  
Sec. 44-143. - Fee schedule. 
The fees as provided under section 44-142 shall be based upon actual costs of services rendered. The fire chief shall annually present to the common council for approval, a fee schedule based on the approved fire department budget. The fee schedule will encompass manpower, equipment, material and maintenance costs to ensure proper charges for services rendered. Said schedule shall be as set forth in the annual budget fee schedule. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.30(3))  
Sec. 44-144. - Charges binding on successors. 
The fees in section 44-142 shall be binding upon all persons rendered such services as well as their successors in interest, assigns, estates and heirs. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.30(4))  
Sec. 44-145. - Disposition of funds. 
All monies received under the provisions of this division shall be placed in an account set up for the express purpose of funding expenses necessary to furnish fire protection to the citizens of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.30(5))  
Sec. 44-146. - Fire facilities impact fee. 
(a)  Authority. 
(1)  This section is authorized under Wis. Stats. § 66.0617. 
(2)  The provisions of this section shall not be construed to limit the power of the city to adopt this section pursuant to any other source of local authority, nor to utilize any other methods or powers otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set forth in subsection (c) of this section, either in substitution of or in conjunction with this section. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Capital cost means the capital costs to construct, expand, upgrade or improve public facilities, including the cost of land, and including legal, engineering and design and permit costs to construct, expand, upgrade or improve public facilities, except that not more than ten percent of capital costs may consist of legal, engineering and design costs unless the city can demonstrate that its legal, engineering and design costs which relate directly to the public improvement for which the impact fees were imposed exceed ten percent of costs. The term "capital costs" does not include other non-capital costs to construct, expand, upgrade or improve public facilities, the costs of equipment to construct, expand, upgrade or improve public facilities or the costs for vehicles. 
Developer means a person that constructs or creates a land development. 
Impact fees means cash fees imposed upon a developer under this section. 
Land development means the construction or modification of improvements to real property that creates additional residential dwelling units within the city, or that results in nonresidential uses that create a need for new, expanded or improved fire protection facilities within the city. 
(c)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the community and to facilitate the adequate provision for fire protection by imposing impact fees upon those developing or redeveloping their property within the city, to pay for the necessary capital costs for the facilities needed. 
(d)  Imposition of fees. 
(1)  Impact fees are hereby imposed on all land development within the city. 
(2)  For all development, impact fees shall be due in full upon the issuance of a building permit. 
(3)  The effective date of a building permit is the date on which all impact fees imposed under this section are paid in full and unless all impact fees are paid in full upon issuance as required by Wis. Stats. § 66.0617(6)(g); said building permit shall expire 15 days after issuance. 
(e)  Payment and collection of fees; use of fund. 
(1)  Any developer creating or constructing land development within the city shall pay a fee to the city to provide for the capital costs of fire protection facilities that are necessary to accommodate land development. 
(2)  The fire facilities impact fee shall be established according to the following tables: 
Projected Five Year Rate Increase 
Fire Protection Impact Fee 
Year 	Single-Family Residential (per d.u.) 	Multifamily Residential (per d.u.) 	Studio and One-Bedroom Apartment 	Commercial/Industrial (per SF) 	Industrial/Business Park Use 
2009 (1) 	$500 	$500 	$500 	$0.100 	$0.050 
2010 	$524 	$493 	$462 	$0.126 	$0.069 
2011 	$549 	$487 	$424 	$0.151 	$0.087 
2012 	$573 	$480 	$387 	$0.177 	$0.106 
2013 	$597 	$473 	$349 	$0.203 	$0.124 
2014 (2) 	$622 	$466 	$311 	$0.228 	$0.143 
Notes: 
(1) Existing Fire Protection Impact Fee $500.00 per dwelling unit l; $500.00 per commercial unit or per 5,000 sq. ft. whichever is greater; $500.00 per manufacturing unit or 4,000 sq. ft. whichever is greater; and $500.00 per public assembly unit or 2,500 sq. ft. whichever is greater. 
(2) Calculated fire impact fee calculated in 2010. Taken from Tables 13 and 14. 
 
(3)  Such fees collected by the city shall be placed in a special fund which shall be separate from the general fund of the city, and the special fund and all interest earned thereon shall be used exclusively for the particular capital costs for which the fee was imposed. 
(4)  Impact fees imposed and collected by the city under this section shall be used within the time limits defined by Wis. Stats. § 66.0617(9) by the city to pay the capital costs of the public facilities for which they were imposed, or, in the alternative, refunded to the current owner of the real property with respect to which the impact fees were imposed along with any interest that has accumulated. Specifically, the time limits shall be as follows: 
a.  With regard to impact fees collected within seven years of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived enacting the impact fees, ten years after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived enacting the impact fees. 
b.  With regard to impact fees collected more than seven years after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived enacting the impact fees, 20 years after the date on which the fee was collected. 
(5)  Impact fees for redevelopment and building additions shall be calculated as follows: 
a.  Redeveloped properties shall be charged the total amount of the impact fee for the redeveloped use less the impact fee that would be imposed for its current (predevelopment) use. 
b.  Impact fees for building additions shall be calculated on the square footage in excess or in addition to the existing structure. 
(f)  Fee reduction. Any impact fee imposed under this section shall be reduced to compensate for capital costs otherwise imposed by the city, upon the land development subject to this section, for the same public facilities for which an impact fee has been imposed under this section, including, by way of special assessments, special charges, land dedications, or any ordinance adopted thereunder or any other items of value. Impact fees imposed under this section shall also be reduced to compensate for moneys received from the federal or state government specifically to provide or pay for the public facilities for which the impact fees under this section are imposed. 
(g)  Exemption from fees. The lawful new construction of a single-family dwelling structure upon a nondivisible parcel of land supporting or having supported a habitable single-family dwelling structure razed or to be razed within one year of the date of the issuance of a building permit for the new construction as part of the new construction project shall be exempt from the fees imposed under this section. Any new construction of a single-family dwelling structure upon a single parcel of land involving the demolition of a preexisting residential structure upon such single parcel of land, which project is similar to but not exactly as described above to be exempt, may be found to be exempt upon application to the city council and a finding by the city council that such project does not bear a rational relationship to the need for new, expanded or improved public facilities required to serve such development. Such application shall be made to the city council prior to the payment of any fees under this section. 
(h)  Administration and review. 
(1)  All fees collected and special accounts maintained under this section shall be subject to administration by the city treasurer. The city treasurer shall report annually to the city council with regard to all deposits, withdrawals and fund balances in these accounts. The purpose of the annual report is to provide the city council with information necessary to determine that all funds collected are spent within the time required for the purpose intended and that the amount of fees imposed continues to represent an equitable and reasonable apportionment of the cost of public improvements and requirements generated by land development. The revenue and expenditure totals for each impact fee must also be included in the city's annual budget, and a summary of the revenue and expenditure totals for each impact fee must also be made available in the city's annual budget summary required under Wis. Stats. § 65.90(3)(a). 
(2)  As part of the annual budget process, the impact fees imposed under this section shall be increased annually at a rate equal to the percentage change in the Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index 20-City Average for the previous 12 months, with the adjustment effective January 1 of each year. The city treasurer or his/her designee shall calculate the adjusted fees and maintain a copy of the calculation and the adjusted impact fees in the office of the city clerk. 
(i)  Appeal. Any developer upon whom an impact fee is imposed under this section shall have the right to contest the amount, collection or use of the impact fee to the city council, provided that the developer files a written notice of appeal in the city clerk's office within 15 days of the developer's filing of an application for a building permit upon which the impact fee is imposed. Such notice of appeal shall be entitled "Notice of Appeal of Impact Fee" and shall state the developer's name, address, telephone number, address (if available) and legal description of the land development upon which the impact fee is imposed, and a statement of the nature of and reasons for the appeal. The city clerk shall schedule the appeal for consideration by the city council at a regular meeting as soon as reasonably practicable under the circumstances and shall notify the developer of the time, date and place of such meeting, in writing, by regular mail, deposited in the mail no later than at least three days before the date of such meeting. Upon review of such appeal, the city council may adjust the amount, collection or use of the impact fee upon just and reasonable cause shown. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.31; Ord. No. 2010-O-15, § II(2.202), 10-26-2010)  
Secs. 44-147—44-175. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 44-176. - Purpose. 
The provisions of this article are intended to provide for the city rules and regulations to improve public safety by promoting the control of fire hazards; regulating the installation, use and maintenance of equipment; regulating the use of structures, premises and open areas; providing for the abatement of fire hazards; establishing the responsibilities and procedures for code enforcement and setting forth the standards for compliance with and achievement of objectives. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.08)  
Sec. 44-177. - Applicability. 
Except as specifically otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this fire prevention code shall apply equally on public and private property and to all locations. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.09)  
Sec. 44-178. - Exercise of police powers. 
This article shall be deemed an exercise of the police powers of the city for the preservation and protection of public health, safety and welfare and all provisions hereof shall be liberally construed for that purpose. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.33)  
Sec. 44-179. - National and state fire safety codes adopted. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, there are hereby adopted as part of the fire prevention code of the city and incorporated herein as if fully set forth the following codes and standards: 
(1)  NFPA 1, 1987 edition, "Fire Prevention Code," of the National Fire Protection Association, including its incorporated Standards, Annexes, Codes and Appendices, as published in the National Fire Codes of the National Fire Protection Association. 
(2)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. COMM 10, Flammable, Combustible and Hazardous Liquids. 
(3)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. COMM 48, Petroleum Products. 
(4)  Wis. Admin. Code chs. COMM 61 through 65. 
(b)  Exceptions. The following sections of Annex A of the 1987 edition of the NFPA "Fire Prevention Code" are excluded from the Fitchburg Fire Prevention Code: 
(1)  3-9.2 Matches. 
(2)  3-9.2 Type Permitted. 
(3)  3-9.2.2 Packaging and Labeling. 
(4)  3-9.2.3 Storage Requirements. 
(5)  3-9.2.3.1 Vertical Openings. 
(6)  3-9.2.3.2 Sources of Ignition. 
(7)  3-9.2.3.3 Storage at Whole Sale Outlets. 
(8)  3-9.2.3.4 Match Storage with other Commodities. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.10(1), (2))  
Sec. 44-180. - Copies of incorporated codes to be filed. 
At least one copy each of all codes and standards incorporated in this fire prevention code as set forth in section 44-179(a) shall be kept on file and open for public inspection during all business hours in the office of the deputy chief-fire prevention. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.10(3))  
Sec. 44-181. - State statutes adopted. 
The following provisions of the state law except the penalties therefor, which shall be as provided in section 1-21, are hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth and prohibited by the city within its corporate boundaries: 
Wis. Stats. § 50.56 	Hotel safety. 
Wis. Stats. § 254.76 	Causing fires by tobacco smoking. 
Wis. Stats. § 100.41 	Flammable fabric sales. 
Wis. Stats. § 941.11 	Unsafe burning of buildings. 
Wis. Stats. § 941.12 	Interference with firefighting. 
Wis. Stats. § 943.01 	Criminal damage to property. 
Wis. Stats. § 943.02 	Arson of buildings; damage of property by explosion. 
Wis. Stats. § 943.03 	Arson of property other than building. 
Wis. Stats. § 943.04 	Arson with intent to deface. 
Wis. Stats. § 943.05 	Placing of combustible materials an attempt. 
Wis. Stats. § 943.06 	Molotov cocktails. 
 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.07(4), (5))  
Secs. 44-182—44-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - JUNK AND DEBRIS 
 
Secs. 44-201—44-223. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FIRES AND BLASTING 
 
Secs. 44-224—44-254. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - FIRE-DAMAGED BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 44-255. - Order to owner to abate hazardous burned structure. 
If the fire chief finds that any building or its contents or both are damaged by fire to a point where the structure and contents present a health or life safety hazard to the public, the chief may issue orders to the owner of the property on which the building is located to abate such hazard through repair or removal of the building and/or its contents. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.14)  
Sec. 44-256. - Service of order. 
Such orders shall be served personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested on the owner and each lienholder of record in the office of the county register of deeds, whose address is known or can be ascertained with reasonable diligence and include a time period to complete abatement of such hazard to extend no more than 60 days. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.14)  
Sec. 44-257. - Extension of time for owner to comply with order. 
Written request for extension of the time permitted to complete ordered repairs or removal shall be submitted to the fire chief within 45 days after the fire. The written request must contain the following information: 
(1)  The reason compliance cannot be completed within the 60-day limit; 
(2)  The projected date the repairs are to start; 
(3)  The type of repairs to be conducted; and 
(4)  The projected date repairs are to be completed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.14)  
Sec. 44-258. - Removal by city; owner liable for expenses. 
After 60 days the fire chief may order the building and contents removed to an appropriate landfill site. The owner of the property will be held responsible for any expenses incurred, and any expenses incurred by the city shall not be paid within 30 days of billing shall be levied against the premises on which the building was located pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0703 as a special charge for current services. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.14)  
Secs. 44-259—44-279. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - EMERGENCY LIGHTING 
 
Sec. 44-280. - Scope. 
Emergency illumination shall include all required exit lights and emergency lighting as required by this division. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.19(1))  
Sec. 44-281. - In public areas. 
Emergency lighting shall be installed in the following occupancies: 
(1)  Factories. Within any factory over two interior stories or 10,000 square feet in gross interior area. 
(2)  Offices. Within any office over two interior stories or 10,000 square feet gross interior area. 
(3)  Mercantile buildings. Within any mercantile building over two interior stories or 4,000 square feet in gross interior area. 
(4)  Places of public assembly. Within any place of public assembly (buildings with an occupancy load of 100 people or more) regardless of size. 
(5)  Residential occupancies. Residential buildings with common areas and containing ten or more bedrooms (efficiency units shall be considered as bedrooms). 
(6)  Taverns. Within any tavern regardless of size. 
(7)  Schools and places of instruction (including day care centers). Within any school or place of instruction housing more than 20 students. 
(8)  Health care facility. Within any health care facility regardless of size. 
(9)  Place of detention. Within any place any place detention regardless of size. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.19(2))  
Sec. 44-282. - Battery backup for exit lights. 
All illuminated exit signs required under state administrative rules and this Code shall be equipped with emergency power to maintain illumination during power failure. Any illuminated exit signs installed prior to the activation of this division shall be upgraded at the time of remodeling. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.19(3))  
Sec. 44-283. - Standards. 
Emergency illumination shall be installed in accordance with National Electrical Code 700-16. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.19(4))  
Sec. 44-284. - Emergency lighting locations. 
Emergency lighting shall be located in hallways, stairwells, open meeting areas 1,000 square feet or larger and basements. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.19(5))  
Secs. 44-285—44-301. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 
 
Sec. 44-302. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to ensure safe and effective hazardous materials and hazardous waste management and to establish a program of regulation over the storage, transportation, treatment and disposal of hazardous materials and waste in the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.28(1))  
Sec. 44-303. - Findings. 
The common council finds that: 
(1)  Increasing production and consumption rates, continuing technological development and energy requirements have led to the generation and use of greater quantities of hazardous materials and associated hazardous waste; 
(2)  The problems of disposing of hazardous waste are increasing as a result of air and water pollution controls and a shortage of available landfill sites; 
(3)  While it is technologically and financially feasible for hazardous waste generators to dispose of their waste in a manner which has a less adverse impact on the environment than current practices, such knowledge is not being utilized to the extent possible; 
(4)  Even though the city is not heavily industrialized, there is a significant daily hazardous waste disposal problem; and 
(5)  The public health and safety and the environment are threatened where hazardous materials and wastes are not managed in an environmentally sound manner. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.28(2))  
Sec. 44-304. - Definitions. 
As used in this division the following terms shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Disposal means the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of any hazardous material or waste into or on any land or water so that this hazardous waste or any constituent thereof may enter the environment, be emitted into the air, or discharge into any waters, including groundwaters. 
Fire chief means the fire chief of the city or his/her designated agent. 
Generation means the act or process of producing hazardous waste. 
Hazardous material (substances/wastes) means any substance which results or may result in adverse affects on the health or safety of employees, the general public, or the environment; any chemical, radiological or biological agent and other disease causing agent; or waste or combination of wastes. 
Storage means containment in such manner as not to constitute disposal. 
Transport means the movement from the point of production, generation or use to any intermediate site, and finally to the point of ultimate storage or disposal. 
Treatment means any method, technique or process, including neutralization, designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or composition of hazardous waste so as to neutralize or render it nonhazardous, safer for transport, amenable for recovery or storage, or reduced in volume. 
Treatment facility means a location for treatment, including an incinerator or a facility where generation has occurred. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.28(3))  
Sec. 44-305. - Prohibited discharge. 
No person shall discharge or cause to discharge, leak, leach or spill any hazardous material as defined section 44-304 upon any public street, alley or public property, or onto the ground, surface waters, subsurface waters, aquifers, or on any private property within the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.28(4))  
Sec. 44-306. - Containment, cleanup and restoration. 
Any person in violation of this section must, upon direction of the fire chief begin immediate actions to contain, cleanup and remove to an approved repository the offending material and restore the site to its original condition. Should any person fail to engage or complete the requirements of this section, the fire chief may order the required actions to be taken by public or private resources, with all costs incurred by the city to be reimbursed by the person violating this division. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.28(5))  
Sec. 44-307. - Access. 
Access to any site, public or private, where a prohibited discharge is indicated or suspected shall be provided to the fire chief for purpose of evaluating the threat to the public and monitor containment, cleanup and restoration. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.28(6))  
Sec. 44-308. - Public protection. 
Should any prohibited discharge occur that reasonably causes a threat to the life, safety, or health of the public, the senior fire officer on the scene may order an evacuation of the area or take other appropriate protective steps for a period of time as deemed necessary for the safety of the public. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.28(7))  
Sec. 44-309. - Enforcement. 
The fire chief and any fire inspector shall have authority to issue citations or complaints under this section. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.28(8))  
Sec. 44-310. - Civil liability. 
Any person who shall violate this section shall be liable to the city for any expenses incurred by the city or loss or damage sustained by the city by reason of such violation and to any individual whose person or property was damaged by such violation. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.28(9))  
Secs. 44-311—44-338. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - HIGH RISE BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 44-339. - Scope. 
This section shall apply to all buildings, having floors located more than 60 feet above the lowest interior level or exceeding five stories. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.26(1))  
Sec. 44-340. - Construction. 
Highrise buildings shall be constructed of class 1, fire resistive construction as defined in Wis. Admin. Code § COMM 75.02. 
(1)  Stairway doors and telephones. Doors from stairways to floors may be locked only if provided with remote release from building control station. Stairways must have telephone or intercom to building control station at least every three floors if locked. On power failure locks must release and the door must remain unlocked. 
(2)  Smoke control. Openable windows, tempered glass or openable panels must be provided to accomplish ventilation during fire operations. Tempered glass shall be marked with a two-inch etched circle. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.26(2))  
Sec. 44-341. - Automatic sprinkler and standpipe systems. 
(a)  An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in accordance with article V, division 4 of this chapter, pertaining to automatic sprinkler systems. 
(b)  A standpipe system shall be installed in accordance with article V, division 3 of this chapter, pertaining to standpipe and hose systems. 
(c)  Shutoff valves and water flow detection devices for the standpipe and sprinkler systems shall be provided for each floor. 
(d)  Standpipe and sprinkler valves shall be supervised by a continuously manned station or central station. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.26(3))  
Sec. 44-342. - Fire and smoke detection systems. 
Fire and smoke detection systems shall be installed in accordance with article VI, division 3 of this chapter. In addition, the following shall be installed: 
(1)  At least one approved smoke detector, suitable for the intended use, shall be installed: 
a.  Within every mechanical equipment, electrical transformer or control, telephone equipment, elevator machine or similar room. 
b.  Within the main return and exhaust air plenum of each air conditioning system and located in a serviceable area downstream of the last duct inlet. 
(2)  Detectors installed under subsection (1) of this section shall activate an alarm or signaling system and shut down the ventilation system except where automatic smoke control is incorporated in the system. 
(3)  Approved heat detection equipment shall be installed in boiler rooms and furnace rooms in lieu of smoke detection equipment. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.26(4))  
Sec. 44-343. - Alarm and communications systems. 
The alarm and communications system shall be installed in compliance with NFPA 72F, "Emergency Voice/Alarm Communication Systems," and the following standards: 
(1)  Installation. The alarm and communications systems shall be designed and installed so that damage to any terminal unit or speaker will not render more than one zone of the system inoperative. 
(2)  Voice alarm system. The operation of any smoke detector, sprinkler, water flow device or manual fire alarm station shall automatically sound an alarm signal to the desired areas, followed by voice instructions giving appropriate information and direction to the occupant. The voice alarm and public address system may be a combined system. When approved by the fire department, the communications system may be combined with the voice alarm system and the public address system. 
a.  The central control station shall contain controls for the voice alarm system so that a selective or general voice alarm may be manually initiated. 
b.  The system shall be supervised to cause the activation of an audible trouble signal in the central control station upon interruption or failure of the audiopath, including amplifiers, speaker wiring, switches and electrical contacts, and shall detect opens, shorts and grounds which might impair the function of the system. 
c.  The alarm shall be designed to be heard clearly by all occupants within the building or designated portions thereof as is required for the public address system. 
(3)  Public address system. A public address communications system designed to be clearly heard by all occupants of the building shall operate from the central control station. It shall be capable of directing messages selectively or on a general basis to the following terminal areas: 
a.  Elevators. 
b.  Elevator lobbies. 
c.  Corridors. 
d.  Exit stairways. 
e.  Rooms and tenant spaces exceeding 1,000 square feet in area. 
f.  Dwelling units. 
g.  Hotel guestrooms and/or suites. 
(4)  Fire department communications system. A central control station for fire department operations shall be provided in a location approved by the department. This station shall contain: 
a.  Voice alarm and public address system control panels; 
b.  Two-way communications between the control station and all elevators, elevator lobbies, exit access and stairways at each floor. The type of equipment proposed for this function shall be approved by the fire department; 
c.  Fire detection and alarm system annunciator panels; 
d.  Annunciator visually indicating the location and status of each elevator; 
e.  Status indicators and controls for air-handling systems; 
f.  Controls for unlocking all stairway doors simultaneously; 
g.  Sprinkler valve and water flow detector display panels; 
h.  Standby power controls and status indicators; 
i.  A telephone for fire department use with controlled access to the public telephone system; 
j.  Small scale layout plan of building showing all permanent partitions, identifying permanent areas and doorways, exterior wall openings suitable for use in smoke ventilation, elevator locations and stair locations; 
k.  Diagrams to indicate the location of the main shutoffs for sprinkler or standpipe systems, electrical, water, gas and steam systems with an indication of the areas served by each of these main shutoffs; 
l.  A list of names indicating all key building operating personnel and where they may be reached; 
m.  An emergency plan of action for the building with personnel responsibilities defined. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.26(5))  
Sec. 44-344. - Standby power and lighting. 
(a)  An approved, permanently installed standby power generating system shall be provided. The system shall be equipped with suitable means for automatically starting the generator set upon failure of the normal electrical service and for automatic transfer and operations of the required electrical functions at full power within 60 seconds of such normal service failure. 
(b)  System supervision with manual start and transfer features shall be provided at the central control station. An on-premises fuel supply, sufficient for not less than 12 hours full demand operation of the system shall be provided. The power requirement shall be determined so as to provide service to, but not limited to, fire alarm system, exit and other emergency lighting, fire protection equipment, mechanical ventilation equipment, elevators, communications systems. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.26(6))  
Sec. 44-345. - Maintenance. 
All communications, fire protection, detection and suppression systems required under this section, shall be tested and maintained in an operable condition. All installed equipment required under this section shall be maintained pursuant the appropriate standards of the National Fire Protection Association adopted in section 44-179. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.26(7))  
Sec. 44-346. - Floor level identification. 
(a)  Stairways. All stairways shall have each floor level or story identified on both sides of the door leading to the stairway as to its name or number with a permanent sign having letters or characters at least two inches in height. 
(b)  Elevators. All elevators shall have each floor level or story identified on both sides of the door leading to the elevator shaft as to its name or number with a permanent sign having letters or characters at least two inches in height. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.26(8))  
Sec. 44-347. - Emergency elevator operations. 
Upon activation of the building fire alarm system the elevators shall return to the elevator lobby. A smoke detector shall be installed in the elevator lobby connected to the elevator controls. Upon activation of the lobby detectors the elevators shall proceed to another floor of refuge as approved by the fire chief. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.26(9))  
Sec. 44-348. - Lockboxes for keys for elevators and building control station area. 
(a)  Elevator control station and building control station keys shall be provided in a standard lockbox of a type approved by the fire department. 
(b)  Lockboxes shall be installed in the elevator lobby or other location approved by the department. 
(c)  Properly identified keys for emergency elevator control and keys required to gain access to the building control station shall be maintained in the lockbox. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.26(10))  
Secs. 44-349—44-369. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FIRE SUPPRESSION ACCESS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 44-370. - Keybox access to buildings required. 
(a)  Keybox required. When access to or within a structure or an area is unduly difficult because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for lifesaving or firefighting purposes, the fire chief may require that a keybox be installed in an accessible location. The keybox shall be a type approved by the fire department and shall contain those keys found to be necessary to provide emergency access. 
(b)  Property owner responsibility. The property owner is responsible to assure that keys maintained within a keybox are those of the current type. When a change of locks within the building is necessary, the fire department shall be notified with new keys placed in the keybox. 
(c)  Removal of key prohibited. Removal of any key by other than fire department or FitchRona EMS personnel shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.23; Ord. No. 2014-O-21, § 1, 6-24-2014)  
Sec. 44-371. - Access road for construction sites. 
(a)  Required. Every building construction site shall be accessible to fire department apparatus by way of an access roadway. An access roadway shall be in place and accessible to fire equipment prior to the delivery of any combustible construction materials. 
(b)  Design. Access roadways shall be extended to within 30 feet of the closest edge of the building and shall have not less than 20 feet of unobstructed width and a minimum of 13 feet six inches of vertical clearance. Access roadways in excess of 300 feet in length, shall be provided with approved provisions for a turnaround adequate for fire department apparatus. A driving surface of at least roadbase quality gravel shall be maintained at all times in order that all-weather integrity is ensured. The roadbase shall be capable of supporting the imposed loads of fire apparatus. 
(c)  Maintenance. During winter months the roads shall be maintained by the developer to include proper and timely snow removal. 
(d)  Penalty for noncompliance. In addition to all other applicable remedies, failure to comply with these requirements shall result in revocation of building permits or refusal to issue permits. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.22)  
Secs. 44-372—44-400. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FIRE LANES 
 
Sec. 44-401. - Where required. 
All premises, public or private, which the fire department may be called upon to protect in case of fire and which are not readily accessible from public roads, shall be provided with suitable gates, access roads and fire lanes so that all buildings on the premises are accessible to fire apparatus. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.21(1)(A))  
Sec. 44-402. - Fire lane standards. 
Fire lanes shall be provided on public or private property devoted to public use for all buildings used for human habitation or occupancy which are set back more than 100 feet from any roadway access or which exceed 30 feet in height and are set back more than 50 feet from a roadway. Fire lanes may also be designated on those private roadways where it is found by the fire chief that such access is necessary for fire apparatus. Fire lanes shall be at least 20 feet in width with the closest edge of the lane at least ten feet and no more than 30 feet from the building. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.21(1)(B), (C))  
Sec. 44-403. - Dead end roads; turn arounds. 
(a)  Any dead-end road more than 300 feet long shall be provided a turn around at the closed end of the roadway. Turn arounds can be T-type or hammerhead, cul-de-sac or curved driveway. 
(b)  Curves and turn arounds shall be designed for a 48-foot turning radius. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.21(1)(D), (E))  
Sec. 44-404. - Designation, marking and maintenance of fire lanes. 
The designation, marking and maintenance of fire lanes shall be accomplished as specified by the fire chief. The current state department of transportation standards for highway marking shall be used as guidelines in designating and marking fire lanes. 
(1)  Designated fire lanes shall be marked with signs within five feet of the beginning and within five feet of the end of fire lane, with spacing between signs not to exceed 75 feet. Each sign shall face in the direction of oncoming traffic. The curb shall be painted yellow, if there is no curb a four-inch wide stripe shall be painted the full length of the fire lane. Fire lane sign shall be affixed to a stationary pole or object. Sign shall be plainly visible. 
(2)  Roadways identified exclusively as fire lanes, shall be identified with approved fire lane signs on each side facing forward and the pavement area between the signs shall be striped with four-inch wide yellow stripes. 
(3)  Before the requirements may be enforced, the fire lane must be approved by the fire department. A sticker is placed on each sign indicating approval and authorizing enforcement of the provisions of the city fire prevention code. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.21(1)(F))  
Sec. 44-405. - Unlawful designation of fire lanes. 
Any person who shall post, damage or remove a fire lane sign without the approval of the fire department shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties provided in the forfeiture schedule, section 70-309. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.21(2))  
Sec. 44-406. - Emergency access. 
A written document, agreeable to the fire chief and for the benefit of the city, shall be required for emergency access over all fire lanes. The document shall define the area designated as a fire lane and shall specify those methods used to label or post the area as a fire lane. A copy of the document shall be kept on file in the fire department, police department, city clerk's office and building inspector's office. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.21(1)(G))  
Sec. 44-407. - Obstruction prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  Removal of unlawfully parked vehicles. Any vehicle that is parked within a lawfully designated and marked fire lane may be removed at the vehicle owner's expense. Vehicles will be towed away under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When a vehicle repeatedly violates this fire lane ordinance by habitually parking in a fire lane. 
(2)  When a vehicle blocks the ingress/egress of a business, theater, night club, apartment complex, gymnasium or a place of public assembly. 
(3)  When the vehicle's presence threatens the life safety of the public by impeding the ability of fire apparatus and/or emergency medical equipment to respond to an emergency. 
(4)  Removal of a vehicle under such circumstances may be authorized by the person in lawful possession of the property or by the fire chief or his/her representative. The police department may order the towing of a vehicle at any time the conditions set forth in this subsection exist. 
(b)  Citation for unlawfully parked vehicles. In addition to any other remedy authorized by this section, owners of vehicles parked in fire lanes may be cited with a notice of violation on a standard "Wisconsin Uniform Municipal Court Citation" form issued by a member of the police or fire department who has been granted citation authorization. 
(c)  Temporary loading or unloading permitted. Vehicles will be permitted to stop in a fire lane while actively loading or unloading provided the driver is present. When this requirement is met, a reasonable amount of time may be allowed for the completion of the transaction. 
(d)  Obstructions other than vehicles. Whenever an obstruction is found in a designated fire lane, an inspection report with warning notice shall be issued to the property owner, occupant or responsible party requiring that if the obstruction is not removed within the specified time period, the department may cause the removal of the obstruction with the cost of removal billed to the person responsible for the obstruction. 
(e)  Approval and authorization to obstruct fire lane when necessary. When it becomes necessary to obstruct a fire lane, i.e., construction remodeling or repair, a site approval shall be required and permission obtained from the department. A copy of the authorization shall be posted at the site. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.21(3))  
Sec. 44-408. - Unapproved signs. 
Fire lane signs posted without the approval of the department shall be removed or the fire lane shall be formally established and posted as required by this section. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.21(4))  
Secs. 44-409—44-429. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FIRE SUPPRESSION EQUIPMENT AND SYSTEMS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 44-430—44-456. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FIRE HYDRANTS 
 
Sec. 44-457. - When required. 
Where the municipal water system is available, and any portion of a commercial, residential or industrial building is set back more than 300 feet from the municipal fire hydrants, the owner shall install approved water hydrants at his/her expense. The setback distance shall be determined by measuring the travel distance from a municipal hydrant along the centerline of a municipal street or private road suitable for travel by fire apparatus. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.20(1))  
Sec. 44-458. - Location. 
(a)  Hydrants determined to be necessary in accordance with section 44-457 shall be freestanding and shall be installed not more than 50 feet nor less than 25 feet from the building. One hydrant shall be located at the main entryway to such building or complex. Additional hydrants shall be provided around the perimeter of the building or complex so no hydrant is more than 400 feet from any other approved hydrant as described in section 44-457. 
(b)  All water mains, hydrants and their location shall be approved by the city fire department. The hydrants shall be installed in such a manner and location so as to be accessible at all times to the fire department. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.20(2))  
Sec. 44-459. - Installed prior to construction. 
For new construction, hydrants required by this article shall be installed and made operable prior to permitting construction to progress beyond the footing and foundation stages. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.20(3))  
Sec. 44-460. - Specifications. 
All private water lines between the municipal water main and approved fire hydrants shall be no less than eight inches inside diameter. All water mains and hydrants shall be installed in compliance with the standards of the city utility commission. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.20(4))  
Sec. 44-461. - Blocking of fire hydrants prohibited. 
No person shall park any motor vehicle within ten feet of any fire hydrant or otherwise interfere with the accessibility of any fire hydrant by piling, dumping or placing any other obstructive material or object within ten feet of a fire hydrant without first obtaining written permission from the fire department. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties provided in the forfeiture schedule, section 70-309. Every day during which such interference continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.20(5))  
Sec. 44-462. - Marking of fire hydrants. 
Fire hydrants shall be marked with the curb painted yellow. The curb shall be painted to produce a 20-foot stripe extending ten feet to each side of the hydrant. Areas without curbs shall have a four-inch wide yellow stripe placed on the pavement. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.20(6))  
Secs. 44-463—44-492. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - STANDPIPE AND HOSE SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 44-493. - Scope. 
Standpipe and hose systems shall be installed and maintained in operable condition in the following occupancies and locations in the city: 
(1)  In any new building over three interior stories. 
(2)  Within any building 100,000 square feet or more in total gross area. 
(3)  Within any building having a horizontal dimension of 300 or more feet. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.25(1))  
Sec. 44-494. - Installation standards. 
Standpipe and hose systems shall be installed in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code § COMM 75.22 or NFPA 14, "Standards for Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems." Standpipe and hose systems required herein shall be of class I or III types, as specified in NFPA 14. Wet standpipe systems may be an integral part of an approved automatic sprinkler system, provided calculations for required fire flows have been submitted with sprinkler system plans. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.25(2))  
Sec. 44-495. - Maintenance. 
Standpipe and hose systems shall be maintained in accordance with NFPA 14, "Standards for Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems." 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.25(3))  
Sec. 44-496. - Areas without municipal water supply. 
Any building erected which falls within the criteria described in this division in an area which does not have a municipal water supply shall construct a dry type standpipe and hose system which the fire department can connect to in the event of an emergency. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.25(4))  
Sec. 44-497. - Areas with an inadequate municipal water supply. 
Any building erected for any of the uses described in section 44-493 in an area in which the municipal water supply cannot, for any reason, provide the water pressure or volume necessary to operate a standpipe and hose system shall have an approved fire pump or secondary water supply installed to provide the required water flow for that occupancy. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.25(5))  
Sec. 44-498. - Conditional approval required prior to installation. 
No standpipe and hose system shall be installed or altered in any building until three copies of each of the plans in this section plans and calculations have been submitted to, reviewed and conditionally approved by the city fire department. Conditionally approved plans shall be stamped with the date of review. One copy shall be returned to the owner, one copy kept on file in the fire department office. 
(1)  Plans and specifications. Plans (including drawing, diagrams as needed) shall be submitted, on all standpipe and hose systems, to the department for review and conditional approval. 
(2)  Calculations. Hydraulic calculations shall be submitted with all plans. The engineer producing the calculations shall stamp and sign the calculations. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.25(6))  
Sec. 44-499. - Installation inspection required. 
(a)  Underground piping. The installation of underground piping shall be inspected by an inspector from the fire department prior to being covered. 
(b)  Acceptance test. 
(1)  After installation standpipe and hose systems shall have a hydrostatic test performed by the installer in the presence of an inspector from the city fire department. The system shall be tested by the installer in accordance with NFPA 14. 
(2)  The installer shall give advance notice to the city fire department for any test to be conducted. 
(c)  Installer responsible for compliance. Failure to comply with the listed items can result in enforcement action against the installer. The penalties provided in the forfeiture schedule, section 70-309, shall apply. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.25(7))  
Sec. 44-500. - Annual testing and inspection report. 
Inspection of a standpipe and hose system shall be conducted annually by a qualified sprinkler/standpipe technician in accordance with NFPA 14, chapter 8. hydrostatic testing of underground piping may be omitted during annual testing. An inspection report shall be completed on the system inspected, and a copy of the report shall be submitted to the city fire department to be kept on file. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.25(8))  
Secs. 44-501—44-523. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 44-524. - Scope. 
Automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed and maintained in operable condition in all new occupancies and locations set forth in this division. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.24(1))  
Sec. 44-525. - Installation. 
Except for one- and two-family dwellings, the installation of any automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be completed in accordance with NFPA 13, "Installation of Sprinkler Systems." In one- and two-family dwellings automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 13D, "Standards for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in 1 and 2 Family Dwellings and Mobile Homes." 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.24(2))  
Sec. 44-526. - Monitoring requirements. 
New automatic sprinkler systems installed under this article shall be monitored by an approved central station monitoring service, except in one- and two-family dwellings and mobile homes and in apartments, townhouses condominiums, with less than 50 dwelling units. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.24(3))  
Sec. 44-527. - Maintenance and annual inspection. 
All automatic sprinkler systems shall be properly maintained for efficient service as specified in NFPA 13A, "Standard for the Care and Maintenance of Sprinkler Systems." Maintenance shall be the responsibility of the building owner. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.24(4))  
Sec. 44-528. - Where required. 
Classification of construction for purposes of this division is determined under the Wis. Admin. Code ch. COMM 75. Automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed and maintained in operable condition in the following new occupancies and locations: 
(1)  Within all new factories, workshops, office buildings, mercantile establishments, warehouses, passenger terminal, exhibition buildings and places of public assembly with less than a 100-person occupant load: 
a.  Where the building is of class 1 or class 2 fire-resistive construction and is 10,000 square feet or more in total area; 
b.  Where the building is of classes 3—8 non-fire-resistive construction and is 7,000 square feet or more in total area; or 
c.  Buildings of three interior stories or more in height regardless of area. 
(2)  Within new repair garages, motor vehicle storage garages and body shops: 
a.  Where the building is of class 1 or class 2 fire-resistive construction, and is 10,000 square feet or more in total area; 
b.  Where the building is of classes 3—8 non-fire-resistive construction, and is 7,000 square feet or more in total area; or 
c.  Where the building has 3 interior stories or more in height regardless of area; 
d.  In any basement or sub-basement if a vehicle can be parked therein. 
(3)  Within the following residential occupancies: 
a.  Multiple-family dwellings, apartment buildings, townhouses, condominiums, hotels, motels, dormitories, fraternities, sorority houses and other places of abode except one- and two-family dwellings. 
1.  New residential buildings having three interior stories or less in height or having no more than four living units shall have sprinklers installed in the basements, crawl spaces, stairways and corridors. 
2.  New residential buildings with more than three interior stories in height or containing more than a total of four living units shall be protected by an automatic sprinkler system installed throughout the building regardless of size or type of construction. 
3.  New residential buildings with no common interior area shall have a separate heated room for the sprinkler system riser. The room shall be provided with direct access to the outside of the building for use by fire department personnel. 
b.  Automatic sprinkler systems are not required in one- and two-family dwellings, but when installed shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Any installation of an automatic sprinkler system within a one- or two-family dwelling shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 13D "Standards for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in 1 and 2 Family Dwellings and Mobile Homes." 
2.  Automatic sprinkler systems installed within one- and two-family dwellings shall have two plans submitted to the fire department for review and conditional approval. 
3.  Residential quick response sprinkler heads are to be used in buildings of this type. 
4.  The installation of the sprinkler system shall be inspected by the fire department prior to enclosing of wall and ceiling spaces. 
5.  A hydrostatic test shall be conducted on the system in the presence of a fire department inspector. 
6.  A final inspection by the fire department shall be conducted prior to placing system in service. 
(4)  New theaters and buildings of public assembly over 100-person occupancy. Automatic sprinklers shall be installed throughout such buildings regardless of size or type of construction. 
(5)  New health care facilities including hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent and group care centers. Automatic sprinklers shall be installed throughout such buildings regardless of size or type of construction. 
(6)  New detention and correctional facilities. Automatic sprinklers shall be installed throughout the building regardless of size of construction. 
(7)  New schools, colleges and universities. 
a.  Where the building is of class 1 or class 2 fire-resistive construction, and is 10,000 square feet or more in total area, automatic sprinklers shall be installed throughout the building. 
b.  Where the building is of classes 3—8 type of construction, automatic sprinklers shall be installed throughout the building. 
(8)  High hazard occupancy. Throughout any new building which by reason of its construction or combustible occupancy is deemed a severe life or property hazard by the fire chief. This includes, but shall not be limited to: 
a.  Aircraft/helicopter hangers, aircraft/helicopter servicing. 
b.  Dry cleaning establishments using or storing volatile or flammable liquids. 
c.  Enameling or Japanning operations. 
d.  Mills. 
e.  Paint and varnish, manufacturing, storage, handling, spraying or other related operations. 
f.  Pyroxylin products. 
g.  Smoke houses. 
h.  Storage of combustible and flammable gases such as acetylene, hydrogen, liquid propane, etc., in excess of 1,000 cubic feet. 
i.  Storage of combustible and flammable liquids such as kerosene, oil gasoline, etc., in excess of 500 gallons. 
j.  Woodworking establishments. 
k.  Chemical works. 
l.  Warehouses with materials piled 15 feet or more in height. 
m.  Explosive and pyrotechnic manufacturing and storage. 
n.  Basements over 2,500 square feet and containing combustible materials or storage within. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.24(5))  
Sec. 44-529. - Exceptions. 
Automatic fire sprinkler systems are not required in the following: 
(1)  Rooms or buildings used for the manufacture or storage of aluminum powder, calcium carbide, calcium phosphide, metallic sodium or potassium, quick lime, magnesium powder, sodium peroxide or like materials where the application of water may cause or increase combustion. 
(2)  Any location where the fire chief determines that the use of water as a fire extinguishing agent would increase the hazard. However, an automatic fire suppression system using an extinguishing agent other than water, or an automatic smoke detection system, shall be installed. 
(3)  One- and two-family dwellings. 
(4)  In new factories, workshops, office buildings, mercantile establishments, warehouses, passenger terminals, exhibition buildings, places of public assembly with less than 100-person occupant load, and new repair garages, motor vehicle storage garages and body shops, if the building is of class 1 or 2 fire-resistant construction and is less than 10,000 square feet in total area or the building is of Class 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 or 8 non-fire-resistant construction and is less than 7,000 square feet in total area. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.24(6))  
Sec. 44-530. - Smaller buildings in areas without municipal water supply. 
Any building of less than 25,000 square feet of a size or use that falls within the requirements of section 44-528, erected within an area not served by the municipal water system shall be constructed to structurally support a sprinkler system. Once municipal water is available the building owner shall have 90 days to install an automatic sprinkler system which conforms to this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.24(7))  
Sec. 44-531. - Areas with inadequate municipal water supply. 
Any building having a total area of 25,000 square feet or more erected for any of the uses described in section 44-528 shall install an automatic sprinkler system at the time of construction. Water for the system shall be supplied by a pressure tank or other approved water source capable of delivering the required water flow for a period of 30 minutes if monitored by a central station monitoring service or 60 minutes if unmonitored. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.24(8))  
Sec. 44-532. - Plan review; installation and inspection. 
(a)  Approval of plans required. No automatic sprinkler equipment shall be installed or altered in any building until plans have been submitted to and reviewed by the fire department. Three copies of the plans and specifications shall be submitted for review. Conditionally approved plans shall be stamped with the date of review. One copy shall be returned to the owner, two retained by the department for field use and property file reference. 
(1)  Plans. Plans for sprinkler systems (including drawings, diagrams as needed) shall be submitted, to the fire department for review and conditional approval. Plans shall be conditionally approved prior to any installation or construction. 
(2)  Calculations. Calculations shall be submitted with all plans. In the event a pipe schedule is used, a written report with verified pressure information shall be submitted. The engineer completing such calculations shall stamp and sign the report. 
(b)  Installation and inspection services required. The installation of underground piping shall be inspected by the fire department prior to being covered. The installer shall provide advance notice to the fire department for any required installation inspection. 
(c)  System requirements. All required building automatic sprinkler systems shall comply with the following, provided existing systems not in compliance on the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall have 12 months to come into compliance. 
(1)  System drain. The building automatic sprinkler system shall have a drain piped to the outside of the building or to a drain suitable to handle the required flows. 
(2)  Inspector's test valve. The system shall have an inspector's test valve piped so as to discharge to the outside of the building. 
(3)  Alarm bells or horns. Alarm bells or horns shall be installed on all systems. One bell or horn shall be installed on the inside of the building and a second bell or horn installed on the outside of the building. The sprinkler alarm shall be tied into the building alarm system in buildings equipped with a local alarm system. 
(d)  Acceptance test. The sprinkler system shall have a hydrostatic test performed by the installer in the presence of a fire department inspector. The sprinkler system shall be tested by flows of the main drain and inspector's test. The installer shall notify the fire department prior to any test being conducted. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.24(9))  
Sec. 44-533. - Annual testing. 
A qualified sprinkler technician shall inspect the automatic sprinkler system at least annually. The provisions of NFPA 13A, chapters 1 through 7, shall be used as the inspection criteria. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.24(10))  
Sec. 44-534. - Lockbox required. 
Buildings equipped with an automatic sprinkler system shall be provided with a standard lockbox of a type approved by the department. The lockbox shall be located in a place approved by the fire department. Properly identified keys to gain access to the building and the building automatic sprinkler system shall be maintained in the lockbox. Removal of any key by persons other than fire department personnel shall be considered a violation of this division. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.24(11))  
Sec. 44-535. - Penalties for noncompliance. 
In addition to all other applicable penalties, failure to comply with the items listed in sections 44-532 through 44-534 can result in enforcement action against the installer. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.24(12))  
Sec. 44-536. - Retroactive provisions. 
(a)  Existing systems. The provisions of section 44-532(c)(1), pertaining to system drains, and 44-533, pertaining to annual testing, shall apply to all sprinkler systems installed within the city. Systems not in compliance with the provisions of section 44-532(c)(1) shall have 12 months after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived to come into compliance. 
(b)  Existing buildings. See article VI, division 4 of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.24(13))  
Secs. 44-537—44-565. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FIRE DETECTION EQUIPMENT AND SYSTEMS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 44-566—44-593. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ALARMS 
 
Sec. 44-594. - Definitions. 
As used in this section, the following words and phrases have the designated meanings unless the context requires otherwise: 
Central alarm station means any facility operated by a business that owns or leases a system of fire alarm devices, which is controlled by operators who receive, record and validate alarm signals and relay information about validated signals to the city police or fire departments when appropriate. 
Dial fire alarm means any fire alarm system that automatically or electronically selects a telephone line connected to the city fire department and reproduces a prerecorded message or signal to report a fire. 
False fire alarm means any report received by the police or fire department from any source resulting in a response by the police or fire department to premises on which an alarm or alarm system is located, where an emergency does not exist. An alarm test shall not be considered a false alarm. 
Fire alarm system means any system designed for the detection of a fire that transmits a visible or audible signal or prerecorded message in a single dwelling unit or one or more buildings, or to the police or fire department or to a central alarm station. As used in this section, the term "fire alarm system" includes, without limitation because of enumeration, local fire alarm systems, single station fire alarms and dial fire alarms. 
Local alarm system means any alarm or alarm system within one or more buildings which produces an audible or visible signal designed to notify persons within the buildings of a fire. 
Responsible party means any person in charge, owner, lessee or operator of premises on which a fire alarm system is installed or maintained, or their agents. 
Single station alarm means any fire alarm or series of alarms within a single dwelling units. 
Year means that 12-month period of time commencing with the first false fire alarm on a system. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.16(1))  
Sec. 44-595. - False fire alarms. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person shall within the city activate or cause to be activated a false fire alarm or fail to promptly repair an improperly functioning fire alarm system on premises for which such person is the owner or responsible party. The fire department shall notify the owner of or responsible party for any premises, in writing, of a false fire alarm within ten working days of its occurrence. 
(b)  Failure to notify; waiver of forfeiture. Failure by the fire department to notify the owner or responsible party of a false fire alarm within ten working days of its occurrence constitutes a waiver of any forfeiture which would otherwise apply under this section. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.16(2))  
Sec. 44-596. - Restriction on dial fire alarms. 
Any fire alarm system that automatically or electronically selects a telephone line connected to the fire department and reproduces a message or signal to report a fire shall be programmed to dial only the fire department telephone numbers or number designated by the fire chief. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.16(3))  
Sec. 44-597. - Inspection and reporting requirements of systems. 
(a)  After a second false fire alarm has occurred on any premises, the responsible party shall file with the fire chief, in writing, an explanation by a certified alarm technician as to why the false fire alarm occurred and a certificate of a certified alarm technician of the repairs or other measures which will be required to prevent future false alarms by the fire alarm system. 
(b)  The information required in this subsection shall be submitted, in writing, to the fire chief within ten working days after the responsible party has received notification from the fire department of the occurrence of a second false fire alarm unless a timely appeal, authorized under section 44-598 has been filed with the mayor. 
(c)  In an effort to ensure compliance with this article, the fire chief may require a responsible party to have the fire alarm system on premises described in section 44-595(a), inspected and repaired by a certified alarm technician. The inspection shall identify, in writing, the cause or causes of the most recent system malfunction. Repairs determined necessary by the fire chief in order to prevent future system malfunction shall be completed as soon as possible. The fire chief shall subsequently certify that the system has been repaired. If, in the opinion of the fire chief, repairs will not eliminate the false alarm problem, the chief may order the system upgraded to conform to division 3 of this article, pertaining to fire and smoke detection systems. 
(d)  Any notification of an inspection and/or repair requirement issued by the fire chief under subsection (a) of this section shall also contain information regarding the appeal procedure provided herein. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.16(4))  
Sec. 44-598. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  Any responsible party may appeal an inspection or repair requirement issued under section 44-597. The appeal must be made, in writing, to the mayor within three working days of receiving written notice that an inspection and/or repair of the fire alarm system has been required. 
(b)  Within 15 days of receipt the mayor shall determine whether the appeal has merit. The mayor shall promptly refer his/her findings to the public safety and human services committee for expeditious resolution. 
(c)  If the committee concurs with the mayor's finding by majority vote, the inspection and/or repair requirement which causes the appeal is waived. If the committee rejects the mayor's finding by majority vote, the matter shall be placed on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled common council meeting. The common council may affirm, reject or modify the mayor's finding by majority vote. 
(d)  If the appeal is rejected, the responsible party shall comply with the inspection or repair requirement within 30 days after filing of the council's decision. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.16(5))  
Secs. 44-599—44-629. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FIRE AND SMOKE DETECTION SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 44-630. - Scope. 
To provide early warning in the event of fire, detection systems shall be installed and maintained in operable condition in the following the following locations: 
(1)  Schools. All new schools, regardless of size shall have a manual alarm system with heat detection installed in mechanical rooms. 
(2)  Passenger terminals. All new passenger terminals over 10,000 square feet in size or over two interior stories in height shall be equipped with a manual alarm system with heat detection installed in mechanical rooms. 
(3)  Public assemblies. All new places of public assembly over 10,000 square feet in size or over two interior stories, shall be equipped with a manual alarm system with heat detection installed in mechanical rooms. 
(4)  Health care facilities. Any new health care facility regardless of size shall be equipped with a manual alarm system with automatic detection as specified within NFPA 72E. 
(5)  Correctional/detention facilities. Any new correctional/detention facility regardless of size shall be equipped with a manual alarm system with automatic detection as specified within NFPA 72E. 
(6)  Residential, three or more dwelling units. Any new residential occupancy containing three or more dwelling units shall be equipped with a manual alarm system with smoke detection installed in common hallways, stairwell, storage areas and common basements. Smoke detectors shall be installed in each living area of the building and shall not be connected to the building general alarm system. 
(7)  High hazard occupancies. Any new high hazard occupancy deemed a severe life or property hazard by the fire chief shall be equipped with a detection system as provided in this section. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.17(1))  
Sec. 44-631. - Standards for equipment and installation. 
(a)  Components to be listed. All components of a fire or smoke detector system shall be listed by Underwriter's Laboratories (UL) or the Factory Mutual System (FM). The entire installation shall conform to applicable provisions of the National Fire Protection Association Standards 71, 72A, 72C, 72D or 72E. 
(b)  Backup power system. The fire alarm system shall monitor the integrity of all alarm initiating and indicating appliance circuits, and shall be provided with automatically charged standby batteries to maintain system operation for 24 hours in the normal supervisory mode, plus have sufficient capacity to operate in the alarm mode for five minutes at the conclusion of this supervisory time period. Batteries shall be supervised for connection to the system and a low voltage threshold. The automatic battery charger shall be capable of charging fully discharged system batteries to 100 percent. 
(c)  Remote annunciator. A remote annunciator shall be provided at the main entrance of the building to indicate each of the designated alarm initiating zones via red LEDs which flash when in alarm and lock in upon acknowledging the alarm. The remote annunciator shall be electrically supervised from the main fire alarm control panel. Space shall be provided on the remote annunciator for custom zone labels. The zone labels shall plainly describe the location of the zones. 
(d)  Wiring of required fire and smoke detection systems. 
(1)  All electrical wiring in connection with required fire alarm systems, including accessory devices such as detectors shall be installed in rigid metal conduit, intermediate metal conduit, electrical metallic tubing, flexible metal conduit or surface metal raceway. 
(2)  Raceways for required fire alarm system wiring shall contain no other circuits. 
(e)  External devices. 
(1)  The system shall utilize UL or FM listed fire alarm initiating devices (pull stations, smoke detectors, heat detectors, waterflow switches, duct detectors, etc.) and UL or FM listed fire alarm indicating devices (horns, bells, visual lights, etc.). Smoke detectors shall possess an LED lamp to indicate either "ready" or "alarm" status. 
(2)  Smoke detectors (photoelectric, ionization) shall be installed approximately 30 feet on center, located on the ceiling, or wall of the protected area. 
(3)  Heat detectors shall be installed approximately 50 feet on center, located on the ceiling of furnace rooms, engine rooms, garages and meeting rooms over 1,000 square feet. Heat detectors shall also be installed as a substitution for smoke detectors in locations determined by the fire chief to be unsuitable for smoke detection installation. 
(4)  Horns/bells. 
a.  Alarm system horns. Horns used as the audible alarm indicating appliance shall be 24 volt DC horns of metal construction with a minimum sound pressure level output of 87 dB at ten feet. Fire alarm horns shall be UL or FM listed for fire alarm use. Horns shall be adaptable for surface or semiflush mounting and be suitable for use within combination audiovisual systems. 
b.  Alarm system bells. Bells used as the audible alarm indicating appliance shall be 24-volt DC bells of the vibrating or single stroke type with a minimum sound pressure level output of 90 dB at ten feet. Bells shall be UL or FM listed for fire alarm use. Bells shall be suitable for surface or semiflush mounting and be suitable for use within combination audio-visual systems. 
c.  Visual flashing lamps. Visual indicating appliances shall be comprised of a strobe-type flashtube and be entirely solid state. These devices shall be UL or FM listed and be capable or either ceiling or wall mounting. Visual units shall incorporate a built-in reflector to improve lighting characteristics. Visual units shall be incorporated as part of the horn or bell assembly. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.17(2))  
Sec. 44-632. - System operation. 
(a)  Alarm initiating devices shall be grouped in zones identified by zone light emitting diodes (LEDs) on the control panel and at the remote annunciator. 
(b)  Actuation of an alarm initiating device shall cause the respective red zone alarm LED on the control panel to flash until the "acknowledge" switch is actuated at the control panel. Once acknowledged, the zone LED will be constantly illuminated until the actuating device is restored to normal and the system is reset or equivalent operation. The audible alarm indicating appliance shall sound throughout the entire facility until the system alarm acknowledge/silence switch is operated. (Exception: High-rise occupancies where zoned actuation has been approved by the fire chief). Visual indicating appliances shall flash until the acknowledge/silence switch is operated. After the acknowledge switch is operated, subsequent activation of an initiating appliance will cause the alarm bells or horns to resound, and the visual indicating appliances to flash. 
(c)  Each alarm initiating circuit and indicating appliance circuit shall be electrically supervised. Any disarrangement of system wiring such as opens or grounds shall activate the audible and visual trouble indicators at the control panel. Actuation of the trouble silence switch shall silence the audible trouble indicator but the trouble LED will remain lit. The trouble LED shall be noncancelling, except by an actual clearing of the trouble condition and restoring the trouble silence switch to normal. 
(d)  The alarm system shall be equipped with the following: 
(1)  Desired type of signal operation; alarm signal tempos, area selective codes, zone codes, or general alarm codes. 
(2)  UL or FM approved alarm verification operation. 
(3)  Waterflow/sprinkler supervisory operation on a distinct zone. 
(e)  Upon actuation of a smoke detector, the LED on the smoke detector shall remain constantly illuminated until the system is reset. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.17(3))  
Sec. 44-633. - Plan review required. 
No fire and smoke detection system shall be installed or altered in any building until plans have been submitted to and conditionally approved by the city fire department. Three copies of the system plans shall be submitted for review. The plans shall contain drawings containing locations of detectors, pull stations and horns. The plans shall contain a brief description of how the system will be connected. Conditionally approved plans shall be stamped with the date of approval. One copy shall be returned to the owner. One copy shall be kept on file at the city fire prevention office, and one copy will be used by the fire department inspector during site inspection. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.17(4))  
Sec. 44-634. - System installer qualifications. 
The system installer must maintain a service organization within 50 miles of the city and must be a licensed electrician in order to install equipment. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.17(5))  
Sec. 44-635. - Acceptance test required. 
The acceptance test of a fire and smoke detection system shall be conducted in the presence of an inspector from the city fire department prior to being placed in service. All testing shall be conducted by the installer. The installer shall give advance notice to the city fire department for any test to be conducted. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.17(6))  
Sec. 44-636. - Lockbox required. 
Buildings equipped with a fire and smoke detection system shall be provided with a standard lockbox of a type approved by the fire department. The lockbox shall be located in a place approved by the fire department. Properly identified keys to gain access to the building and the building alarm control panel shall be maintained in the lockbox. Removal of any key by other than fire department personnel shall be a violation of this division. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.17(7))  
Sec. 44-637. - Enforcement against owner, installer, or both. 
Failure to comply with any provision of this section can result in enforcement action against the building owner or installer or both. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.17(8))  
Secs. 44-638—44-662. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - EXISTING BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 44-663. - General exception. 
Except as hereinafter provided automatic fire sprinklers, smoke detectors and standpipes need not be installed in buildings which exist or were under construction before July 10, 1978, unless such installation was required by previous ordinance, administrative regulation or state statute. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.18(1))  
Sec. 44-664. - Expansion or remodeling. 
(a)  When a building is expanded or remodeled and the building is of a size, a type, or a use, which, if the building were to be constructed new, the provisions of division 3 of this article or article V, division 3 or 4 of this chapter would apply, the building or part thereof shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  If more than 50 percent of the gross interior area of the building is remodeled or added to the building, the entire building shall be made to conform to the requirements of division 3 of this article and article V, divisions 3 and 4 of this chapter. 
(2)  If 25 percent to 50 percent of the gross interior area of the building is remodeled or added to the building, only the additional, expanded, or remodeled area shall be subject to the requirements of division 3 of this article and article V, divisions 3 and 4 of this chapter. 
(3)  If less than 25 percent of the gross interior area of the building is remodeled or added to the building, the requirements of division 3 of this article and article V, divisions 3 and 4 of this chapter need not be satisfied. 
(4)  If less than 25 percent of the gross interior area of the building is remodeled or added to the building, the requirements of article V, division 3 of this chapter need not be satisfied unless such remodeling or expansion creates additional living units. 
(5)  In determining the foregoing percentages, successive additions, expansions or remodeling if made within a period of 20 years shall be aggregated and treated as a single expansion or addition. 
(6)  Regardless of any percentage set forth in this section, if the additional, expanded, or remodeled area is of a size or type or for a use which is subject to the provisions of article III, division 7 or article V, division 3 or 4 of this chapter the additional, expanded, or remodeled area must conform to the requirements of such sections. 
(b)  Regardless of any percentage set forth in this section when any residential building over three living units is remodeled or expanded and the quotient obtained by dividing the total cost of the expansion, the addition or the remodeling by the total number of dwelling units in the building equals or exceeds $10,000.00, the entire building shall be made to conform to the requirements of article V, division 4 of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.18(2), (3))  
Sec. 44-665. - Sale or transfer. 
At the time any building containing dwelling units situated within the city is sold, transferred or conveyed, the building shall be made to conform to the requirements of article V, division 4 of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.18(4))  
Sec. 44-666. - Change in use. 
(a)  Where at the time of its construction a building or any part thereof is exempt from the requirements of division 3 of this article by reason of its proposed intended use and subsequent to construction the use of such building or part thereof is changed in such a way that the reason for the exemption no longer exist shall be made to conform with the requirements of division 3 of this article. 
(b)  If the use of an existing building or structure is changed and the requirements for the new use are more stringent than those for the previous use, the building or structure shall be made to comply with the requirements for the new use as provided in this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.18(5))  
Secs. 44-667—44-690. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - FIREWORKS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 44-691. - Definitions. 
Wis. Stats. § 167.10(1), which defines "fireworks", together with any existing or future amendments thereto, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference and made part of this chapter, as if fully set forth herein. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.02(3)(a); Ord. No. 2017-O-03, § 1, 2-14-2017)  
Sec. 44-692. - Regulation by city. 
The city hereby elects under Wis. Stats. § 167.10(5) to regulate the sale, possession and use of fireworks. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.13(1))  
Sec. 44-693. - State law adopted by reference. 
Except as herein specifically provided, Wis. Stats. § 167.10 regulating the sale and use of fireworks, including the definition of fireworks in Wis. Stats. § 167.10(1), exclusive of any penalty imposed thereby, is adopted by reference and made part of this article as if fully set forth. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.13(2))  
Sec. 44-694. - National fire protection association standards adopted by reference. 
NFPA 1123, "Fireworks Display" and NFPA 1124, "Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles" are adopted by reference and made part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Wherever the provisions of state law conflict with NFPA 1123 or 1124, the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.13(3))  
Sec. 44-695. - Sale, possession and use restricted. 
No person may sell fireworks, or possess fireworks with intent to sell, or use fireworks, except as allowed in this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.02(3)(b), (c))  
Sec. 44-696. - Exclusions. 
This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Explosives, ammunition and blasting agents handled and used in accordance with construction or mining purposes, in which such action is in accordance with other ordinances and statues. 
(2)  The use of or sale of blank cartridges for circus or theatrical purposes, or signal purposes in athletic contest or sport events, or use by militia, police or military organizations; nor the use or sale of colored flares or torpedoes for railway, aircraft, or highway signal purposes. 
(3)  Pyrotechnic display approved by the Fitchburg Days Committee for a Fitchburg Days event, and for pyrotechnic display approved by the public safety and human services committee for the annual Festa Italia Event sponsored by Italian Workman's Club. 
(4)  Any person who, without the intent to sell the fireworks in the city, is in the possession of fireworks while transporting the fireworks to a municipality where the possession of the fireworks is authorized by permit or ordinance, provided, however, that this exclusion does not apply if the person remains within the city for a period of more than 12 hours. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.02(3)(d))  
Sec. 44-697. - Out-of-state. 
This section does not prohibit a resident wholesaler, dealer, or jobber from selling fireworks at wholesale, if that wholesaler, dealer or jobber ships or delivers the fireworks outside of the state in sealed opaque containers by common motor carrier, contract motor carrier or private motor carrier, as defined by Wis. Stats. § 194.01(1), (2), and (11), engaged in the business of shipping or delivering property. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.02(3)(e))  
Sec. 44-698. - Storage and handling. 
This section shall apply to places where fireworks are stored and handled within the city. 
(1)  Fireworks may only be stored or handled in premises that are equipped with fire extinguishers approved by the fire chief. 
(2)  Smoking shall be prohibited where fireworks are stored or handled. 
(3)  Every wholesaler, dealer, or jobber who keeps, stores, or handles fireworks, of any description, within the city shall immediately notify the fire chief of the receipt of such fireworks, or the removal thereof from one location to another, and the location where such fireworks are stored. 
(4)  No fireworks may be stored within 50 feet of a dwelling. 
(5)  No fireworks may be stored within 50 feet of a public assemblage or place where gasoline or volatile liquid is dispensed in quantities exceeding one gallon. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.02(3)(f))  
Sec. 44-699. - Parental liability. 
A parent, foster, or family-operated group home parent or legal guardian of a minor who consents to the use of fireworks by the minor who is under the age of 18 years of age is liable for damages caused by the minor's use of fireworks, and in addition shall be subject to the penalty provided in in section 1-21. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.02(3)(g)) 
State Law reference— Parental liability for acts of minor child, Wis. Stats. § 895.035.  
Sec. 44-700. - Seizure. 
The fire chief or police chief shall seize, at the expense of the owner, all fireworks stored, handled, sold, possessed or used by any person who violates this section. Such seized fireworks shall be destroyed after conviction for a violation. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.02(3)(h))  
Secs. 44-701—44-728. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC DISPLAY 
 
Sec. 44-729. - Public displays, permits and fees. 
This section shall not prohibit the use of fireworks for pyrotechnic displays sponsored by public authorities, fair associations, amusement parks, park boards or civic organizations if a permit for such display is issued by the city. 
(1)  Application for permits. An application for a fireworks permit shall be made in writing to the city at least 30 days in advance of the date of the display. The application shall be reviewed by the fire chief or his/her designee. 
(2)  Fee. An application for permit shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount established by the common council. In the event the application is denied, the permit fee shall be refunded; provided, however, that the common council may by ordinance establish a nonrefundable administrative fee for processing of denied application in which event the administrative fee shall be withheld upon refund of the permit fee. 
(3)  Sponsor. The sponsor of the event shall provide the following information to the city in the application: Name and qualifications of operators (operators must be at least 18 years of age), proof of insurance (minimum of $1,000,000.00 bodily injury/property damage) location of event and proposed method of spectator control and protection. 
(4)  Display conditions. The operator shall provide the city at the time the application for permit is submitted with details concerning the display of the fireworks. These details shall be used to evaluate the safety precautions planned for the display. The department will base its evaluation upon the NFPA standards adopted in section 44-694. Such conditions shall be submitted to the permit holder and the operator in writing. The operator shall comply with all conditions found to be required for the display. The city may impose conditions on the display. 
(5)  Day of display requirements. At least four hours prior to the start of the display, the operator shall make contact with the fire chief or his/her designee to obtain conditional approval for the display to occur. The fire chief or his/her designee may prohibited or terminate the use or display of fireworks or pyrotechnic special effects material when in the opinion of the fire chief or his/her designee atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such use or display a fire or other hazard or otherwise endangers the safety of the public. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.13(5))  
Secs. 44-730—44-758. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-O-03, § 1, adopted February 14, 2017, amended the Code by repealing former § 44-730 in its entirety. Former § 44-730 pertained to parental responsibility, and derived from the Compiled Ords. of 2009, § 3.13(6).  
Chapter 46 - LAW ENFORCEMENT 
(RESERVED)  
Chapter 48 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Food regulation generally, Wis. Stats. § 97.01 et seq.; miscellaneous health regulations, Wis. Stats. § 146.001 et seq.; groundwater protection standards, Wis. Stats. § 160.001 et seq.; local health officials generally, Wis. Stats. § 251.001 et seq.; local health officer qualifications and duties, Wis. Stats. § 251.06; powers of cities, villages, and towns to regulate human health hazards, Wis. Stats. § 254.593; smoke as health hazard, Wis. Stats. § 254.57; smoking prohibited in certain places, Wis. Stats. § 101.123; local enforcement of certain health and food regulations, Wis. Stats. § 66.0417. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 48-1—48-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SMOKING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 48-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bed and breakfast establishment has the meaning set forth in Wis. Stats. § 254.61(1). 
Chewing tobacco means snuff, snuff flour, cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine cut and other chewing tobaccos; refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing. 
Child care facility means any state licensed or county certified child care facility including, but not limited to, licensed family day care or licensed group day care centers, licensed day camps, certified school-age programs and Head Start programs. 
Cigarette means any roll of tobacco wrapped in paper or any substance other than chewing tobacco or tobacco products. 
City buildings means all city-owned buildings and those portions of buildings leased and operated by the city. 
Common areas of buildings means all areas not part of a tenant's leased premises, including, but not limited to, lobbies, community rooms, hallways, laundry rooms, stairwells, elevators, enclosed parking facilities, pool areas, and restrooms contiguous thereto. 
Common areas of malls means those areas within a mall customarily accessible to patrons. 
Educational facility means any building used principally for educational purposes in which a school is located or a course of instruction or training program is offered that has been approved or licensed by a state agency or board. 
Employee means any person who is employed by any employer for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, including those fulltime, parttime, temporary or contracted for from a third party; employee also means any person who serves as a volunteer for a business or nonprofit entity. 
Employer means any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other entity, including a public or nonprofit entity who employs the services of one or more individual persons. 
Enclosed area means all space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of door or passage ways) that extend from floor to ceiling, including all space therein screened by partitions that do not extend to the ceiling, are not solid, or are landscaping or similar structures. 
Entrance means a doorway and adjacent area that gives direct access to a building from a contiguous street, plaza, sidewalk or parking lot. 
Existing means the establishment has been granted an alcohol license by the city on or before June 1, 2006 and that both the individual licensee (or individual agent in the case of a corporation, partnership or LLC) as listed on the alcohol license and the owners of the real property on which the establishment is located have not changed since June 1, 2006. Any change in either the licensee or the owner of real estate shall cause the establishment to cease to meet the definition of the term "existing." In the event the owner of real estate is a corporation, partnership or LLC, any change in the ownership of the corporation, partnership or LLC owning the real estate, excluding the purchase or transfer of a share of ownership from a current owner to another current owner, shall cause the establishment to cease to meet the definition of the term "existing." Any expansion of the establishment shall cause the establishment to cease to meet the definition of the term "existing." Any remodeling, repair or renovation of the establishment where the total cost of the remodeling, repair or renovation exceeds $20,000.00, other than renovations necessary to create the enclosure described in this article, shall cause the establishment to cease to meet the definition of the term "existing." 
Existing bowling center means an establishment devoted primarily to recreational bowling where all of the following apply: 
(1)  The bowling center is existing as defined by this article; 
(2)  The bowling center allows smoking in a bar area no greater than 4,000 square feet; and 
(3)  The area where smoking is allowed is separated from the remainder of the establishment by a walled or glass enclosure. 
Existing small tavern means a tavern where all of the following apply: 
(1)  The small tavern is existing as defined by this article; 
(2)  The exterior footprint of the establishment is no greater than 5,000 square feet; and 
(3)  The sales of alcohol constitute at least 75 percent of gross revenues. 
Food means a raw, cooked, or processed edible substance or ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human consumption. It does not include ice, beverages or chewing gum. 
Health care facility has the meaning set forth in Wis. Stats. § 155.01(6). 
Hotel and motel have the meaning set forth in Wis. Stats. § 254.61(3). 
Mall means an enclosed, indoor area containing common areas and discrete businesses primarily devoted to the retail sale of goods and services. 
Medical services has the meaning set forth in Wis. Stats. § 647.01(6). 
Nonsmoking means smoking is prohibited. 
Person in charge means the person who ultimately controls, governs or directs the activities aboard a public conveyance or within or at a place where smoking is regulated under this section, regardless of the person's status as owner or lessee. 
Place of employment means an enclosed area controlled by the employer that employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges and restrooms, conference and classrooms, employee cafeterias and hallways. A private residence is not a place of employment' within the meaning of this article unless used as a childcare facility, an adult daycare facility or a healthcare facility. 
Private residence means premises owned, rented or leased for temporary or permanent habitation. 
Public place means any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted. A private residence is not a public place. 
Restaurant means an establishment defined in Wis. Stats. § 254.61(5). This includes restaurants within a mall and adjacent seating. The term "restaurant" shall also include a bar or tavern area within a restaurant. 
Room means a space within a building completely enclosed with walls, partitions, floor and ceiling, except for openings for light, ventilation, ingress and egress. 
Smokefree means absence from the ambient air of the smoke byproduct from the burning, inhaling, exhaling, or carrying of a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe, weed, plant, or other combustible substance in any manner in any form. 
Smoking means to smoke or carry a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette or tobacco-related products in any form. 
Sports arena means sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and indoor ice rinks, and bowling centers. 
Tavern means any establishment in which fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquors are sold for consumption upon said premises and whose sale of alcohol beverages accounts for more than 50 percent of the establishment's gross receipts of the most recent licensing year. 
Tobacco bar means a tavern that generates ten percent or more of its total annual gross income from the on-site sale of tobacco products, not including any sales from vending machines. 
Tobacco product means cigars; cheroots; stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready-rubbed and other smoking tobacco; shorts; refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such a manner, as to be suitable for smoking in a pipe or otherwise smoking; but the term "tobacco product" does not include cigarettes or chewing tobacco. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.10(2))  
Sec. 48-22. - Intent and construction. 
The city finds that it is in the interests of the health, safety and welfare of the community to adopt by reference Wis. Stats. § 101.123 and subsequent amendments, additions and recodifications. It is the intent of the common council that where there may be conflict between Wis. Stats. § 101.123 and this article, that the provision most restrictive of smoking and tobacco use shall apply. This article shall not be construed to mean that progressive discipline of city employees for violations of laws, rules, and regulations is only authorized where explicitly provided by ordinance. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.10(9)(a))  
Sec. 48-23. - Purpose; liberal construction. 
The common council finds and declares that the purposes of this article are: 
(1)  To protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places and places of employment; and 
(2)  This article shall be liberally construed so as to further its purpose. It shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where smoking is otherwise restricted by applicable laws. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.10(1))  
Sec. 48-24. - Penalties. 
The penalties provided by Wis. Stats. § 101.123 shall be applicable to violations of this article and shall be in addition to the penalties provided for violation of this article when a person has violated both laws. In addition to the penalties provided by this article and Wis. Stats. § 101.123, any city employee who violates any provision of this article or Wis. Stats. § 101.123 may also be subject to progressive discipline by his/her employer. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.10(9)(b))  
Sec. 48-25. - Prohibition of smoking to include the use of electronic smoking devices and paraphernalia. 
(a)  Electronic smoking device means an electronic device that can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine or any other substance intended for human consumption that may be used by a person to simulate smoking through inhalation of vapor or aerosol from the product. It includes any such device whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, commonly known as e-cigarettes; an electronic cigar; an electronic cigarillo; and electronic pipe; an electronic hookah; vape pen; or any other product name or descriptor. 
(b)  Electronic smoking device paraphernalia means a cartridge, cartomizer, e-liquid, smoke juice, tip, atomizer, electronic smoking device battery, electronic smoking device charger, and any other item specifically designed for the preparation, charging, or use of electronic smoking devices. 
(c)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, all the prohibitions against smoking under this chapter 48 article II shall apply to the use of an electronic smoking device and electronic device paraphernalia, as defined in subsections (a) and (b). 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-32 , § 1, 12-10-2019)  
Secs. 48-26—48-44. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC PLACES 
 
Sec. 48-45. - Prohibition of smoking in public places. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to smoke cigarettes or tobacco products in public places, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Elevators and enclosed stairwells of city parking ramps; 
(2)  Public forms of transportation, including but not limited to motor buses, taxicabs, or other public passenger vehicles; 
(3)  Theatres, libraries, museums, auditoriums, and convention halls that are used by or open to the public; 
(4)  Any child care facility; 
(5)  Retail stores; 
(6)  Health care facilities; 
(7)  Waiting rooms, hallways, rooms of health care laboratories; 
(8)  Waiting rooms, hallways, rooms in offices of any physician, dentist, psychologist, chiropractor, optometrist or optician, or other medical services provider; 
(9)  Meeting and conference rooms in which people gather for educational, business, professional, union, governmental, recreational, political or social purposes; 
(10)  Polling places; 
(11)  Service lobbies, waiting areas, and the common areas open to the public of financial institutions, business and professional offices, and multi-unit commercial facilities; 
(12)  Self-service laundry facilities; 
(13)  Enclosed, indoor areas of restaurants; 
(14)  Common areas of malls; 
(15)  Public bus and transfer point shelters; 
(16)  Common areas of buildings that contain three or more rental units, provided that written rental agreements shall include reference to this subsection and section 48-24 shall not apply to this subdivision; 
(17)  City buildings; 
(18)  City-owned or leased motor vehicles; 
(19)  Sports arenas; 
(20)  Enclosed, indoor areas of taverns; 
(21)  Bed and breakfast establishments, hotels and motels, except as provided in section 48-47(4); 
(22)  Educational facilities. 
(b)  With regard to child care facilities, incorporated herein by reference are the following Wisconsin statutory and administrative code sections and any amendments or renumbering thereof: Wis. Stats. § 101.123(1)(ad) and (2)(bm); Wis. Admin. Code § DCF 202.08(2)(n). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.10(3))  
Sec. 48-46. - Prohibition of smoking in places of employment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke cigarettes or tobacco products in places of employment. 
(b)  Every building that is a place of employment shall have at least one entrance that is smoke free. For buildings with fewer than four entrances, no more than one entrance may be designated as a smoking entrance. For buildings with four or more entrances, no more than 25 percent of all entrances may be designated as a smoking entrance. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.10(4))  
Sec. 48-47. - Exceptions. 
The following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this section: 
(1)  Any stage of any theater when used in connection with any theatrical performance and so noticed in the program. 
(2)  Tobacco bars, subject to the following: 
a.  Smoking of tobacco products and cigarettes is permitted; 
b.  Service of food is not permitted; 
c.  The tobacco bar was in existence on June 1, 2006, and has remained at the same physical location since June 1, 2006; 
d.  To qualify for this exemption the owner must file written proof prescribed and sworn to by a certified public accountant certifying the tobacco bar's total gross income and the percentage of tobacco product sales from the tobacco bar. The city clerk or city attorney may at any time request further information, including an audit of the tobacco bar's records, if there is reason to believe the financial data may not be accurate; 
e.  Tobacco bars shall display signs, in accordance with the standards in section 48-48, that state that cigars, cigarettes and pipes may be smoked in the tobacco bar, and warning of the dangers of secondhand smoke, in language and form as approved by the public safety and human services committee. 
(3)  Existing bowling centers and existing small taverns subject to the following: 
a.  For an existing small tavern to qualify for this exemption the owner must file written proof prescribed and sworn to by a certified public accountant certifying the existing small tavern's total gross income and the percentage of alcohol product sales from the existing small tavern. The city clerk or city attorney may at any time request further information, including an audit of the existing small tavern's records, if there is reason to believe the financial data may not be accurate; and 
b.  The exemption for existing bowling centers and existing taverns shall expire on the earlier of: 
1.  The date the existing bowling center or existing small tavern ceases to meet the definition of existing; or 
2.  April 1, 2011. 
(4)  Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms; provided, however, that not more than ten percent of rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated. All smoking rooms on the same floor must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to add additional nonsmoking rooms. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.10(5))  
Sec. 48-48. - Signage. 
(a)  Signs prohibiting, prohibiting except in designated areas, or permitting smoking, as the case may be, shall be posted conspicuously at every building, structure, or public place entrance and in prominent locations throughout the premises by the proprietor, employer or other person in charge of each building, structure or public place specified in sections 48-45 through 48-47 and this section. Signs in outdoor areas designated as nonsmoking shall be placed so that the public has reasonable notice of the prohibition. Signs shall reference "Fitchburg Ord. No. 14.10." 
(b)  Restaurants and taverns shall post, in a conspicuous place at each entrance normally used by the public, a sign not smaller than 11 inches by 8½ inches indicating they are smokefree. Each sign and the language contained therein shall be clearly visible from a distance of at least ten feet. The signage lettering shall be in bold and the lettering shall be a minimum of two inches in height. Each sign shall contain the phone number for the county division of public health and the nonemergency number for the police department. Signs shall reference "Fitchburg Ord. No. 14.10." 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, deface, or destroy any sign required by this section, or to smoke in any place where any such sign is posted. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.10(6))  
Sec. 48-49. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The director of the county division of public health and the chief of police or their designees, shall have the power, whenever they may deem it necessary, to enter upon the premises named in this section to ascertain whether the premises are in compliance with this article. A compliance time of not less than one week shall be granted. Enforcement may be by citation, as permitted by chapter 18, article III, or through issuance of a summons and complaint. 
(b)  The proprietor, employer or other person in charge of premises regulated hereunder, upon either observing or being advised of a violation, shall make reasonable efforts to prevent smoking in prohibited areas by: 
(1)  Approaching smokers who fail to voluntarily comply with this section and requesting that they extinguish their cigarette or tobacco product and refrain from smoking; or 
(2)  Refusing service to anyone smoking in a prohibited area. 
(c)  Any person who desires to register a complaint under this section may contact the county division of public health or the police department. 
(d)  Ashtrays, cigarette vending machines and other smoking paraphernalia shall not be located in areas where smoking is prohibited. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.10(7))  
Sec. 48-50. - Retaliation prohibited. 
No person shall discharge, refuse to hire, refuse to serve or in any other manner retaliate against any employee, applicant for employment, customer, service user, business patron or any other person because that person exercises any rights afforded by this division. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.10(8))  
Chapter 52 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal cemeteries, Wis. Stats. § 157.50; highway access to cemeteries preserved, Wis. Stats. § 86.09; cemetery authorities and salespersons, Wis. Stats. § 440.90 et seq.; improvement and care of cemetery lots and grounds, Wis. Stats. § 157.11. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 52-1. - Authority. 
The common council has specific statutory authority, powers and duties, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 157.50 and its adoption of city powers under Wis. Stats. § 60.10 to acquire by gift, purchase or condemnation, land for cemeteries within or without the boundaries of the city and to determine, upon any acquisition, by ordinance, the system of management and operation of the cemetery. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 33.02)  
Secs. 52-2—52-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OAK HILL CEMETERY 
 
Sec. 52-21. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish a system for the operation and maintenance of cemetery property acquired by the city and known as the Oak Hill Cemetery ("cemetery"). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 33.01)  
Sec. 52-22. - Acquisition. 
The common council on December 14, 1999, authorized acquisition of eight acres of land to be added for cemetery purposes to the historic 1.2 acre Oak Hill Cemetery more fully described as a parcel of land located in the Northeast Quarter of Section 32, Township 6 North, Range 9 East, City of Fitchburg, Dane County, Wisconsin. [The westernmost 9.2 acres of the Southeast Quarter of said Northeast Quarter of Section 32.] 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 33.03)  
Sec. 52-23. - Plan. 
The plan of Oak Hill Cemetery, as made in January 2000, is on file in the office of the city clerk (see exhibit A) and is hereby declared to be the plan of the Oak Hill Cemetery, and the sections, lots and divisions, streets, alleys and paths as designated and shown on said map and the additions thereto are hereby declared to be fixed and determined beyond alteration, except by ordinance of the common council, and then only to such extent as shall not interfere with private rights; subject, nevertheless, to the lotting, subdividing, and numbering of such portions of said grounds as have not already been lotted and numbered. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 33.03(a))  
Sec. 52-24. - Management by common council with recommendation of park commission. 
The Oak Hill Cemetery shall be under the management and control of the common council with recommendation from the park commission. The park commission shall have the power and authority to recommend such rules and regulations for the management of the cemetery and relating to the use of the cemetery and interments therein as they shall deem advisable. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 33.03(b))  
Sec. 52-25. - Sexton appointed; duties. 
The city park director is hereby appointed cemetery sexton. The cemetery sexton, under the direction of the mayor, city council, and the park commission, shall have the control and management of the cemetery as to the lay out and subdivision of, and the clearing and improvement of the grounds and buildings and the ornamentation thereof, and shall have responsibility of all interments made in the cemetery. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 33.03(c))  
Sec. 52-26. - Enforcement of regulations. 
The city council, with recommendation from the park commission, shall enforce written rules and regulations respecting the cemetery operations, including any physical management and any fiscal management requirements, in compliance with Wis. Stats. ch. 157. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 33.04)  
Sec. 52-27. - Annual statement. 
The common council shall have prepared an annual statement of the transactions at the Oak Hill Cemetery and the financial condition of the cemetery. The money received from the sale of lots at the cemetery shall be used by the common council for the care and improvement of the cemetery, operation expenses of the cemetery and maintenance of roads in the cemetery, including perpetual maintenance of the graves and grave sites. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 33.05)  
Sec. 52-28. - Lot conveyances and contracts; recordkeeping; fees. 
The mayor and the city clerk shall sign all conveyances for cemetery lots. The clerk shall be responsible to maintain the cemetery books detailing the names of the grantee, the consideration and the residence of the grantee. The common council shall annually, or more often if necessary, establish by resolution the proper charges for cemetery lot purchases and the proper charges of the perpetual care maintenance costs. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 33.06)  
Sec. 52-29. - Improvements. 
The park commission may recommend to the common council to appropriate funds in any year for the improvement of the cemetery. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 33.07)  
Sec. 52-30. - Investments. 
The common council shall invest the money received for the perpetual care as provided in Wis. Stats. ch. 881. The common council has the right, at any time, to terminate the perpetual care fund and place the money in the general fund if the city owns the cemetery and provides all maintenance expenses in perpetuity for those grave sites in the cemetery at the time of termination. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 33.08)  
Chapter 54 - PARKS, RECREATION AND FORESTRY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Public parks and places of recreation, Wis. Stats. § 27.01 et seq.; city park boards, Wis. Stats. § 27.08; city forester duties and tree planting, Wis. Stats. § 27.09; regulation of boating generally, Wis. Stats. § 30.50 et seq.; local regulation of boating. Wis. Stats. § 30.77; local water safety patrols, Wis. Stats. § 30.79; water exhibitions and races, Wis. Stats. § 30.742; use of firearms near parks, Wis. Stats. § 167.30; safe use and transportation of firearms and bows, Wis. Stats. § 167.31. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 54-1. - Penalties for violations. 
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be as provided in section 1-21. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 32.11)  
Secs. 54-2—54-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARK AND POOL USE 
 
Sec. 54-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Private pools means residential swimming pools which include all artificially constructed pools which are used or intended to be used as a swimming pool in connection with a single-family residence and available only to the family of the householder and private guests. 
Public pools means all artificially constructed swimming pools which are not private pools, including, but not limited to, any municipal pool, community pool, public or private school pool, athletic or swimming club pool, any institutional pool (such as Girl Scouts, Boy Scouts, YMCA, YWCA, etc.), pools of country clubs, hotels and motels, pools of apartments, multiple-house units and dormitories, treatment pools, therapeutic pools and special pools for water therapy, including wading pools, where applicable. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.09(2)(c))  
Sec. 54-22. - Closing hours of public swimming pools. 
(a)  No person shall swim, wade or use any public swimming pool in the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. CDT and 6:00 a.m. CDT; provided this subsection shall not apply to public pools which are wholly indoors. 
(b)  No person shall allow or permit to be open for use any public swimming pool in the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. CDT and 6:00 a.m. CDT; provided this subsection shall not apply to public pools which are wholly indoors. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.09(2)(a), (b))  
Sec. 54-23. - Public parks closing hours. 
No person shall be or remain in any public park in the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. CDT and 6:00 a.m. CDT, except with written permission granted by the common council to use the public park during said prohibited hours under terms and conditions to be determined by the common council; provided this section shall not prohibit passing through a park area on a public roadway either in a vehicle or on foot or bicycle without stopping. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.09(3))  
Secs. 54-24, 54-25. - Reserved.  
Sec. 54-26. - Large scale festival events. 
(a)  No large scale festival event as defined below shall be allowed in city parks unless approved by the public safety and human services committee and park commission. 
(b)  A large scale festival event is defined as an event where all of the following apply: 
(1)  The event is located in a city park. 
(2)  The event is open to the public. 
(3)  The event requires a sound permit. 
(4)  The event serves alcohol pursuant to an alcohol license. 
(5)  The event is not sponsored in whole or in part by the city. 
(c)  An application for a large scale festival event shall be submitted to the clerk at least 60 days before the date of the event on forms provided by the clerk. At a minimum the application shall include all of the following: 
(1)  A site plan for the event. 
(2)  A schedule of events. 
(3)  A security plan. 
(4)  Proof of insurance. 
(d)  The public safety and human services committee may condition approval upon payment of a security deposit in an amount not to exceed that deemed sufficient to cover the anticipated services provided by the city. Approval of a large scale festival event under this section shall not relieve an applicant from other city requirements including but not limited to park shelter reservation, alcohol license approval and sound permit approval. 
(e)  Payment of all costs incurred by the city, not required to be paid prior to the event including, but not limited to, costs for security or damages caused by the event shall be paid within 60 days of being invoiced by the city. Failure to make full payment of all costs due to the city within 60 days of being invoiced shall cause the event or the applicants for the event to be ineligible for a large scale festival event permit in the following year. 
(Ord. No. 2016-O-07, § 1, 3-18-2016)  
Secs. 54-27—54-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TREES AND SHRUBBERY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 54-50. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City forester means the city parks director or a qualified designee of the city parks director. 
Maintenance and protection means any trimming, pruning, injecting, fertilizing, treating, bracing, surgery or cutting of trees or shrubs above or below ground level, except such operations which are conducted by a department of the city. 
Public area means any public way, park or other lands owned or leased by the city. 
Public nuisance means any tree or shrub or any part thereof which: 
(1)  Interferes with the use of public areas; 
(2)  Is infected with a plant disease; 
(3)  Is infested with injurious insects or pests; 
(4)  Is injurious to public improvements; or 
(5)  May endanger life, health, safety or welfare of persons or property, public or private. 
Public way means any public street, road, highway, walkway, drainageway or part thereof. 
Qualified designee means that city employee or consultant: 
(1)  Who is a certified arborist or who holds at least a bachelors degree in forestry, botany, agrobiology, plant pathology, or other appropriate discipline; 
(2)  Who is designated to act as the city forester by the city parks director. 
Terrace means: 
(1)  The area between the edge of pavement or curb, or proposed curb, and the property line; 
(2)  Each median strip and all unpaved areas in cul-de sacs. 
Trees and/or shrubs means all wood vegetation presently standing or hereafter planted. 
Vision plane is a triangular plane located 30 inches above the curb elevation bounded by two 45-foot legs along the curb intersecting at the intersection corner. In the volume above and below this plane objects including plant materials of any description shall not exceed an elevation 30 inches, above the curb. This restricted view plane shall be required in any residential or commercial development from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, at any intersection which is not controlled by a stop and go traffic signal or arterial stop sign. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 32.03)  
Sec. 54-51. - Intent and purpose. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to regulate and control the planting, removal, maintenance and protection of trees and shrubs within public ways and public areas of the city to: 
(1)  Eliminate and guard against dangerous conditions which may result in injury to persons using the streets, sidewalks or other public areas; 
(2)  Promote and enhance the beauty and general welfare of the city; 
(3)  Prohibit the undesirable and unsafe planting of trees and shrubs located in public areas; and 
(4)  Guard all trees and shrubs, within the city against the spread of disease, insects or pests. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 32.01)  
Sec. 54-52. - Application. 
This article shall apply to all trees and shrubs, which threaten the life, health, safety or welfare of the public or of any public area, now growing or hereafter planted: 
(1)  Within public areas; and 
(2)  In or upon any private premises. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 32.02)  
Secs. 54-53—54-77. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 54-78. - Authority of city forester. 
(a)  Public trees and shrubs. The city forester is authorized to maintain, protect, remove, and replace trees or shrubs located in public ways or public areas, or to cause such work to be done as may be necessary to insure public safety in accordance with ANSI standards and the protection of property from injury or damage. 
(b)  Private trees and shrubs. 
(1)  Whenever any tree, shrub or part thereof, growing upon private property, constitutes a public nuisance because it: 
a.  Interferes with the use of public areas; 
b.  Is infected with a plant disease, insect or pest; or 
c.  Endangers life, health, safety or welfare of persons or property; 
the city forester shall notify the record owner of the parcel or lot upon which such tree or shrub is located. 
(2)  The notice shall be in writing, shall identify the nuisance, shall specify the treatment or abatement required, and shall state the time within which the owner must abate the nuisance. The owner shall be afforded at least 30 days to abate the nuisance unless the city forester determines that immediate action is necessary for public safety. If the owner fails to abate the nuisance within the specified time, the city forester shall do so forthwith at the owner's expense and shall then give the owner written notice of the charge for doing so. If such charge is neither paid nor appealed within 30 days of the date of such notice, it shall be entered on the tax roll, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.60(16), as a special charge against the parcel on which the tree or shrub was growing. 
(3)  The city forester shall maintain a record and accounting of any work done pursuant to this section for which an assessment may be made. Such record shall include: 
a.  A description of the lot or parcel of land affected; 
b.  The name and address of the owner of record, as shown on the tax rolls; 
c.  A description of the nuisance and of the steps taken to abate it; and 
d.  An itemization of the charges or expenses incurred by the city to abate the nuisance. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 32.04)  
Sec. 54-79. - Appeals. 
(a)  From determination of public nuisance. Any property owner aggrieved by a determination of the city forester that any tree or shrub situated on his/her property constitutes a nuisance may appeal such determination to the board of appeals. The board shall not overrule the city forester unless the greater weight of the credible evidence, including but not limited to any expert testimony, offered at the appellate hearing supports the conclusion that no such nuisance exists. 
(b)  From abatement charges imposed. Any property owner aggrieved by the charges imposed for abating a nuisance attributable to his/her lot or parcel may appeal to the board of appeals. The board shall determine whether the abatement charges imposed were reasonable and if not, shall adjust them, upward or downward, as may be appropriate. The charge so determined by the board of appeals shall be paid within ten days after the date notice of the board's determination is mailed to the aggrieved property owner. If it is not so paid, the charge shall be entered and added to the tax roll, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.60(16), as a special charge. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 32.05)  
Sec. 54-80. - Interference with city forester prohibited. 
No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with the city forester or with any agent or employee of the city in their performance of any duties imposed by this division. Upon prior notification to the owner or occupant, the city forester shall be permitted to enter upon any private property during normal business hours (7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday) to carry out such duties. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 32.09)  
Secs. 54-81—54-103. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TREE AND SHRUB MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 54-104. - Plantings in public ways and areas. 
(a)  Public plantings. The city forester shall determine the placement of any trees and shrubs which are to be planted in any public way or public area as well as the best suited species for any particular planting site with respect to: 
(1)  Growth habits, shape, form, health, disease and pest resistance; 
(2)  Conflicts with wires, lights, pavements, traffic, pedestrians, sewers, water mains; and 
(3)  Space availability. 
The locations for planting shall be determined by the city forester. 
(b)  Land divisions and subdivisions approved after January 1, 1998. Land divisions and subdivisions submitted for review after December 31, 1997, shall comply with section 15.09(10) of the city land division ordinance, as well as the provisions of this division. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 32.06)  
Sec. 54-105. - Planting, maintenance and removal. 
(a)  Permit required. No person, other agents or employees of the city acting within the scope of their employment, shall plant, remove, brace, trim, prune, cut above or below the ground, disturb or alter any tree or shrub in any public way or public area or cause such acts to be done by others, without first obtaining a written permit from the city forester as hereinafter provided. However, no permit shall be required to cultivate, fertilize, mulch or water public trees or shrubs. 
(b)  Permit conditions. Whenever the city forester determines that any proposed planting or work is in accordance with the provisions or this division and of the subdivision ordinance, a permit shall be issued that specifies the work to be done and the species, variety, size and location of any trees or shrubs which may be planted. All work authorized by the permit shall comply with this division and be completed within six months after the date on which the permit was issued. 
(c)  Permitted users of rights-of-way. Any public utility other than the city municipal utility, any cable television company, any telecommunications company, and any other permitted user of municipal rights of way shall obtain an annual permit from the city forester authorizing such user to trim, cut, or remove trees or shrubs situated within public ways or public areas upon 24 hours advance written notice to and the written authorization of the city forester. The city forester may only permit such work to proceed if it is within the public interest and consistent with the purpose and intent of this division. 
(d)  Costs of removal, maintenance, and protection of shrubs and trees. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this division, the cost of removal, maintenance and protection of all trees and shrubs in public ways and public areas shall be borne by the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 32.07)  
Sec. 54-106. - General rules and regulations. 
(a)  Planting. The number, species and sizes of all trees and shrubs to be planted in public ways or public areas as well as the manner of planting shall be determined and approved by the city forester before planting is commenced. An approved plant and tree species list shall be kept on file with the city parks department and city board of public works which shall be subject to periodic review. 
(b)  Vision plane to be maintained. After the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, no trees or shrubs shall be planted within the vision plane of any public way or public area. 
(c)  Placement of trees. A minimum distance of 35 feet shall be maintained between trees in public ways, unless otherwise authorized by the city forester after considering site circumstances and plant species. Trees planted within public ways shall be at least 1 1/12 -inch diameter, measured 12 inches above grade. Trees shall not be planted closer than two feet from any established or proposed curbline or from the inner line of any established sidewalk or proposed sidewalk. 
(d)  Trimming. Trees and shrubs standing and/or overhanging any public way shall be kept trimmed so that the lowest branches provide a safe overhead clearance. The city forester may waive this requirement for newly planted trees upon determining that any such tree or shrub will not interfere with safe public travel, or endanger public safety. 
(e)  Construction safeguards. During construction operations, each contractor or builder shall erect suitable protective barriers three feet outside trees and shrubs which could be injured during construction, and shall obtain the city forester's approval of the adequacy of such barriers before construction is commenced. No person shall fasten any sign, rope, wire or other material to or around or through any public tree or shrub without first obtaining permission from the city forester, except in emergencies such as storms or accidents. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 32.08)  
Sec. 54-107. - Damage to trees and shrubs prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall do any of the following without first obtaining the permission of the record owner or the occupant of the parcel or lot upon which trees or shrubs are located: 
(1)  Break, injure, mutilate, kill or destroy any tree or shrub; 
(2)  Permit any animal under such person's control to break, injure, mutilate, kill or destroy any tree or shrub; 
(3)  Permit any fire to injure any portion of any tree or shrub; 
(4)  Permit any leak to exist in any gas line within the root zone of any tree or shrub; 
(5)  Permit any toxic chemical to seep, drain, or be emptied on or about any tree or shrub; or 
(6)  Permit electric wires to come into contact with any tree or shrub. 
(b)  No person shall fasten any sign, rope, wire or other material to or around or through any public tree or shrub without first obtaining permission from the city forester, except in emergencies such as storms or accidents. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 32.10)  
Chapter 56 - ANIMAL CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Crimes against animals, Wis. Stats. § 951.01 et seq.; local regulation of wild animals, Wis. Stats. § 29.038; wild animals and plants generally, Wis. Stats. § 29.001 et seq.; protection of endangered species, Wis. Stats. § 29.604; noxious substances, Wis. Stats. § 29.601; soil and water conservation and animal waste management, Wis. Stats. § 92.01 et seq.; local regulation of livestock operations, Wis. Stats. § 92.15; animal health generally, Wis. Stats. § 95.001 et seq.; diseased animals, Wis. Stats. § 95.19; rabies control program, Wis. Stats. § 95.21; disposition of animal carcasses, Wis. Stats. § 95.50; strays and lost chattels, Wis. Stats. § 170.01 et seq.; animals distrained or doing damage, Wis. Stats. § 172.01 et seq.; animals not to run at large, Wis. Stats. § 172.01; humane officers, Wis. Stats. § 173.01; dogs generally, Wis. Stats. § 174.001 et seq.; dog license tax, Wis. Stats. § 174.05; dog licenses and collar tags, Wis. Stats. § 174.07; humane killing of dogs, Wis. Stats. § 562.105. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 56-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
At large means off the property of the owner and not physically restrained by leash, rope, cord, chain or other physical restraint. 
Department means the state department of agriculture, trade and consumer protection. 
Habitually means the act or conduct complained of had occurred on two or more distinct prior occasions of which the owner was given notice. 
Humane officer means a person appointed by the city, in accordance with Wis. Stats. ch. 173. 
Isolation facility means a humane society shelter, veterinary hospital, municipal pound or other place specified by an officer which is equipped with a pen or cage which isolates the animal from contact with other animals. 
Keeper means any person who harbors, shelters, protects, feeds, or controls an animal owned by another. 
Let means to give opportunity to whether by action, inaction, or failure to prevent. 
Officer means any law enforcement officer, the humane officer, the code enforcement officer, and any of their subordinates who has been delegated the authority to issue citation pursuant to article III of chapter 18. 
Owner means the person who owns an animal. The term "owner" also means any person owning, licensing, harboring, or keeping an animal and includes the occupant of any dwelling or property on which the animal is kept. 
Suspected animal means any animal that shall have been exposed to rabies, may appear to have rabies or that shall have bitten any human or any other animal under such conditions as to give rise to suspicion that the biting animal may have rabies. 
Veterinarian has the meaning designated under Wis. Stats. § 453.02(7), which is incorporated herein by reference. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 6.09)  
Sec. 56-2. - Penalties. 
Penalties for violations of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated herein, shall be as provided in section 1-21. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 6.03(7))  
Sec. 56-3. - Humane officers. 
(a)  Additional powers and duties. Any humane officer appointed by the city shall have the power to enforce this chapter. 
(b)  Modification or withdrawal of abatement orders issued by humane officer. The city attorney, assistant city attorney and the municipal judge may modify or withdraw any abatement orders issued under Wis. Stats. § 173.11; accordingly, the city attorney, assistant city attorney and the municipal judge shall not participate in the decision to issue the order or any activity leading to that decision. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 6.085)  
Secs. 56-4—56-24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING AND INSPECTION 
 
Sec. 56-25. - License required—Dog. 
Every person who owns, harbors or keeps a dog in the city that is five month of age or older shall annually obtain a license and pay a dog license tax/fee for said dog, as required by Wis. Stats. § 174.05. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 6.03(1))  
Sec. 56-26. - Same—Cat. 
Every person who owns, harbors or keeps a cat in the urban services area of the city that is five months of age or older shall annually obtain a license and pay a cat license tax/fee for said cat. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 6.03(2))  
Sec. 56-27. - License fee. 
The fee for dog and cat licenses shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. The fee schedule may differentiate between male/female and neutered/unneutered animals. The fee schedule shall be kept on file in the city clerk's office and shall be made available for reference and public inspection during normal business hours. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 6.03(3), (4))  
Sec. 56-28. - Issuance of license and tag. 
(a)  Upon payment of the required fee and presentation of evidence that the dog or cat is currently immunized against rabies, as required by this chapter, the city shall complete and issue to the owner a license and tag for the animal. The license shall include: 
(1)  A serial number; 
(2)  The date of expiration; 
(3)  The owner's name and address; and 
(4)  The name, sex, neutered/ unneutered status, breed and description of the animal licensed. 
(b)  The city shall also deliver to the owner a license tag of durable material bearing: 
(1)  The same serial number as the license; 
(2)  The name of the county in which it is issued; and 
(3)  The license year. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 6.03(5))  
Sec. 56-29. - Attachment of tag to collar or harness. 
The owner shall securely attach the tag to a collar or harness and said collar or harness shall be kept on the dog or cat for which the license is issued. Any dog or cat found without a collar or harness, or without the proper tag attached to the collar or harness of said animal, shall be presumed to be unlicensed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 6.03(6))  
Sec. 56-30. - Kennels. 
(a)  The owner of four or more dogs shall have his/her premises and/or kennel area inspected annually by the humane officer, or by any person duly appointed by the humane officer, to ensure that said dogs and their habitat are within the legal requirements and the boundaries of the city zoning laws. 
(b)  A written certificate of inspection shall be provided to such owner by the inspector upon proof of compliance. Such certificate shall be furnished to the tax collector when the annual dog tax is paid. 
(c)  All owners whose premises or kennel area must be inspected shall have in their possession a certificate of inspection valid for the current calendar year and shall produce such document upon request of any police officer or humane officer for the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 6.07)  
Secs. 56-31—56-48. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - IMPOUNDMENT 
 
Sec. 56-49. - Authority; notice; redemption, sale and destruction. 
(a)  Any police officer or humane officer of the city may take custody of any uncontrolled animal and shall impound same in a suitable place under the terms and conditions of this chapter. 
(b)  If the owner of an impounded animal is determined from the identification tag or number found on said animal, then notice of such impoundment shall be given to such owner by telephone or by mail. Such animal shall remain impounded, for a minimum time period of 72 hours following such telephone notice or the posting of notice by mail, the owner procures an earlier release of the animal; provided, however, that the period of impoundment shall, when necessary, be of as long a duration as may be required for reasons of rabies observation. 
(c)  Unless further impoundment for rabies observation is required, the owner of any animal impounded may procure release from impoundment and take possession thereof upon: 
(1)  Furnishing suitable identification and proof of ownership; 
(2)  Payment of the annual dog tax, if applicable, unless such tax has been paid for the current year; and 
(3)  Furnishing of proof of vaccination or arrangements to procure said vaccination of any dog or cat against rabies as required by this chapter. 
(d)  If the owner of an impounded animal fails to procure the release of the animal in the way and manner provided, the police department or humane officer may sell the animal at private sale, for the best price obtainable, to any person. Where compliance with licensing and vaccination requirements have not otherwise been met, any person purchasing an impounded dog or cat shall pay the annual license fee for the current year and have the animal vaccinated against rabies within 24 hours of such purchase. The purchase price of said dog or cat may be applied to such tax and cost of such vaccination, with an excess of such purchase price being applied to the impoundment fee. Any further excess of purchase price shall be deposited in the general revenues of the city. 
(e)  If the owner of an impounded animal fails to procure the release of said animal in the manner herein provided, and if said animal is not sold under the terms in this section, then said animal may be destroyed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 6.04(10), (11))  
Secs. 56-50—56-71. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ANIMAL CARE AND CONTROL 
 
Sec. 56-72. - Owner's responsibility. 
The owner of an animal shall control the acts and conduct of such animal and shall be subject to the penalties heretofore set forth for any animal found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 6.08)  
Sec. 56-73. - State statutes adopted by reference. 
The following sections of Wis. Stats. chs. 173 and 951, together with any existing or future amendments thereto, are adopted and incorporated herein by reference, as if fully set forth in this article and any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute hereby incorporated is required or prohibited in the city and violators upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 56-2: 
(1)  Wis. Stats. § 173.01, definitions. 
(2)  Wis. Stats. § 173.07, powers and duties of humane officer. 
(3)  Wis. Stats. § 951.01, definitions. 
(4)  Wis. Stats. § 951.13, providing proper food and drink to confined animals. 
(5)  Wis. Stats. § 951.14, providing proper shelter. 
(6)  Wis. Stats. § 951.15, animals, neglected or abandoned; police powers. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 6.015)  
Sec. 56-74. - Prohibited conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any animal to let such animal do any of the following: 
(1)  Run at large. Run or be at large upon any street, alley or public place in the city or on property other than that of the owner or keeper except in the following areas: 
a.  City dog park; and 
b.  Public hunting grounds. 
(2)  Attack pedestrians. To assault or attack a person while such person is peacefully walking or riding within the city. 
(3)  Attack other animals. To attack, assault, worry, wound or kill, any pet or domestic animal other than that of its owner. 
(4)  To disturb the peace. Habitually disturb the peace and quiet of any person in the vicinity of the place where such animal is kept. 
(5)  Damage property. To injure, damage or destroy the property of other than its owner. 
(6)  Chase vehicles. Habitually pursue or chase vehicular traffic. 
(7)  Presence in public parks. Be present in or upon the grounds of any city park or other public recreational grounds where signs are posted prohibiting such presence; and in all other park or recreational areas, unrestrained by rope, cord, leash, chain, harness, or bridle. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 6.01; Ord. No. 2011-O-21, 12-13-2011; Ord. No. 2015-O-06, 2-24-2015)  
Sec. 56-75. - Owner's duty to remove refuse. 
The owner or the person in charge of an animal shall immediately remove all refuse, dirt, foods and/or excretions expelled, caused by or left by any animal on any public property or private property other than that of the owner and deposit same into proper refuse containers. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 6.02)  
Secs. 56-76—56-93. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RABIES MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 56-94. - Vaccination required. 
Except as provided in Wis. Stats. § 174.054, every owner or keeper of any dog or cat that is in the city shall have the dog or cat vaccinated against rabies by a veterinarian before it reaches the age of six months and revaccinated within one year after the vaccinated against rabies within 30 days after it is obtained or brought into the city unless it has been vaccinated as evidenced by a current certificate of rabies vaccination from this state or some other state. The owner or keeper of any dog or cat shall have it revaccinated against rabies by a veterinarian before the date that the immunization expires as stated on the certificate of vaccination or, if no date is specified, within three years after the previous vaccination. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 6.04(1))  
Sec. 56-95. - Certificate of rabies vaccination; contents. 
The owner or keeper of any dog or cat that is in the city shall obtain a certificate of rabies vaccination bearing a serial number and the form approved by the department stating: 
(1)  The owner's name and address; 
(2)  The name, sex, spayed or unspayed, neutered or unneutered, breed and color of the dog or cat; 
(3)  The date of the vaccination; 
(4)  The type of rabies vaccine administered and the manufacturer's serial number; 
(5)  The date that the immunization expires; and 
(6)  The city, village or town where the dog is required to be licensed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 6.04(2))  
Sec. 56-96. - Rabies vaccination tag. 
The owner or keeper of any dog or cat that is in the city shall also obtain a vaccination tag of durable material bearing the same serial number as the certificate of rabies vaccination, the year the vaccination was given and the name, address and telephone number of the veterinarian. Such owner shall attach the rabies vaccination tag or a substitute tag to a collar and a collar with the tag attached shall be kept on the dog or cat at all times but this requirement does not apply to a dog during competition or training, to a dog while hunting, to a dog or cat securely confined indoors, to a dog or cat securely confined in a fenced area or to a dog while actively involved in herding or controlling livestock if the dog is under the control of its owner. The substitute tag shall be of a durable material and contain the same information as the rabies vaccination tag. The requirements of this section do not apply to a dog which is not required to be vaccinated under section 56-95. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 6.04(3))  
Sec. 56-97. - Cost. 
The owner shall pay the cost of the rabies vaccination and the cost associated with the issuance of a certificate of rabies vaccination and the delivery of a rabies vaccination tag. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 6.04(4))  
Sec. 56-98. - District quarantine. 
(a)  Dogs confined. If a district is quarantined for rabies, all dogs within the district shall be kept securely confined, tied, leashed or muzzled. Any dog not confined, tied, leashed or muzzled is declared a public nuisance and may be impounded. All officers shall cooperate in the enforcement of the quarantine. The clerk of every town, city or village wholly or partly within the quarantine district shall promptly post in at least three public places in the town, city or village, notices of quarantine furnished by the department for posting. 
(b)  Exemption of vaccinated dog. A dog which is immunized currently against rabies as evidenced by a valid certificate of rabies vaccination or other evidence is exempt from the district quarantine provisions of subsection (a) of this section, if a rabies vaccination tag or substitute tag is attached to the dog's collar. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 6.04(5))  
Sec. 56-99. - Quarantine or sacrifice of animals suspected of biting or of being infected or exposed to rabies. 
(a)  Quarantine or sacrifice of dog or cat. An officer shall order a dog or cat quarantined if the officer has reason to believe that the animal: 
(1)  Bit a person; 
(2)  Is infected with rabies; or 
(3)  Has been in contact with a rabid animal. 
If quarantine cannot be imposed because the dog or cat cannot be captured, the officer may kill the animal. The officer may kill a dog or cat only as a last resort or if the owner agrees. The officer shall attempt to kill the animal in a humane manner and in a manner which avoids damage to the animal's head. 
(b)  Sacrifice of other animals. An officer may order killed or may kill an animal other than a dog or cat if the officer has reason to believe that the animal bit a person or is infected with rabies. 
(c)  Sacrifice of a dog or cat. An officer may order killed or may kill a dog or cat if the owner of the dog or cat violates section 56-98(a), (b). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 6.04(6))  
Sec. 56-100. - Quarantine procedure of dog or cat. 
(a)  Delivery to isolation facility or quarantine on premises of owner. An officer who orders a dog or cat to be quarantined shall deliver the animal or shall order the animal delivered to an isolation facility as soon as possible but no later than 24 hours after the original order is issued or the officer may order the animal to be quarantined on the premises of the owner if the animal is immunized currently against rabies as evidenced by a valid certificate of rabies vaccination or other evidence. 
(b)  Health risk to humans. If a dog or cat is ordered to be quarantined because there is reason to believe that the animal bit a person, the custodian of an isolation facility or the owner shall keep the animal under strict isolation under the supervision of a veterinarian for at least ten days after the incident occurred. In this subsection, the term "supervision of a veterinarian" includes, at a minimum, examination of the animal on the first day of isolation, on the last day of isolation and on one intervening day. If the observation period is not extended and if the veterinarian certifies that the dog or cat has not exhibited any signs of rabies, the animal may be released from quarantine at the end of the observation period 
(c)  Risk to animal health. 
(1)  If a dog or cat is ordered to be quarantined because there is reason to believe that it has been exposed to a rabid animal and if the dog or cat is not currently immunized against rabies, the custodian of an isolation facility, the owner or the keeper shall keep the animal leashed or confined for 180 days. The owner shall have the animal vaccinated against rabies between 155 and 165 days after the exposure to a rabid animal. 
(2)  If a dog or cat is ordered to be quarantined because there is reason to believe that it has been exposed to a rabid animal but if the dog or cat is immunized against rabies, the custodian of an isolation facility, the owner, or the keeper shall keep the animal leashed or confined for 60 days. The owner or keeper shall have the animal revaccinated against rabies as soon as possible after exposure to a rabid animal. 
(d)  Sacrifice of a dog or cat exhibiting symptoms of rabies. If a veterinarian determines that a dog or cat exhibits symptoms of rabies during the original or extended observation period, the veterinarian shall notify the owner and the officer who ordered the animal quarantined and the officer or veterinarian shall kill the animal in a humane manner and in a manner which avoids damage to the animal's head. If the dog or cat is suspected to have bitten a person, the veterinarian shall notify the person or the person's physician. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 6.04(7))  
Sec. 56-101. - Delivery of carcass; preparation; examination by laboratory of hygiene. 
An officer who kills an animal shall deliver the carcass to a veterinarian or local health department, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 250.01(4). The veterinarian or local health department shall prepare the carcass, properly prepare and package the head of the animal in a manner to minimize deterioration, arrange for delivery by the most expeditious means feasible of the head of the animal to the state laboratory of hygiene and dispose of or arrange for the disposal of the remainder of the carcass in a manner which minimizes the risk of exposure to any rabies virus. The laboratory of hygiene shall examine the specimen and determine if the animal was infected with rabies. The state laboratory of hygiene shall notify the department, the veterinarian or local health department which prepared the carcass and, if the animal is suspected to have bitten a person, that person or that person's physician. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 6.04(8))  
Sec. 56-102. - Responsibility for quarantine and laboratory expenses. 
The owner of an animal is responsible for any expenses incurred in connection with keeping the animal in an isolation facility, supervision and examination of the animal by a veterinarian, preparation of the carcass for laboratory examination and the fee for the laboratory examination. If the owner is unknown, the county is responsible for these expenses. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 6.04(9))  
Sec. 56-103. - Observation of suspected rabid animals. 
(a)  Every person who has notice or knowledge that any animal is a suspected animal shall immediately report such fact to a police officer, humane officer or to the police department of the city. 
(b)  A person who has custody or control of any suspected animal shall, upon request of any police officer or humane officer, immediately deliver to such officer the suspected animal. 
(c)  When information respecting any suspected animal shall be brought to the attention of the police department or any police officer or humane officer of the city, the police department or agriculture, trade and consumer protection department shall as promptly as possible impound the suspected animal and place the same in custody of a veterinarian for observation for such period of time as the veterinarian shall deem necessary. 
(d)  If, after the appropriate period of observation, the veterinarian determines that the suspected animal does not have rabies, then said animal may be returned by the veterinarian to the owner, if known, upon receiving proof of payment to the city clerk of the expenses for impounding and observation; but if the owner is not known, then said animal may be sold or otherwise disposed of as provided by law. If the animal shall prove to have rabies; then the animal shall be destroyed or disposed of in accordance with customary procedures in like cases. 
(e)  The usual and customary expenses for impounding and observation of the suspected animal shall be paid by the owner of such animal before the animal is released to the owner, such payment being made to the city clerk who shall remit the same to the veterinarian who had the animal under observation. If the owner is not known and the necessity for observation arises from any person having been bitten by the suspected animal, the expenses for impounding and observation by the veterinarian shall be paid by such person, or by the parents of such person if such person is a minor. In all other cases, the expenses of impoundment and observation shall be paid by the city. 
(f)  Every animal found running at large known to be infected with the disease of rabies may be destroyed on sight by any police officer or humane officer of this city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 6.06)  
TITLE V BUSINESS REGULATION  
Chapter 58 - BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Regulations and licensing of businesses generally, Wis. Stats. § 440.01 et seq.; cigarette and tobacco products retailer license, Wis. Stats. § 134.65; restrictions on sale or gift of cigarettes or tobacco products, Wis. Stats. § 134.66; food regulation generally, Wis. Stats. § 97.01 et seq.; local licensing of nonintoxicating and soda water beverages, Wis. Stats. § 66.0433. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 58-1—58-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BLASTING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 58-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Airblast means an airborne shock wave resulting from the detonation of explosives. 
Annoyance means any injurious effect on the safety, health or morals of the public, or the use of property which works some substantial annoyance or inconvenience to the public. 
Blasting means any method of loosening, moving or shattering masses of solid matter by use of an explosive. 
Blasting operation means any operation, enterprise or activity involving the use of blasting. 
Blasting resultants means the physical manifestations of forces released by blasting, including, but not limited to, projectile matter, vibration and concussion, which might cause injury, damage, or annoyance to persons or property located outside the controlled blasting site area. Blasting resultants shall be the measured levels (recorded) for vertical, horizontal and transverse directions. 
Controlled blasting site area means the area that surrounds a blasting site, and is owned by the operator; or, with respect to which, because of property ownership, an employment relationship or an agreement with the property owner, the operator can take reasonably adequate measures to exclude or to assure the safety of persons and property. 
Flyrock means rock that is propelled through the air from a blast. 
Ground vibration means a shaking of the ground caused by the elastic wave emanating from a blast. 
Inhabited area means an area where the inhabitant or inhabited building is subject to blasting resultants. 
Inhabited building means a building regularly occupied, in whole or in part, as a habitation for human beings, or any church, schoolhouse, railroad station, store or other structure where people are accustomed to assemble, except any building or structure occupied in connection with the manufacture, transportation, storage or use of explosive materials. 
Operator means the person who is responsible for a blasting operation at a blasting site. 
Particle velocity means any measure of ground vibration, describing the velocity at which a particle of ground vibrates when excited by a seismic wave. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.015(3))  
Sec. 58-20. - Preblasting notification requirements. 
The operator shall comply with the following notification requirements: 
(1)  Affected dwellings or other structures. At least 24 hours before initiation of blasting, the operator shall notify all residents or owners of affected dwellings or other structures on how to request a preblasting survey. Affected dwellings or other structures shall be determined as provided in Wis. Admin. Code § COMM 7.41. 
(2)  Local police and fire department. Any person conducting blasting operations in the city shall notify the city police department and fire department of the time and location of the blast prior to undertaking blasting. Notification shall be made on forms from DILHR, Wis. Admin. Code ch. COMM 7, appendix F. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.015(4))  
Sec. 58-21. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to limit permissible levels of blasting resultants to ensure that blasting resultants do not cause annoyance to persons or property outside any controlled blasting site area. The purpose is not to prevent damage, as Wis. Admin. Code ch. COMM 7 provides for this factor; but to limit annoyance. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.015(1))  
Sec. 58-22. - Scope and intent. 
The requirements of this article are intended to apply to all quarry blasting activities within the city and to supplement the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code ch. COMM 7. Blasting activities in the city must comply with the provisions of this article in addition to the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code ch. COMM 7. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.015(2))  
Sec. 58-23. - Notification of injury or violation. 
The operator shall notify the city chief of police within two business days of the occurrence of any blast resulting in bodily injury, death or violation of the blasting resultant limits specified in Wis. Admin. Code § COMM 7.64. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.015(5))  
Sec. 58-24. - Instrumentation and data. 
All seismographs used for compliance with this article shall meet the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code § COMM 7.43 and record: 
(1)  Acceleration, (g) ft./sec. 2 over a range of 0.0010 to 0.5000 ft./sec. 2 ; 
(2)  The U.S. Bureau of Mines peak particle velocity PPV versus frequency; and 
(3)  The individual data distribution points for the three directions for each blast period of the event. The three directional waves to be recorded cover transverse, longitudinal and vertical. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.015(6))  
Sec. 58-25. - Blasting log. 
(a)  Maintaining and filing. A blasting log shall be maintained for each blast fired, and the required blasting log data shall be filed with the city clerk within 15 days after each blast. If the operator is notified that a complaint has been made to the city police department, required blasting log data shall also be provided to the city police department within 24 hours after the operator has been notified of the complaint. The blasting log shall consist of a copy of the Wis. Admin. Code ch. COMM 7 log requirements and a copy of the seismic strip chart recorded for each blast. 
(b)  Information. Each blasting log shall contain at a minimum the following items of information: 
(1)  Name and license number of blaster in charge of the blast. 
(2)  Blast location. 
(3)  Date and time of blast. 
(4)  Weather conditions at time of blast. 
(5)  Diagram of blast layout. 
(6)  Number of holes. 
(7)  Hole depth and diameter. 
(8)  Spacing. 
(9)  Burden. 
(10)  Maximum holes per delay. 
(11)  Maximum pounds of explosives per delay. 
(12)  Depth of stemming used. 
(13)  Total pounds of explosives used. 
14  Distance to nearest inhabited building not owned by operator. 
(15)  Type of initiation used. 
(16)  Powder factor. 
(c)  Seismographic and airblast data report content. Seismographic and airblast data shall be submitted with the blasting log for each blast, and shall be a copy of the state report form with the seismic data strip chart attached. The seismographic and airblast data report shall include all of the following: 
(1)  Maximum peak particle velocities, frequencies plotted on a strip chart, with tabulated values for three mutually perpendicular directions, transverse, longitudinal and vertical and the peak vector sum of the three measurements. 
(2)  Type of instrument and last laboratory calibration date. 
(3)  Exact location of the instrument and the date, time and distance from the blast site. 
(4)  Name of person and firm taking the reading. 
(5)  Name of person and firm analyzing the seismographic record. 
(6)  Recorded measurement of the ground vibration and airblast. 
(7)  Tabulation of recorded measurements of the transverse, longitudinal and vertical particle velocities and the vector sum of these three measurements and tabulation of recorded measurements. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.015(8))  
Sec. 58-26. - Preblast survey. 
A structure owner within 1,000 feet of the blasting site boundary may request a preblast survey provided at the expense of the quarry operator. The preblast survey shall provide a baseline record of the condition of the structure against which the effects of blasting can be assessed. This preblast survey shall allow an equitable resolution of blast damage claims. Any structure owner may request the survey at any time from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and additional requests may be made whenever the structure is remodeled. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.015(9))  
Sec. 58-27. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the fire inspector, zoning administrator or chief of police or their designees, and they shall have the power whenever they deem it necessary and appropriate to issue orders to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article and/or to issue citations and otherwise pursue enforcement through the municipal court procedures. Penalties for violation of this article shall be as set forth in section 1-21. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.015(10))  
Secs. 58-28—58-57. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONTROL OF ADVERSE EFFECTS 
 
Sec. 58-58. - Required. 
Blasting shall be conducted so as to prevent injury and annoyance to persons and damage to public or private property outside the controlled blasting site area. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.015(7))  
Sec. 58-59. - Airblast. 
Airblast shall not exceed the maximum limits listed in the following table A, at the location of any dwelling, public building, place of employment, school, church, or community or institutional building outside the controlled blasting site area: 
Table A. Airblast Limits 
Lower frequency limit of measuring system, in Hz 	Maximum level, in dB 
2 Hz or lower—Flat response 	133 peak 
6 Hz or lower—Flat response 	129 peak 
 
;hn0; (Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.015(7)(a))  
Sec. 58-60. - Monitoring. 
The operator shall monitor each blast to ensure compliance with the airblast standards. Airblast shall be measured by the seismograph at the location where the seismic measurements are taken. A measuring system with an upper-end flat frequency response of at least 200 Hz shall be used. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.015(7)(a))  
Sec. 58-61. - Flyrock. 
Flyrock traveling in the air or along the ground shall remain within the controlled blasting site area and shall not be cast from the blasting site more than one-half the distance to the nearest inhabited building within or outside of the controlled blasting site area. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.015(7)(b))  
Sec. 58-62. - Ground vibration. 
(a)  The maximum ground vibration at the location of any dwelling, public building, place of employment, school, church, or community or institutional building outside the controlled blasting site area shall be established in accordance with the maximum peak-particle-velocity limit of this division. 
(b)  Ground vibration shall be measured as the particle velocity. Particle velocity shall be recorded on a seismographic strip chart in three mutually perpendicular directions. The directions shall be transverse, longitudinal and vertical. The maximum allowable peak particle velocity shall apply to each of the three measurements. 
(c)  A seismographic record shall be provided for each blast, and a copy of the record for each blast shall be filed with a copy of the state blasting log. All seismographs shall be set at a trigger level of 0.02 in./sec. 
(d)  Data distribution points for each blast shall be printed below the waveform of the U.S. Bureau of Mines limit plot representing each individual blast of the total event indicating the three directions. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.015(7)(c)(1))  
Sec. 58-63. - Maximum peak particle velocity. 
An operator shall not exceed the maximum ground vibration limits listed in table B as follows: 
Table B. Peak Particle Velocity Limits 
	Maximum allowable peak particle velocity for ground vibration (in./sec.) 
Type of Structure 	At frequencies below 40 Hz 1 	At frequencies of 40 Hz and greater 
Modern or older homes and structures with drywall interiors or wood lath construction for interior wall 	0.30 	1.0 
1 All spectral peaks with 6dB 50 percent amplitude of the predominant frequency must be analyzed. 
 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.015(7)(c)(2))  
Sec. 58-64. - Scaled-distance equation. 
An operator may use the scaled distance equation, as defined in Wis. Admin. Code § COMM 7.41 only for the purposes of determining the notification area. The scaled distance equation may not be used under this article to establish maximum ground vibration for blasting. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.015(7)(c))  
Sec. 58-65. - Seismic monitoring. 
All measurements shall be taken at the closest building outside the controlled blasting site area. An operator must conduct seismic monitoring of all blasts. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.015(7)(c))  
Sec. 58-66. - Permitted deviations. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the maximum ground vibration limits of this subsection, at each quarry blasts shall be allowed to exceed the limits of table B, in section 58-63, for two blasts per year at a minimum to a maximum of two percent of the total blasts initiated during the six-month period from January 1 to June 30 and to two percent of the total blasts initiated during the six-month period from July 1 to December 31 without violating this section; provided, however that the peak particle velocity for ground vibration produced by such blasts does not exceed 0.50 inches per second and that after the first blast at each quarry exceeding the limits of table B, a plan of action to reduce the peak particle velocities shall be presented to the city to show the intent to reduce future levels to the limits of table B. 
(b)  All blasting after the second deviation at the quarry shall cease until a plan of action is presented to the city clerk to show reduction of blasting levels and the plan has been reviewed jointly by the blaster and the city and accepted in writing by the city. A permit to continue blasting shall be delivered to the blaster after acceptable review requiring up to five working days. The blaster may appeal cessation of operations according to the city appeals process. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.015(7)(c))  
Chapter 60 - ALCOHOL BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Alcohol beverages, Wis. Stats. ch. 125; local option, Wis. Stats. § 125.05; municipal regulation of alcoholic beverages, Wis. Stats. § 125.10; fermented malt beverages generally, Wis. Stats. § 125.25 et seq.; intoxicating liquor generally, Wis. Stats. § 125.51 et seq.; unlicensed places serving alcoholic beverages as nuisance, Wis. Stats. § 125.14 carrying handgun where alcohol beverages may be sold and consumed, Wis. Stats. § 941.237; parental liability for acts of minor child, Wis. Stats. § 895.035; beverage taxes, Wis. Stats. § 139.01 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 60-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult means a person 18 years of age or older. 
Alcohol beverages means fermented malt beverages and intoxicating liquor. 
Applicant means a person who applies for licensure under this chapter. 
Brewer means any person who manufactures fermented malt beverages for sale or transportation. 
Card means an official identification card issued under Wis. Stats. § 125.085. 
Class "A" malt beverage license means a license described in section 60-328 and Wis. Stats. § 125.25. 
"Class A" intoxicating liquor license means a license described in section 60-477 and Wis. Stats. §125.51(2). 
Class "B" malt beverage license means a license as provided in section 60-347 and Wis. Stats. § 125.26. 
"Class B" intoxicating liquor license means a license as provided in section 60-511 and Wis. Stats. § 125.51(3). 
"Class C" wine license means a license as provided in section 60-407 and Wis. Stats. § 125.51(3m) 
Club, society or lodge means an organization, whether incorporated or not, which is the owner, lessee or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes, which is operated solely for recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain. The trafficking in alcohol beverages shall be incidental only and shall not be the object of its existence or operation. A club making an application for a license shall have occupied the premises upon which it has been located for a period of six months prior to the date of filing such application. 
Committee means the common council committee on public safety and human services. 
Department means the state department of revenue. 
Dwelling house means a detached building which is the residence of one or two families, or a building which is the residence of more than two families and which does not have a separate entrance for the room to be licensed. 
Fermented malt beverages means any beverage made by the alcohol fermentation of an infusion in potable water of barley, malt and hops, with or without unmalted grains or decorticated and degerminated grains or sugar containing 0.5 percent or more of alcohol by volume. 
Hotel means a hotel as defined in Wis. Stats. § 254.61(3), that is provided with a restaurant. 
Immediate supervision means the licensee, members of the licensee's immediate family who are 18 years of age or older, a licensed operator, a licensed manager or approved agent must be able to see at all times the activities of those persons serving alcohol beverages. It is not enough for the person supervising merely to be on the premises. 
Intoxicating liquor. 
(1)  The term "intoxicating liquor" means all ardent, spirituous, distilled or vinous liquors, liquids or compounds, whether medicated, proprietary, patented or not, and by whatever name called, containing 0.5 percent or more of alcohol by volume, which are beverages. 
(2)  The term "intoxicating liquor" does not include fermented malt beverages. 
Legal drinking age means 21 years of age. 
License means an authorization to sell alcohol beverages issued under this chapter. 
Licensee means any holder of a license issued under this chapter. 
Market means the retail sale of secondhand or antique merchandise or art. 
Operator means any person who shall draw or remove any fermented malt beverage or intoxicating liquors for sale or consumption from any barrel, keg, cask, bottle or other container in which alcohol beverages shall be stored or kept on-premises requiring a license for sale or service to a consumer for consumption in or upon the premises where sold. 
Permit means any permit issued by the department under Wis. Stats. ch. 125. 
Permittee means any holder of a permit issued by the department under Wis. Stats. ch. 125. 
Premises means the area described in the license or permit under this chapter or the area described in a permit issued under Wis. Stats. ch. 125. 
Principal business means the primary activity as determined by analyzing the amount of capital, labor, time, attention and floor space devoted to each business activity and by analyzing the sources of net income and gross income. The name, appearance and advertising of the entity may also be taken into consideration if they are given less weight. 
Reserve "Class B" intoxicating liquor license means a license as provided in section 60-533 and Wis. Stats. § 125.51(4). 
Restaurant means a restaurant as defined in Wis. Stats. § 254.61(5). 
Sell, sold, sale or selling means any transfer of alcohol beverages with consideration, or any transfer without consideration if knowingly made for purposes of evading the law relating to the sale of alcohol beverages, or any shift, device, scheme or transaction for obtaining alcohol beverages, including the solicitation of orders for, or the sale for future delivery of alcohol beverages. 
Tavern means any place in which alcohol beverages are sold for consumption upon said premises. 
Temporary Class "B" license means a license described in section 60-349 and Wis. Stats. § 125.26(6). 
Temporary "Class B" license means a license described in section 60-382 and Wis. Stats. § 125.51(10). 
Underage person means a person who has not attained the legal drinking age. 
Wholesaler means a person other than a brewer, manufacturer or rectifier, who sells alcohol beverages to a licensed retailer or to another person who holds a permit or license to sell alcohol beverages at wholesale. 
Wine means products obtained from the normal alcohol fermentation of the juice or most of sound, ripe grapes, other fruits or other agricultural products, imitation wine, compounds sold as wine, vermouth, cider, perry, mead and sake, if such products contain 0.5 percent or more of alcohol by volume. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.01) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, Wis. Stats. § 125.02.  
Sec. 60-2. - Conflicts. 
In accordance with Wis. Stats. § 125.10, if any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is in impermissible conflict with Wis. Stats. ch. 125, the applicable section, subsection, clause or phrase of Wis. Stats. ch. 125 shall apply. Even where this chapter refers to section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of Wis. Stats. ch. 125, for reference or definition purposes, if this chapter deviates, but does not impermissibly conflict with Wis. Stats. ch. 125, this chapter shall apply. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.18)  
Sec. 60-3. - State statutes adopted. 
The prohibitions, provisions, exceptions and penalties set forth in the following statutes, as from time to time amended, are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter, as if fully set forth herein: 
(1)  Wis. Stats. § 125.07, underage and intoxicated persons; presence on licensed premises, possession; penalties. 
(2)  Wis. Stats. § 125.075, injury or death by providing alcohol beverage to a minor. 
(3)  Wis. Stats. § 125.085, proof of age. 
(4)  Wis. Stats. § 125.09, general restrictions. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.13)  
Sec. 60-4. - Sale or consumption of alcohol beverages in public places. 
(a)  Peddling liquor. It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle any intoxicating liquor from house-to-house where the sale is consummated and the delivery made concurrently. 
(b)  Sale on public right-of-way. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or serve, or to offer to sell or serve any alcohol beverages upon any public street right-of-way within the city. 
(c)  Consumption on streets public right-of-way. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcohol beverages upon any public right-of-way within the city. 
(d)  City park. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or have in his/her possession any alcohol beverage in any city park between the hour of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(1)  Neighborhood parks. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcohol beverages in any park designated as a neighborhood park. Appropriate signs shall be erected at the entrances to neighborhood parks indicating this prohibition. 
(2)  Common council ability to waive prohibition. The common council, in its discretion, may waive this prohibition for special events in designated parks. This prohibition does not apply to official city neighborhood association sponsored events which are pre-approved by the parks director. 
(e)  Exception. This section shall not apply to persons selling malt beverages in compliance with a validly issued Class "B" permit, or to persons consuming malt beverages at an event for which a temporary Class "B" license has been issued during the hours authorized. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.12)  
Secs. 60-5—60-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING POLICY AND PROCEDURE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 60-27. - License or permit required. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section and in section 60-607 it shall be unlawful for any person to sell or keep for sale at wholesale or retail, or permit to be sold or kept for sale at wholesale or retail within the city, to manufacture, rectify, brew or engage in any other activity, for which this chapter provides a license, permit or other type of authorization without holding the appropriate license, permit or authorization under this chapter. All licenses must be approved by city council. 
(b)  If a temporary Class "B" (picnic beer) license is turned in with insufficient time to hold a public safety and human services and common council meeting, then the authority to grant approval of the license is given to the chair of public safety and human services committee, pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 125.26(1) and 125.26(6) and section 60-72. If time permits a meeting to be held, then authority is not granted to the committee chairperson. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.02(1); Ord. No. 2015-O-09, § 1, 3-24-2015) 
State Law reference— General licensing requirements, Wis. Stats. § 125.04; authority for municipal regulation of alcohol beverages, Wis. Stats. § 125.10; Class "B" malt beverage licenses, Wis. Stats. § 125.26; face-to-face retail sales of malt beverages, Wis. Stats. § 125.27; malt beverage wholesaler's license, Wis. Stats. § 125.28; retail licenses and permits for the sale of intoxicating liquor, Wis. Stats. § 125.51.  
Sec. 60-28. - Licenses or permits issued in violation of chapter. 
No license or permit may be issued to any person except as provided in this chapter and Wis. Stats. ch. 125. Any license or permit issued in violation of this chapter and Wis. Stats. ch. 125 is void. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.02(2))  
Sec. 60-29. - License and permit exceptions. 
(a)  No license or permit shall be required under this chapter for: 
(1)  Brewers' premises; 
(2)  Hospitals; 
(3)  Homemade wine or fermented malt beverages; 
(4)  Unadulterated cider; 
(5)  Railroads and aircraft in transit; 
(6)  Public parks, except as otherwise provided in section 60-4; 
(7)  Judicial, personal representative's, guardian's, receiver's or trustee's sale; 
(8)  Sale by secured party; 
(9)  Ceramic bottle collectors; 
(10)  Raffles; 
(11)  Auction sales; or 
(12)  Bed and breakfast establishments, as set forth and defined more fully in Wis. Stats. § 125.06. 
(b)  No provision of this chapter shall apply to alcohol intended for use and used in the manufacture and sale of any of the following when unfit for beverage purposes, namely: 
(1)  Denatured alcohol produced and used pursuant to Acts of Congress and regulations promulgated thereunder; 
(2)  Patent, proprietary, medicinal, pharmaceutical, antiseptic and toilet preparations; 
(3)  Flavoring extracts, syrups and food products; and 
(4)  Scientific chemical, mechanical and industrial products. 
(c)  No person shall knowingly sell any of the products enumerated in subsection (b) of this section as an intoxicating beverage or under circumstances from which it might reasonably be deduced that the intention of the purchaser is to use or consume them as an intoxicating beverage. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.02(4))  
Sec. 60-30. - Amendment of regulations and restrictions applicable. 
Any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to such further regulations and restrictions as may be imposed by amendment to this chapter or by the enactment of new ordinances. Failure to meet the requirements imposed by such amended or new restrictions and regulations shall constitute cause for revocation of the license. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.16(1))  
Sec. 60-31. - Separate license for each place of business. 
Except as provided under Wis. Stats. §§ 125.27(2)(a) and 125.51(5)(c)1, relating to vessels, wholesalers, manufacturers, rectifiers, brewers and retailers shall have a separate permit or license covering each location or premises, except a licensed public warehouse, from which deliveries and sales of alcohol beverages are made or at which alcohol beverages are stored. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(6))  
Sec. 60-32. - No-license districts. 
No license for the sale of intoxicating liquor shall be issued for any premises within any district established as a no-license district pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 125.05(2). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(8))  
Sec. 60-33. - Form of license. 
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and shall contain the date of issuance, the fee paid and the name of the licensee. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.04(10))  
Sec. 60-34. - Licenses not valid until all sums due city are paid in full. 
No license for the sale of alcohol beverages pursuant to this chapter may be delivered to the applicant until the applicant has paid to the city all required fees. The city may not require an applicant to pay an alcohol license fee more than 15 days before the date the license is to be issued. No alcohol beverage license or operator license shall be issued for any premises for which taxes, assessments, utility payments, fines or other claims of the city, are delinquent and unpaid or to any person delinquent in payment of such claims to the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.04(11))  
Sec. 60-35. - Term and expiration. 
Except as provided in section 60-608, all alcohol beverage licenses shall expire on June 30 of each year unless sooner suspended or revoked. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.05; Ord. No. 2015-O-09, § 2, 3-24-2015)  
Sec. 60-36. - Lapse and cancellation of inactive licenses. 
Whenever any licensee under this chapter shall not conduct his/her licensed business at the authorized location for a period of six consecutive months, the license issued to him/her shall lapse and become void, unless such six-month period shall be extended by the public safety and human services committee and the city council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.07(3))  
Sec. 60-37. - Restrictions near schools and churches. 
No liquor license shall be issued for premises the main entrance of which is less than 300 feet from the main entrance of any established public school, parochial school, hospital or church. Such distance shall be measured by the shortest route along the highway from the closest point of the main entrance of such school, church or hospital to the main entrance to such premises. This section shall not apply to premises licensed as such prior to the occupation of real property within 300 feet thereof by any school building hospital building or church building. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.10(18))  
Sec. 60-38. - Expansion or change in premises during license year. 
(a)  No licensed premises as described in a license issued under this chapter, shall be expanded or changed during the license year, without the approval of the city common council, except that no prior approval is required for the following: 
(1)  A change in a hotel which does not involve a change or expansion of a licensed bar or restaurant; 
(2)  If the only change to the premises is to the exterior facade; 
(3)  Any exterior construction; or 
(4)  Reconstruction not affecting interior floor space or layout. 
(b)  The licensee shall provide evidence of preliminary plan review and site inspections by the city police, fire and building departments to the public safety and human services committee prior to council action. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.04(7)(a))  
Sec. 60-39. - Notice to department of revenue. 
By July 15 annually, the city clerk shall mail to the department of revenue a list containing the name, address and trade name of each person holding a license issued by the city, other than a manager's or operator's license or a temporary Class "B" or temporary "Class B" license, the type of license held and, if the person holding the license is a corporation or LLC, the name of the agent appointed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.04(5)(a))  
Sec. 60-40. - Fees. 
The licenses issued under this chapter shall be issued for a period of 12 months except as otherwise specifically provided herein. The fees for all licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be as provided in the city fee schedule, payable at the time application for original license or renewal is filed, subject to the following: 
(1)  Class "A" license. The fee for a Class "A" license for less than 12 months shall be prorated according to the number of months or fraction thereof for which the license is issued. 
(2)  Class "B" license. 
a.  The fee for a Class "B" license for less than 12 months shall be prorated according to the number of months or fraction thereof for which the license is issued. 
b.  A Class "B" license may be issued at any time for a period of six months in any calendar year. Such licenses are not renewable during the calendar year in which issued. 
(3)  Temporary Class "B" license. The fee for a temporary Class "B" license covers either picnic beer, wine, or both beer and wine for the same dollar amount. 
(4)  "Class A" license. The fee for a "Class A" license for less than 12 months shall be prorated according to the number of months or fraction thereof for which the license is issued. 
(5)  "Class B" license. The fee for a "Class B" license for less than 12 months shall be prorated according to the number of months or fraction thereof for which the license is issued. 
(6)  Reserve "Class B" license. The fee for a reserve "Class B" license shall include a one time initial issuance fee. Bona fide clubs and lodges situated and incorporated in the state for at least six years that apply for a reserve "Class B" license are exempt from paying the initial issuance fee. The fee for a license for less than 12 months shall be prorated according to the number of months or fraction thereof for which the license is issued. The initial issuance fee is not prorated and must be paid prior to the license being issued. 
(7)  "Class C" Wine license. The fee for a "Class C" license for less than 12 months shall be prorated according to the number of months or fraction thereof for which the license is issued. 
(8)  "Class A" and "Class B" licenses for less than one year. Licenses valid for six months may be issued at any time. The fee for the license shall be 50 percent of the annual license fee. The license may not be renewed during the calendar year in which issued. 
(9)  Provisional operator's license. There shall be no fee for a provisional operator's license; provided, however, that the applicant for a provisional operator's license must pay the fee for a regular operator's license prior to issuance of the provisional operator's license, and must pay an additional fee upon application for renewal of the provisional operator's license. A provisional operator's may only be renewed once after 60 days, for an additional 60-day period. 
(10)  Refunds. No license fee shall be refunded if a license is surrendered or revoked for any reason. 
(11)  Late fee. A late fee shall be charged for all renewal license applications other than operator licenses received after April 15. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.06(1)—(15); Ord. No. 2015-O-09, § 3, 3-24-2015)  
Secs. 60-41—60-68. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - APPLICATION AND INVESTIGATION 
 
Sec. 60-69. - Application—Required. 
Except as provided in section 60-607 the common council may issue alcohol related licenses granted only upon application, in writing, on forms provided by the city clerk, and upon fulfilling the requirements of this chapter. Such license is valid for operation only within the limits of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.04(1); Ord. No. 2015-O-09, § 4, 3-24-2015)  
Sec. 60-70. - Same—Contents. 
The city clerk shall provide an application form for each kind of license issued or renewed under this chapter. Such form shall be as prescribed by the state department of revenue, if any, and shall require at least the following information: 
(1)  A history of the applicant relevant to the applicant's fitness to hold a license. 
(2)  The kind of license for which the applicant is applying. 
(3)  The premises where alcohol beverages will be sold or stored. The licensed premises as described may not be expanded or changed during the license year without the approval of the common council. 
(4)  If the applicant is a corporation, the identity of the corporate officers and agent. 
(5)  The applicant's trade name, if any. 
(6)  Any other information required by this chapter. 
(7)  In the case of a corporation or LLC, an appointment of liquor/beer agent form and agent authorization form must also be completed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.04(2))  
Sec. 60-71. - Same—Filed with city clerk. 
Each application for a license, including an operator's license, shall be sworn to by the applicant. The applicant shall file the application for a license with the city clerk. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.04(3))  
Sec. 60-72. - Time of filing original and renewal applications; exceptions. 
(a)  All new applications for retail/wholesale licenses to sell alcohol beverages shall be filed with the city clerk at least 30 days prior to the granting of the license. 
(b)  Annual renewals are due in the city clerk's office by April 15. Failure to return applications by this time will result in a higher publication fee being charged, and the license may not be able to be acted upon prior to June 30. All applications for operator's licenses to sell alcohol beverages shall be filed with the city clerk at least 30 days prior to the granting of the license. 
(c)  The following exceptions shall apply to the filing requirements of this section: 
(1)  Temporary 'Class B" (picnic wine) licenses shall be filed with the city clerk at least 15 days prior to the granting of the license. 
(2)  Temporary Class "B" (picnic beer) licenses lasting more than four days shall be filed with the city clerk at least 15 days prior to the granting of the license. 
(3)  Temporary Class "B" (picnic beer) licenses lasting less than four days can be filed with the city clerk at any time prior to the event. There will be a handling charge in the amount set forth in the city fee schedule to process all temporary Class "B" (picnic beer) licenses turned in less than 15 days prior to the event. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.04(4))  
Sec. 60-73. - Publication; contents; fee. 
(a)  The city clerk shall publish, in a newspaper in accordance with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 125.04(3), each application for a Class "A," Class "B," "Class A," "Class B" or "Class C" retail license, except temporary Class "B" and temporary "Class B" licenses issued under Wis. Stats. §§ 125.26(6) and 125.51(10) to clubs, prior to issuance of a license. 
(b)  The publication shall include the name and address of the applicant, the kind of license applied for and the location of the premises to be licensed. 
(c)  At the time a new application is filed, the applicant shall pay a publication fee to the city clerk. Renewal applicants will pay a publication fee as set forth in the city fee schedule. The renewal publication fee is based on whether or not the application is received timely, in accordance to section 60-72. 
(d)  The publication shall be printed in a daily newspaper on three successive occasions, or if a weekly newspaper is utilized, it shall be printed at least once. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.04(5))  
Sec. 60-74. - Notice where site not previously licensed. 
(a)  In the event that an application is for a license at a site not previously licensed under this chapter, the city clerk shall schedule a public hearing before the committee on public safety and human services on the granting of the license. This will be published as a Class 1 notice. 
(b)  The city clerk shall notify all property owners within a radius of 300 feet of the proposed site of the dates of the hearings. The notice shall be given at least ten days before the hearing and may be mailed. If apartments are within the 300 feet, a notice will be sent to the apartment owner of record stating they must post this notice at each of the affected buildings to allow tenants a chance to appear at the public hearing. 
(c)  The applicant must provide a site plan to the city clerk prior to scheduled public hearing at the public safety committee, showing exactly where alcohol will be stored and sold, as well as how and when it will be kept secure. The applicant must also meet with the chief of police, or designee, to do a walkthrough of the facility prior to approval by the public safety and human services committee. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.04(6))  
Sec. 60-75. - Duty of applicant to notify city of changes in status. 
Within ten days of any change in any fact set out in an application for a license to sell alcohol beverages issued by the city, which includes, but is not limited to, any violations during the license period, the applicant shall file with the city a written description of the change fact. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.14)  
Sec. 60-76. - Investigations. 
(a)  Committee on public safety and human services. The application shall be referred by the city clerk to the committee on public safety and human services. The committee shall make any investigation as to the advisability of granting the license as it may deem necessary or desirable. The committee shall within a reasonable time, and after review of all investigations and reports required by this section, make a report and recommendation to the council as to whether the application should be granted. 
(b)  Police chief. The police chief shall make an investigation of the applicant to determine whether the applicant possesses the qualifications necessary for granting a license under this chapter. In the case of a corporation the agent and all corporate officers will be investigated. All partners will be investigated if the application is for a partnership. The police chief shall report his/her findings to the public safety and human services committee. 
(c)  Building inspector and fire chief. The building inspector and the fire chief shall inspect the premises sought to be licensed to determine whether the premises conform with applicable ordinances of the city and laws of the state. The building inspector and fire chief will report their findings to the public safety and human services committee. 
(d)  Finance and utility departments. A copy of the application will be given to finance, utility and to the court clerk to determine whether there are any outstanding fees owed to the city. All outstanding fees, including, but not limited to, real estate taxes, personal property taxes, utility bills, special assessments, any invoices due the city, fines for any violations (including parking) and any outstanding warrants, must be paid in full prior to the application being approved. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.04(8))  
Sec. 60-77. - Time and procedure for granting license. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 60-607 no license may be granted until and unless the common council, by a majority vote, has authorized granting the license. 
(b)  The committee on public safety and human services shall meet no later than the second Tuesday in May annually, for the purpose of adopting recommendations upon the applications for licenses filed on or before April 15. 
(c)  The council shall grant, or deny any application for a license for the ensuing license year filed on or before April 15 not later than June 15 for the ensuing license year. The council may accept and act upon any application filed at any other time. 
(d)  If the council decides not to grant a new license, it shall notify the applicant for the new license of the decision not to grant the license. The notice shall be in writing and state the reasons for the decision. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.04(9); Ord. No. 2015-O-09, § 5, 3-24-2015)  
Secs. 60-78—60-97. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TRANSFER 
 
Sec. 60-98. - To another premises permitted. 
An alcohol beverage license may be transferred to another premises owned or leased by the same licensee upon payment of a fee as set forth in the city fee schedule and approval of the council. New premises are subject to the same conditions of approval as previous premises. If the request is to transfer the license to a new site that has not been previously licensed, it would be subject to the conditions of section 60-73 and a publication fee as set forth in the city fee schedule for new applicants. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.07(1))  
Sec. 60-99. - To another person prohibited; exceptions upon death of licensee. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, an alcohol beverage license may not be transferred from one holder to another. 
(b)  If the holder of a Class "A," Class "B," "Class A" "Class B" or "Class C" license dies, the license shall automatically pass to the holder's personal representative, or if no personal representative is appointed, to the holder's surviving spouse, if any. The personal representative or surviving spouse, as the case may be, may continue to operate the business, or may sell the business and transfer the license, incidental to such sale; provided, however, that the transferee must comply with all requirements for obtaining a license applicable to original applicants and the transfer must be approved by public safety and human services and council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.07(2))  
Secs. 60-100—60-126. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR NONRENEWAL 
 
Sec. 60-127. - Complaint; summons. 
Upon the filing of a written verified complaint by any building inspector, police, health or fire officer or by any resident with the city clerk alleging that a licensee under this chapter: 
(1)  Has violated any provision of this chapter; 
(2)  Keeps or maintains a disorderly or riotous, indecent or improper house; 
(3)  Has sold or given away any intoxicating liquor or any fermented malt beverage to any minor, to any person who is intoxicated, bordering upon intoxication, or known to be a habitual drunkard; 
(4)  Does not possess the qualifications required under this chapter to hold the license; 
(5)  Has been convicted of manufacturing, distributing or delivering a controlled substance or controlled substance analog under Wis. Stats. § 961.41(1), of possessing, with the intent to manufacture, distribute or deliver, a controlled substance or controlled substance analog under Wis. Stats. § 961.41(1m), of possessing, with the intent to manufacture, distribute or deliver, or of manufacturing, distributing or delivering a controlled substance or controlled substance analog under a substantially similar federal law a substantially similar law of another state; or 
(6)  Has knowingly allowed another person, who is on the premises for which the license under this chapter is issued, to possess, with the intent to manufacture, distribute or deliver, or to manufacture, distribute or deliver a controlled substance or controlled substance analog; 
the common council, or the public safety and human services committee shall issue a summons commanding the licensee to appear before the committee on a day and at a place in such summons named, signed by the city clerk and directed to any police officer in the city, not less than three or more than ten days from its date of issuance, and show cause why the license should not be revoked or suspended. The complaint shall set forth each alleged offense, the date, time and place of each offense alleged and the facts constituting each offense alleged. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.11(1))  
Sec. 60-128. - Service of summons and complaint. 
The summons and a copy of the complaint shall be served at least three days and not more than ten days before the date set for the appearance and may be served either personally upon the licensee or agent or upon the person in charge of the licensed premises. Service shall be in the manner provided under Wis. Stats. ch. 801 for service in civil actions in civil court. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.11(1))  
Sec. 60-129. - Failure to appear for hearing. 
If the licensee does not appear as required by the summons, the allegations set forth in the complaint shall be deemed to be true, and if the committee deems its allegations sufficient, the committee shall recommend revocation or suspension of the license as provided in article III of this chapter and the common council may dismiss the complaint, fine the licensee, suspend the license, nonrenew, or revoke the license. Notice of the council's action shall be given to the licensee in writing. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.11(2))  
Sec. 60-130. - Hearing procedure. 
If the licensee appears at the hearing and denies the allegations set forth in the complaint, each party may present testimony and evidence. The complainant shall be the first to proceed and the licensee, who may be represented by counsel, shall then have the opportunity to be heard in person and to present witnesses and testimony on its behalf. Both the complainant and the licensee shall have the right to cross examine adverse witnesses and to compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena which shall be issued by the chair of the committee upon request. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.11(3))  
Sec. 60-131. - Committee report. 
(a)  If the hearing is held before a committee of a city council, the committee shall submit a report to the city council, including findings of fact, conclusions of law, and a recommendation as to what action, if any, the common council should take with respect to the license. The committee shall provide the complainant and the licensee with a copy of the report. 
(b)  Either the complainant or the licensee may file an objection to the report and shall have the opportunity to present arguments supporting the objection to the city council. The common council shall determine whether the arguments, shall be presented orally or in writing or both. 
(c)  If the city council, after considering the committee's report and any arguments presented by the complainant or the licensee, finds the complaint to be true, or if there is no objection to a report recommending suspension, nonrenewal or revocation, the license shall be suspended, nonrenewed, or revoked. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.11(4))  
Sec. 60-132. - Prerogatives of the council. 
If the common council determines the allegations of the complaint to be true, it may fine the licensee, suspend the license for not less than ten days nor more than 90 days, or revoke the license. If the council determines that the allegations are untrue or if true are not grounds for suspension or revocation it shall dismiss the complaint. If the council determines that the allegations of the complaint were malicious and without probable cause the cost shall be paid by the complainant. The council may require security for costs to be posted by the complainant before issuing the summons. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.11(5))  
Sec. 60-133. - Effect of revocation or nonrenewal. 
When a license is revoked or nonrenewed, under this section, the revocation or nonrenewal shall be recorded by the clerk and no other license issued under this chapter may be granted within 12 months of the date of revocation or nonrenewal to the person whose license was revoked or nonrenewed. No part of the fee paid for any license so revoked or nonrenewed, may be refunded. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.11(6))  
Sec. 60-134. - State law applicable to nonrenewals. 
The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 125.12(3) and this division shall apply to refusals by the committee on public safety and human services to recommend renewal of licenses issued under this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.04(12))  
Secs. 60-135—60-151. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - GUIDELINES FOR DENIAL, NONRENEWAL, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 60-152. - Intent. 
(a)  As it is the responsibility of the public safety and human services committee ("the committee") of the common council to screen applications for alcohol beverage licenses within the city under the licensing authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 125 and this chapter, the common council adopts the following guidelines in order to specify the reasons for denial, nonrenewal, suspension or revocation an alcohol beverage license. If a decision is made to deny, revoke, suspend or nonrenew a license, the committee is required to provide that person with a written reason for the denial. These guidelines are adopted to meet that requirement. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, broad discretion is retained on behalf of the committee to consider each case on an individual basis. Deviation from the guidelines may be allowed if mitigating circumstances exist, which may include, but are not limited to, the particular circumstances documented or the length of time that has expired since the offense.  
Sec. 60-153. - Applicability of state law and city code; conflicting provisions. 
(a)  To the extent Wis. Stats. ch. 125 or this Code provide additional grounds for denial, suspension, revocation or nonrenewal, the committee may rely on such provisions in addition to grounds provided in these guidelines. 
(b)  Any conflict between Wis. Stats. ch. 125, this Code and the policy set forth in this article shall be decided on the order of precedence which shall be the order listed in this sentence.  
Sec. 60-154. - Notices provided by the commission and by the police department. 
(a)  If the police department recommends denial, revocation, suspension, or nonrenewal of a license, both that person and the employer are notified in writing of the recommendation and are provided the opportunity to meet with the public safety and human services committee to discuss the denial. If the public safety and human services committee denies, revokes, suspends or does not renew a license, both that person and the employer will be notified, in writing, of the denial and the guideline that was used as reason for denial. 
(b)  Since alcohol beverage license holders must act in cooperation with law enforcement to enforce the alcohol beverage laws, drunk driving laws, and assist with minimizing disturbances of the peace and maintaining the safety of the community, individuals with a past history of negative or uncooperative contacts with police agencies should be scrutinized; provided, however, that the committee shall not discriminate against such applicants based on a prior arrest or conviction record, pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 111.321, 111.322, 111.335 and 125.12(l)(b), unless said arrest or conviction record substantially relates to the circumstances of the particular licensed activity. It is with these goals in mind, as well, that these guidelines are adopted.  
Sec. 60-155. - Copy of article to be provided to applicants. 
A copy of this article shall be provided to each person who applies for a license under this chapter.  
Sec. 60-156. - Grounds generally. 
In addition to all other provisions of this article and pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.12, any license under this chapter may be denied, refused renewal, suspended or revoked if the applicant or licenseholder: 
(1)  Does not possess the qualifications for licensure under this chapter or state law; 
(2)  Has committed any of the offenses enumerated in division 2 of this article; 
(3)  Keeps or maintains a disorderly or riotous, indecent or improper house; or 
(4)  Sells or gives away, or has sold or given away, alcohol beverages to known habitual drunkards.  
Sec. 60-157. - Effect of falsification of application for license. 
Any person who materially falsifies an application for an alcohol beverage license will not be eligible to reapply for an alcohol beverage license for a period of six months from the date of denial of such application. The committee may waive the provisions of this section, allow the applicant to submit a corrected application, with the appropriate fee, and grant an alcohol beverage license to the person, if it appears to the committee that any falsifications on the application were the result of inadvertence, excusable neglect, or mistake.  
Secs. 60-158—60-182. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - OFFENSES 
 
Sec. 60-183. - Relevance of offenses; discrimination prohibited. 
Since alcohol beverage license holders must act in cooperation with law enforcement to enforce the alcohol beverage laws, drunk driving laws and assist with minimizing disturbances of the peace and maintaining the safety of the community, individuals with a past history of negative or uncooperative contacts with police agencies should be scrutinized; provided, however, that the committee shall not discriminate against such applicants based on a prior arrest or conviction record, pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 111.321, 111.322, 111.335 and 125.12(1)(b), unless said arrest or conviction record substantially relates to the circumstances of the particular licensed activity.  
Sec. 60-184. - Type of relevant offense; relevant time period. 
The committee will only deny renewal of, suspend or revoke a current alcohol beverage license under these guidelines, or other justification provided by law, if the person committed an offense substantially related to the licensed activity within the license year period immediately preceding the year for which the person is seeking renewal or within the license year period in which suspension or revocation is sought, unless the police chief demonstrates that previous offenses were not considered in the approval of the current license. In the event the person is considered for nonrenewal, suspension or revocation as the result of such an offense, the committee shall consider all offenses, regardless of when they occurred, to determine application of these guidelines.  
Sec. 60-185. - Applicants other than natural persons. 
(a)  A corporation or limited liability company with an arrest or conviction record may be issued a license if the corporation or limited liability company has terminated its relationship with all the individuals whose actions directly contributed to the conviction. 
(b)  Additionally, with respect to a nonnatural person, such person's license may be revoked, suspended or nonrenewed in the event a new officer, director, member, or manager, is named and such person does not qualify under these guidelines; with the exception that a corporation or limited liability company may retain its license if it terminates its relationship with all the individuals whose actions directly contributed to the conviction. With respect to successor agents, see Wis. Stats. § 125.04(6). 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 125.04.  
Sec. 60-186. - Exceptions. 
Notwithstanding section 60-185, the following violations may not be used as grounds for suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of an existing license: 
(1)  Furnishing alcohol beverages to underage persons unless the licensee has committed two violations within a one-year period; or 
(2)  Violations punishable under Wis. Stats. § 945.03(2m), 945.04(2m) or 945.05(1m), relating to commercial gambling and gambling devices.  
Sec. 60-187. - Effect of certain prior felony convictions. 
Provided the offense is substantially related to the circumstances of the licensed activity, any person who has been convicted of any felony, unless duly pardoned, does not qualify for an alcohol beverage license. To the extent the other provisions of this article reference a specific offense, this guideline shall apply if the offense constitutes a felony.  
Sec. 60-188. - Effect of certain convictions within ten years of date of license application. 
Provided the offense is substantially related to the circumstances of the licensed activity, any person who has been convicted of, released from incarceration in a state or federal prison system, or a county jail for, or released from parole or probation status, or has a current charge pending, for two or more offenses, arising out of separate incidents, within the last ten years in the following subcategories, does not qualify for an alcohol beverage license: 
(1)  Violent crimes against the person of another including, but not limited to, homicide, aggravated battery, sexual assault, injury by negligent use of a weapon, injury by negligent use of a vehicle, or injury by intoxicated use of a vehicle. 
(2)  Crimes involving cooperation (or lack thereof) with law enforcement officials including, but not limited to, obstructing a police officer, resisting arrest, bribery of public officers or employees, misconduct in public office, bomb scares, or acts or threats of terrorism. 
(3)  Manufacturing, distributing, delivering a controlled substance or a controlled substance analog; possessing with intent to manufacture, distribute or deliver, a controlled substance or a controlled substance analog.  
Sec. 60-189. - Effect of certain convictions within three years of date of application. 
Provided the offense is substantially related to the circumstances of the licensed activity, any person who has been convicted of, released from incarceration in a state or federal prison system, or a county jail for, or released from parole or probation status, or has a current charge pending, for two or more offenses, arising out of separate incidents, within the last three years in the following subcategories, does not qualify for an alcohol beverage license: 
(1)  Disorderly conduct, criminal damage to property, solicitation of prostitution or other prostitution related offenses, wherein the offense involves an incident at a place that is, or should have been licensed under Wis. Stats. ch. 125. 
(2)  Alcohol beverage offenses under state law or this Code, excluding administrative violations such as: 
a.  Failure to post license under glass; 
b.  Furnishing alcohol beverages to underage persons; 
shall not be used as grounds for suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of an existing license, unless the licensee has committed two violations within a one-year period. 
(3)  Perjury or false swearing, wherein the offense involves an incident at a place that is, or should have been licensed under Wis. Stats. ch. 125. 
(4)  Possessing a controlled substance, controlled substance analog or drug paraphernalia. 
(5)  Operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicants or drugs. 
(6)  Operating a motor vehicle with a BAC in excess of 0.08 percent by weight. 
(7)  Open intoxicants in public places or in a motor vehicle.  
Sec. 60-190. - Habitual offenders. 
(a)  Provided the offenses are substantially related to the circumstances of the licensed activity, any person who is an habitual law offender does not qualify for an alcohol beverage license. To constitute an habitual law offender there need not have been a trial or conviction for each or any offense. What is required is that the offenses were committed, that the law has been violated, and that the fact of such violations can be shown. For purposes of this section, an habitual offender includes, but is not limited to, a person who has committed: 
(1)  Two or more offensives, each a separate incident, within the immediately preceding six months. 
(2)  Three or more offensives, each a separate incident, within the immediately preceding two years. 
(3)  Six or more offensives, each a separate incident, within the preceding ten years. 
(b)  In the case of a person applying for, or possessing, a retail license, an habitual law offender, or habitually troublesome license holder, shall include, but not be limited to, persons who have accumulated more than 100 points, in at least two separate incidents, in the immediately preceding year for violations set forth in the point system schedule included in this chapter.  
Secs. 60-191—60-218. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - QUALIFICATIONS FOR LICENSURE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 60-219. - Natural persons. 
Licenses and permits related to alcohol beverages issued to natural persons under this chapter may be issued only to persons who: 
(1)  Do not have an arrest or conviction record, subject to Wis. Stats. §§ 111.321, 111.322, 111.335 and 125.12(1)(b); 
(2)  Have been residents of this state continuously for at least 90 days prior to the date of application; provided, however, this provision does not apply to an officer of a corporation; and applicants for manager's licenses need only to be residents of this state at the time of issuance; applicants for operator's licenses need not be residents of this state; 
(3)  Have attained the legal drinking age; however operator's licenses may be issued to persons who have attained the age of 18 years; 
(4)  Have submitted proof of seller's permit under Wis. Stats. § 77.61(11); 
(5)  Satisfy requirements of section 60-603. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(1)(a))  
Sec. 60-220. - Criminal offenders. 
No license or permit related to alcohol beverages may, subject to Wis. Stats. §§ 111.321, 111.322 and 111.335, be issued under this chapter to any person who has habitually been a law offender or has been convicted of a felony substantially related to the licensed activity, unless the person has been duly pardoned. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(1)(b))  
Secs. 60-221—60-248. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CORPORATIONS AND LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANIES 
 
Sec. 60-249. - Requirements for issuance of license. 
No license or permit may be issued to any corporation or limited liability company, unless that entity meets the qualifications under sections 60-219(1), (4) and 60-220, unless the agent of the entity appointed under section 60-603 and the officers and directors, or the members or managers of the entity meet the qualifications of sections 60-219(1), (3) and 60-220 and unless the agent of the entity appointed under section 60-603 meets the qualification under section 60-219(2). The requirement that the entity meet the qualifications under sections 60-219(1) and 60-220 does not apply, if the entity has terminated its relationship with all of the individuals whose actions directly contributed to the conviction. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(1)(c))  
Sec. 60-250. - Corporate agent. 
No corporation organized under the laws of this state or of any other state or foreign country may be issued any alcohol beverage license unless: 
(1)  The corporation first appoints an agent in the manner prescribed by the authority issuing the licensee. In addition to the qualifications under this division, the agent must, with respect to character, record and reputation, be satisfactory to the public safety and human services committee. 
(2)  The corporation vests in the agent, by properly authorized and executed written delegation, full authority and control of the premises described in the license of the corporation and of the conduct of all business on the premises relative to alcohol beverages, that the licensee could have and exercise if it were a natural person. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(5)(a))  
Sec. 60-251. - Successor agent—Generally. 
The corporation may cancel the appointment of an agent and appoint a successor agent for the remainder of the license year or until another agent is appointed, as follows: 
(1)  The successor agent shall meet the same qualifications required of the first appointed agent. 
(2)  The corporation shall immediately notify the city clerk, in writing, if a license is held in writing, of the appointment of a successor agent and the reason for the cancellation and the new appointment. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(5)(b))  
Sec. 60-252. - Same—Authority. 
A successor agent shall have all the authority, perform all the functions, and be charged with all the duties of the previous agent of the corporation until the next regular or special meeting of the common council if a license is held. However, the license of the corporation shall cease to be in force if, prior to the next regular or special meeting of the common council, the city clerk received notice of disapproval of the successor agent by the chief of police. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(5)(c))  
Sec. 60-253. - Same—Approval. 
(a)  The license of the corporation shall not be in force after the next regular or special meeting of the common council unless and until a successor agent or another corporate agent is appointed and approved by the public safety and human services committee and the common council. 
(b)  Notwithstanding section (a) upon a recommendation for approval by the police department the clerk may without review by the committee or common council approve the appointment of the successor agent. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(5)(d); Ord. No. 2015-O-09, § 6, 3-24-2015)  
Sec. 60-254. - Resignation. 
If an agent appointed under this section resigns, he/she shall notify in writing the corporation and the city clerk within 48 hours of the resignation. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(5)(e))  
Sec. 60-255. - Responsible operators to be on-premises. 
In addition to designation of an agent, the corporation or LLC shall file with the application the names of one or more persons having full responsibility, each of whom shall be licensed operators pursuant to this chapter, any of whom shall be on the licensed premises during business hours. Such named persons may be changed from time to time as is required by business needs, but the agent shall, in writing, notify the city clerk of such change within ten days of its occurrence. This section shall not apply to Class "A" fermented malt beverage and "Class A" liquor and fermented malt beverage licenses or to fraternal organizations. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(5)(f))  
Secs. 60-256—60-273. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - WHOLESALERS 
 
Sec. 60-274. - License precluded by interest in other license or permit; exceptions. 
(a)  Except as stated in subsection (b) of this section, a wholesalers license cannot be issued to anyone holding, or anyone having a direct or indirect ownership interest in a premises operating under, one of the following licenses or permits: 
(1)  A Class "A" license. 
(2)  A Class "B" license, except as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(3)  A Class "B" permit, except as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(4)  An industrial fermented malt beverage. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, a person who holds, or anyone who has a direct or indirect ownership interest in a premises operating under one of the licenses or permits described in subsection (a) of this section, all of which licenses or permits were issued before May 5, 1994, may, subject to this article, division 4 of article II and divisions 3 and 4 of article V of this chapter, renew and continue to hold all of the licenses or permits. 
(c)  If a person who holds, or anyone who has a direct or indirect ownership interest in a premises operating under one of the licenses or permits described in subsection (a) of this section, fails to renew a license or permit, is denied renewal of a license or permit under division 4 of article II of this chapter, or has one of the licenses or permits suspended or revoked, the person is subject to subsection (a) of this section, with respect to holding a license or permit of that type after the failure of denial of renewal or the revocation or suspension of the license or permit. 
(d)  A brewer may hold a wholesalers license issued under Wis. Stats. § 125.28 and a Class "B" license as provided under Wis. Stats. § 125.31. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(1)(d))  
Secs. 60-275—60-296. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - MALT BEVERAGE AND WINE LICENSES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— General licensing requirements, Wis. Stats. § 125.04. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 60-297. - Classes issued; quotas. 
(a)  The city issues alcohol beverage licenses according to the classification system set forth in this article. 
(b)  Each municipality in this state that is not dry by referendum has a statutory quota for "Class B" liquor licenses. A municipality's quota is based on the number of licenses granted or issued in good faith and in force on December 1, 1997, plus the number of reserve "Class B" liquor licenses the municipality is authorized to issue. The city does not have quotas on any other type of alcohol license. If the city has granted or issued a number of licenses equal to or exceeding its quota, it may still issue licenses in accordance with Wis. Stats. 125.51(4)(v). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.01(30))  
Secs. 60-298—60-327. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CLASS "A" LICENSES 
 
Sec. 60-328. - Package sales for off-premises consumption. 
The holder of a Class "A" malt beverage license may sell or keep for sale at retail, on the premises described in the license but for consumption elsewhere, fermented malt beverages in their original packages, containers and bottles. A Class "A" license may be issued to any person qualified under divisions 3 and 4 of this article and articles IV and VI of this chapter, and sections 60-602 through 60-604, except a person acting as an agent for or in the employ or another. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.02(3)(a))  
Sec. 60-329. - No issuance to agents or employees. 
Class "A" licenses may not be issued to any person acting as agent for or in the employ of another. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(1)(e))  
Secs. 60-330—60-346. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CLASS "B" LICENSES 
 
Sec. 60-347. - On-premises or off-premises consumption. 
The holder of a Class "B" malt beverage license may sell or keep for sale at retail, on the premises described in the license, fermented malt beverages for consumption either on the premises where sold or off the premises. The holder of a Class "B" license may also sell beverages containing less than 0.5 percent alcohol by volume, without obtaining a license under Wis. Stats. § 66.0433(1). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.02(3)(b))  
Sec. 60-348. - Issued to hotels. 
(a)  Notwithstanding sections 60-70(3), 60-350 and division 2 of article IV of this chapter, a Class "B" license authorizes a person operating a hotel to furnish a registered guest who has attained the legal drinking age with a selection of fermented malt beverages in the guest's room, which is not part of the Class "B" premises. 
(b)  Fermented malt beverages furnished under this section shall be furnished in original packages or containers and stored in a cabinet, refrigerator or other secure storage place. The cabinet, refrigerator or other secure storage place must be capable of being locked. 
(c)  The cabinet, refrigerator or other secure storage place shall be locked, or the fermented malt beverages shall be removed from the room when the room is not occupied and when fermented malt beverages are not being furnished under this section. A key for the lock shall be supplied to a guest who has attained the legal drinking age upon request at registration. 
(d)  The hotel shall prominently display a price list of the fermented malt beverages in the hotel room. 
(e)  Fermented malt beverages may be furnished at the time the guest occupies the room, but for purposes of this chapter, the sale of fermented malt beverages furnished under this section is considered to occur at the time and place that the guest pays for the fermented malt beverages. 
(f)  Notwithstanding sections 60-662, 60-664 and 60-667, the guest may pay for the fermented malt beverages at any time if he/she pays in conjunction with checking out of the hotel. An individual who stocks or accepts payment for alcohol beverages under this section shall be the licensee, the agent named in the license if the licensee is a corporation or limited liability company or the holder of a manager's or operator's license or be supervised by one of those individuals. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(1)(f)(3))  
Sec. 60-349. - Temporary special event licenses for malt beverages on-site consumption. 
Temporary Class "B" licenses may be issued to bona fide clubs, to state, county or local fair associations or agricultural societies, to churches, lodges or societies that have been in existence for at least six months before the date of application and to posts of veterans' organizations authorizing the sale of fermented malt beverages at a particular picnic or similar gathering, at a meeting of the post, or during a fair conducted by the fair association or agricultural society. The committee and the common council may, upon issuance of any temporary Class "B" license, authorize the licensee to permit underage persons to be on the premises for which the license is issued. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.02(3)(c)(1))  
Sec. 60-350. - Intoxicating liquor license requirement. 
Every holder of a "Class B" intoxicating liquor license shall also hold a Class "B" malt beverage license issued at the same time or earlier. Anything which is cause for revocation of the malt beverage license shall also be grounds for revocation of the intoxicating liquor license. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(5)(i))  
Sec. 60-351. - No issuance to agents or employees; exception for certain hotels and restaurants. 
Class "B" licenses may not be issued to any person acting as agent for or in the employ of another except that this restriction does not apply to a hotel or restaurant which is not part of or located on the premises of any mercantile establishment, or to a bona fide club, society or lodge that has been in existence for at least six months before the date of application. A Class "B" license for a hotel, restaurant, club, society or lodge may be issued in the name of an officer who shall be personally responsible for compliance with this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(1)(f)(1))  
Sec. 60-352. - No issuance to brewers; exception. 
Class "B" licenses may not be issued to brewers except as provided in Wis. Stats. § 125.31. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(1)(f)(2))  
Sec. 60-353. - Issuance for retail sales on railroad car permitted. 
A Class "B" license may be issued authorizing retail sales of fermented malt beverages on a railroad car while the railroad car is standing in a specified location in the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(1)(f)(4))  
Secs. 60-354—60-379. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - "CLASS B" WINERY LICENSES 
 
Sec. 60-380. - Issued to wineries. 
A "Class B" license issued to a winery authorizes the sale of wine to be consumed by the glass or in opened containers only on the premises where sold and also authorizes the sale of wine in the original package or container to be consumed off the premises where sold, but does not authorize the sale of fermented malt beverages or any intoxicating liquor other than wine 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(1)(g)(1))  
Sec. 60-381. - Issued to hotels. 
(a)  Notwithstanding sections 60-70(3), 60-250(2) and 60-255, a "Class B" license authorizes a person operating a hotel to furnish a registered guest who has attained the legal drinking age with a selection of fermented malt beverages in the guest's room which is not part of the "Class B" premises. 
(b)  Fermented malt beverages furnished under this section shall be furnished in original packages or containers and stored in a cabinet, refrigerator or other secure storage place. The cabinet, refrigerator or other secure storage place must be capable of being locked. 
(c)  The cabinet, refrigerator or other secure storage place shall be locked, or the fermented malt beverages shall be removed from the room when the room is not occupied and when fermented malt beverages are not being furnished under this section. A key for the lock shall be supplied to a guest who has attained the legal drinking age upon request at registration. 
(d)  The hotel shall prominently display a price list of the fermented malt beverages in the hotel room. 
(e)  Fermented malt beverages may be furnished at the time the guest occupies the room, but for purposes of this chapter, the sale of fermented malt beverages furnished under this section is considered to occur at the time and place that the guest pays for the fermented malt beverages. 
(f)  Notwithstanding sections 60-662, 60-664 and 60-667, the guest may pay for the fermented malt beverages at any time if he/she pays in conjunction with checking out of the hotel. An individual who stocks or accepts payment for alcohol beverages under this section shall be the licensee, the agent named in the license if the licensee is a corporation or limited liability company or the holder of a manager's or operator's license or be supervised by one of those individuals. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(1)(g)(2))  
Sec. 60-382. - Temporary "Class B" special event licenses for wine on-site consumption. 
Temporary "Class B" licenses may be issued to bona fide clubs, to state, county or local fair associations or agricultural societies, to churches, lodges or societies that have been in existence for at least six months before the date of application and to posts of veterans' organizations authorizing the sale of wine in an original package, container or bottle or by the glass if the wine is dispensed directly from an original package, container or bottle at a particular picnic or similar gathering, at a meeting of the post, or during a fair conducted by the fair association or agricultural society. Not more than two licenses may be issued under this section to any club, to state, county or local fair association, agricultural association, church, lodge, society or veterans' post in any 12-month period. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.02(3)(c)(2))  
Sec. 60-383. - Number. 
No more "Class B" liquor licenses shall be issued by the city than the number permitted by Wis. Stats. 125.51(4), as amended from time to time. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(5)(h))  
Sec. 60-384. - Malt beverage license requirement. 
Every holder of a "Class B" intoxicating liquor license shall also hold a Class "B" malt beverage license issued at the same time or earlier. Anything which is cause for revocation of the malt beverage license shall also be grounds for revocation of the intoxicating liquor license. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(5)(i))  
Sec. 60-385. - No issuance to agents or employees; exceptions. 
Except as provided under Wis. Stat. § 125.69 (relating to interest of manufacturers, rectifiers, wholesalers and retailers), a "Class B" license may not be issued to any person acting as an agent for or in the employ or another. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(1)(g)(3))  
Sec. 60-386. - Issuance for retail sales on railroad car permitted. 
A "Class B" license may be issued authorizing sales of intoxicating liquors on a railroad car while the railroad car is standing in a specified location in the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(1)(g)(4))  
Sec. 60-387. - Club licensee. 
A Class "B" malt beverage license may be issued to a person acting as agent for or in the employ of a club, society or lodge that shall have been in existence for not less than three years prior to the date of the application. The agent for a club, society or lodge shall be an officer or manager who shall be personally responsible for compliance with all the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(5)(g))  
Sec. 60-388. - Issuance with "Class A" license for same premises prohibited; exception. 
Retail "Class A" and "Class B" liquor licenses shall not both be issued for the same premises or connecting premises except in the case of hotels maintaining 25 or more sleeping rooms for the accommodation of transient guests. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(7))  
Sec. 60-389. - Eligibility for economic development grant. 
(a)  The city hereby finds that it is in the interests of the public welfare to increase the property tax base, provide employment opportunities, attract tourists and generally enhance the economic and cultural climate of the community by providing additional economic incentives for new and continued businesses with liquor licenses. 
(b)  No earlier than four weeks after the issuing of any new reserve "Class B" license and payment of the initial issuance fee, the applicant may file an application for an economic development grant in the amount of the initial issuance fee with the clerk. The clerk shall determine whether the licensee is operating in compliance with the approved license. The clerk may require the assistance of any other city department in making said determination. 
(c)  If the clerk determines that the licensee is so operating, the clerk shall authorize the approval of the economic development grant; provided, however, the grant shall not be paid until the licensed premises, which is the subject of the application, has paid all outstanding fees, including, but not limited to, fines, assessments or taxes, owed to the city. 
(d)  If the clerk determines that the licensee is not in compliance with the approved license, no economic development grant may be authorized and the clerk shall make such finding in writing and cause to be delivered a copy of the findings to the licensee. 
(e)  If the licensee disagrees with the clerk's determination, the licensee may file a written notice of appeal upon the clerk within ten calendar days of the delivery of the written notice of the clerk's findings. Within 30 calendar days after receiving the notice of appeal, or as soon thereafter as reasonably possible, the clerk shall relay said notice to the public safety and human services committee which shall hold an informal public hearing. 
(f)  The public safety and human services committee may affirm or reverse the clerk's determination. If the clerk's determination is upheld, appeal thereof may be taken to circuit court pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 753.04. If the clerk's determination is reversed, or the clerk later determines that the applicant has complied with the license, and the licensed premises has paid all outstanding fees, the clerk shall authorize the payment of the economic development grant. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.06(6); Ord. No. 2010-O-04, § 1(11.06(6)(b)), 2-23-2010)  
Secs. 60-390—60-406. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - "CLASS C" WINE LICENSES 
 
Sec. 60-407. - On-premises consumption. 
(a)  The holder of a "Class C" wine license may sell wine by the glass or in an opened original container for consumption on the premises where sold. 
(b)  "Class C" wine licenses may be granted to an applicant only if the applicant meets the qualifications set out in article IV and division 4 of article V of this chapter for other retail licenses and either: 
(1)  The license is for a restaurant in which the sale of alcohol beverages accounts for less than 50 percent of gross receipts and which does not have a barroom; or 
(2)  For a restaurant in which the sale of alcohol beverages accounts for less than 50 percent of gross receipts and which has a barroom in which wine is the only intoxicating liquor sold. 
(c)  A "Class C" license may not be issued to a foreign corporation, a foreign limited liability company or a person acting as agent for or in the employ of another. 
(d)  The licensee under this section shall not be permitted to advertise his/her business as a tavern, bar, pub or any other work or name synonymous with an independent establishment for the purpose of consuming alcohol. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.02(3)(g))  
Secs. 60-408—60-427. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - WHOLESALE LICENSES 
 
Sec. 60-428. - Scope. 
The holder of a malt beverage wholesaler's license may conduct sales of fermented malt beverages from the premises described in the license, only in original packages or containers, to retailers or wholesalers, not to be consumed in or about the premises where sold. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.02(3)(h))  
Secs. 60-429—60-454. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - INTOXICATING LIQUOR LICENSES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 60-455—60-476. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - "CLASS A" LICENSES 
 
Sec. 60-477. - Package sales for off-premises consumption. 
A retail license "Class A" shall permit its holder to sell, deal or keep for sale intoxicating liquors only in original packages or containers, and to be consumed off the premises so licensed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.02(3)(d))  
Sec. 60-478. - No issuance to agents or employees. 
"Class A" licenses may not be issued to any person acting as agent for or in the employ of another. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(1)(e))  
Secs. 60-479—60-509. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - "CLASS B" LICENSES 
 
Sec. 60-510. - Issuance for same premises prohibited; exception. 
A retail "Class A" and "Class B" liquor license shall not both be issued for the same premises or connecting premises except in the case of hotels maintaining 25 or more sleeping rooms for the accommodation of transient guests. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(7))  
Sec. 60-511. - On-premises or off-premises consumption. 
(a)  A retail "Class B" shall permit its holder to sell, deal or keep for sale, intoxicating liquors to be consumed by the glass for on-premises consumption, and for off-premises consumption in quantities not to exceed four liters at any one time, except that wine may be sold in the original container or otherwise in any quantity to be consumed off the premises. 
(b)  This section does not apply to a winery that has been issued a "Class B" license. Division 4 of article V of this chapter shall apply to all wineries that have been issued a "Class B" license. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.02(3)(e))  
Sec. 60-512. - Club licensee. 
A "Class B" intoxicating liquor license may be issued to a person acting as agent for or in the employ of a club, society or lodge that shall have been in existence for not less than three years prior to the date of the application. The agent for a club, society or lodge shall be an officer or manager who shall be personally responsible for compliance with all the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(5)(g))  
Secs. 60-513—60-532. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - RESERVE "CLASS B" LICENSES 
 
Sec. 60-533. - On-premises or off-premises consumption. 
(a)  Reserve "Class B" Licenses are those licenses available under the quota system existing before December 1, 1997, that were not granted or issued by the municipality as of December 1, 1997. 
(b)  A retail reserve "Class B" shall permit its holder to sell, deal or keep for sale intoxicating liquors to be consumed by the glass for on-premises consumption, and for off-premises consumption in quantities not to exceed four liters at any one time, except that wine may be sold in the original container or otherwise in any quantity to be consumed off the premises. 
(c)  This section does not apply to a winery that has been issued a "Class B" license. Division 4 of article V of this chapter shall apply to all wineries that have been issued a "Class B" license. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.02(3)(f))  
Sec. 60-534. - Number. 
No more reserve "Class B" liquor licenses shall be issued by the city than the number permitted by Wis. Stats. 125.51(4). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(5)(h))  
Secs. 60-535—60-561. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PROVISIONAL RETAIL LICENSES 
 
Sec. 60-562. - Issuance; quota limitation. 
A provisional retail license may be issued to a person who has applied for a Class "A," Class "B," "Class A," "Class B" or "Class C" license, provided that the provisional retail license only authorizes the activities that the type of retail license applied for authorizes. A provisional retail license may not be issued if the quota prohibits issuing an annual license for the same. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.02(3)(i))  
Sec. 60-563. - Scope. 
A provisional retail license authorizes applicants for retail licenses to open for business while completing the responsible beverage server training course requirement, provided the applicant meets all the other qualifications set out in article IV and divisions 3 and 4 of article V of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.02(3)(i))  
Sec. 60-564. - Expiration. 
A provisional retail license expires 60 days after its issuance or when the retail license applied for is issued or denied, whichever is sooner. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.02(3)(i))  
Sec. 60-565. - Limitation on number of licenses to same applicant. 
No person may hold more than one provisional retail license for each type of license applied for by the holder per year. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.02(3)(i))  
Sec. 60-566. - False application statement as grounds for revocation. 
The city clerk may revoke, in accordance with division 4 of article II of this chapter, the license if he/she discovers that the holder has made a false statement on the application. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.02(3)(i))  
Secs. 60-567—60-595. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - OPERATOR LICENSES 
 
Sec. 60-596. - When required. 
(a)  There shall be upon the premises operated under such licenses as described in article VII of this chapter, at all times the licensee, or some other person who shall have an operator license, and who shall be responsible for the acts of all persons serving or selling any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages to customers. 
(b)  No person other than the licensee shall serve or sell fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquor unless he/she shall possess an operator license, or unless he/she shall be under the immediate supervision of the licensee or a person holding an operator license who shall be upon the premises at the time of such service and within sight of the person. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.03(1))  
Sec. 60-597. - When not required. 
An operator license is not required when a person is: 
(1)  An adult member of the licensee's immediate family and residing in the licensee's household. 
(2)  An approved agent of the licensed corporation. Permits are required of the approved agent's immediate family and household. 
(3)  Working under the immediate supervision of the licensee, an adult member of the licensee's immediate family and household, an approved agent for the licensed corporation, or another licensed operator. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.03(1)(a)) 
State Law reference— Issuance of operator license, Wis. Stats. § 125.17.  
Sec. 60-598. - Scope. 
The holder of an operator license may sell or serve alcohol beverages for consumption upon the licensed premises or in the original container or package for consumption off-premises for which the required alcohol license described in article VII of this chapter has been issued. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.03(1))  
Sec. 60-599. - Temporary operator's license. 
(a)  This license may be issued only to operators employed by, or donating their services to, nonprofit corporations which have been granted a temporary Class "B" or temporary "Class B" license. No person may hold more than one license of this kind per year. This license is valid for any period from one day to 14 days, and the period for which it is valid shall be stated on the license. 
(b)  The chairperson of the public safety and human services committee does not have authority to grant temporary operators licenses. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, §§ 11.03(2), 11.04(4)(a)(3))  
Sec. 60-600. - Provisional operator's license. 
(a)  A provisional operators license may be issued for a period not to exceed 60 days to any person who has filed a completed application and paid in advance the fee for a regular operator license. A provisional license may not be issued to any person who has been denied a regular operator license by the council within the same licensing year. 
(b)  The city clerk may revoke the provisional license if he/she discovers that the holder has made a false statement on the application. The provisional operator license shall expire 60 days after issuance or when a regular operator license is issued or denied to the provisional licensee, whichever occurs sooner. 
(c)  No person may hold more than one provisional retail license for each type of license applied for by the holder per year. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.03(3))  
Sec. 60-601. - Qualifications. 
An applicant for any operator's license, or temporary operator's license, must: 
(1)  Meet the requirements of article IV and divisions 3 and 4 of article V of this chapter and Wis. Stats. ch. 125; and 
(2)  Complete a written application. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.03(6))  
Sec. 60-602. - Recent DWI will disqualify. 
No person who has been convicted of operating a motor vehicle, snowmobile or boat under the influence of alcohol or drugs within the two years immediately prior to the application shall be eligible for a new or renewal operator's license unless he/she has successfully completed an alcohol assessment program. Applicant must provide proof of completion of class. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(2))  
Sec. 60-603. - Training course. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, no operator's license may be issued unless the applicant has successfully completed a responsible beverage server training course at any location that is offered by a vocational, technical and adult education district and that conforms to curriculum guidelines specified by the state board of vocational, technical and adult education or unless the applicant fulfills one of the following requirements: 
(1)  The person is renewing an operator's license. 
(2)  Within the past two years, the applicant held, (or if the applicant was an agent appointed and approved under section 60-249 of a corporation or limited liability company that held) a Class "A," Class "B," "Class A" or "Class B" "Class C" license or permit, or a manager's or operator's license. 
(3)  Within the past two years, the person has completed such a training course. 
(4)  The person is applying for: a temporary operators license; a managers license; a temporary Class "B" license and is not required to hold a sellers permit under state statutes subchapter III of chapter 77 (Wis. Stats. § 77.51 et seq.), a temporary "Class B" license and is not required to hold a seller's permit under subchapter III of chapter 77 (Wis. Stats. § 77.51 et seq.). 
(b)  A provisional operator's license may be issued to a person who is enrolled in a training course under subsection (a) of this section and the city clerk shall revoke that license if the applicant fails successfully to complete the course in which he/she enrolls. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(3))  
Sec. 60-604. - Appearance before committee. 
Any person who fails to appear before the committee, upon receiving written notice from the city clerk, shall not be recommended for a new or renewal operator's license. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.08(4))  
Sec. 60-605. - Training. 
No applicant for an operator license shall be required to undergo training in addition to that under section 60-603 except for alcohol assessment course referred to in section 60-602. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.03(4))  
Sec. 60-606. - Posting requirements. 
All operator licenses must be posted at the place of employment. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.03(5))  
Sec. 60-607. - Approval of operator license by the clerk. 
All applications for operator licenses, both new and renewal shall be reviewed by the police department under guidelines approved by the committee. The police department shall recommend approval, denial or make no recommendation regarding issuance of the operator license. Upon a recommendation for approval by the police department, compliance with all other aspects of this code, and upon payment of all fees owed to the city by the operator, the clerk may without review by the committee or common council approve the operator license. In all other instances the application shall be referred to the committee with ultimate action by the common council. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-09, § 7, 3-24-2015)  
Sec. 60-608. - Term of operator license. 
The term of all operator licenses shall be for two (2) years and shall expire June 30 of each odd-numbered year. The fee for a license obtained mid-term shall not be prorated. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-09, § 8, 3-24-2015)  
Secs. 60-609—60-630. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - OPERATION STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 60-631. - Gambling and disorderly conduct prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to permit gambling upon any premises licensed under this chapter. Each licenses premises shall at all times be conducted in an orderly manner, and no disorderly, riotous or indecent conduct shall be allowed at any time on any licensed premises. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.10(4))  
Sec. 60-632. - Discrimination prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to refuse service to any person over the legal drinking age on the basis of age, race, color, creed, national origin or sex. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.10(5))  
Sec. 60-633. - Sign to be posted. 
A sign giving notice of legal service hours shall be conspicuously displayed over the bar on all premises for which a Class "B" or "Class B" or "Class C" license has been issued. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.10(8)(g))  
Sec. 60-634. - License to be displayed. 
Any license issued for the sale of alcohol beverages on any premises shall be conspicuously displayed under glass upon the licensed premises. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.10(9))  
Sec. 60-635. - Supervision by licensee or operator. 
(a)  Except as provided in Wis. Stats. § 125.07(3)(a)10, the licensee, the agent named in the license if the licensee is a corporation, or some person having an operator's license, shall be upon premises operated under a "Class A," Class "A," "Class B," Class "B" or "Class C" malt beverage or intoxicating liquor license and at each serving bar within said premises at all times while the premises are open for business. 
(b)  The licensee, agent or operator shall be responsible for the acts of all persons selling or serving alcohol beverages to customers. No person other than the licensee shall sell or serve alcohol beverages in any place operated under a "Class A," Class "A," "Class B," Class "B" or "Class C" license unless he/she is licensed as an operator or is under the immediate supervision of the licensee or of a person holding an operator's license who is on the premises at the time of such service. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to Class "A" premises between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.10(11))  
Sec. 60-636. - Off-street parking. 
After September 15, 1990, no license shall be issued for any premises in any residential or commercial district, unless the licensee has available off-street parking stalls as required under chapter 22, the zoning code. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.10(14))  
Sec. 60-637. - Leaving licensed premises with open container prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to whom a license has been granted to permit any person to leave the licensed premises with an open container containing any alcohol beverages. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.10(15))  
Sec. 60-638. - Employees not to be under influence. 
It shall be unlawful for the licensee or any employee of the licensed establishment to be under the influence of an intoxicant or controlled substance or a combination of intoxicants and controlled substances while performing services on the licensed premises. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.10(16))  
Sec. 60-639. - Unlawful to sell or give away alcohol beverages to intoxicated persons. 
No keeper of a place for the sale of alcohol beverages may sell, vend or in any way deal or traffic in or for the purpose of evading any laws of this state relating to the sale of alcohol beverages, give away alcohol beverages in any quantity to any person intoxicated or bordering on a state of intoxication. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.10(3))  
Sec. 60-640. - Alcohol beverages to be sold only on licensed premises. 
No alcohol beverages shall be sold or dispensed in any portion of the premises which are not described in the license, except that such beverages may be served in bottles or other original containers to guests occupying rooms in hotels and to persons in rooms on the licensed premises which are open to the public for the service of meals. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.10(10))  
Sec. 60-641. - Label required. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or keep for sale or to permit to be sold or kept for sale any fermented malt beverage unless there shall be placed upon each barrel, keg, cask, bottle or other container in which said beverage is placed a label, in plain and legible type, setting forth: 
(1)  The name and address of the brewer or bottler, which manufactured or bottled said beverage; 
(2)  The number registered by said brewer or bottler in the office of the state treasurer; and 
(3)  A statement of the contents in fluid ounces. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.10(1))  
Sec. 60-642. - Liquor label required. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell, to keep for sale, or to permit to be sold or kept for sale any intoxicating liquor unless a clear and legible label setting forth the name of the manufacturer and the contents in fluid ounces are affixed to the container. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.10(2))  
Sec. 60-643. - Displaying brand of malt beverage drawn; penalty. 
Every holder of a Class "B" malt beverage license selling or offering for sale draft fermented malt beverages to be consumed on or off the premises shall display a sign on, over, or near each tap or faucet disclosing the brand of beer drawn from each tap or faucet and the name of the manufacturer or beer on tap. Such sign shall be visible to patrons for a distance of at least ten feet so that every patron may be informed of the brand of fermented malt beverages on tap. No licensee shall substitute any other brand of fermented malt beverages for the brand designated by such sign. Any licensee who violates this section shall upon conviction be punished by a fine of not more than $15.00 for each offense. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.10(12))  
Sec. 60-644. - Unlawful to use amplified devices for sale of alcohol beverages. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate or cause to be used or operated in any public street or place or from any aircraft or in front of or outside of any building, place or premises, or in or through any window, doorway or opening of such building, place or premises, abutting on or adjacent to any public street or place, any device, apparatus or instrument for the amplification of the human voice or any sound or noise or other sound making or sound reproducing device for the purposes of advertising the sale of alcohol beverages. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.10(13))  
Secs. 60-645—60-661. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - OPERATING HOURS 
 
Sec. 60-662. - No after hours consumption. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or drink from any open container which contains alcohol beverages within a Class "B," "Class B" or "Class C" licensed premises, during the closing hours specified in this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.10(8)(f))  
Sec. 60-663. - Carryouts prohibited; exception. 
(a)  Between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. no person may sell alcohol beverages on Class "B" or "Class B" licensed premises in an original unopened package, container or bottle or for consumption away from the premises. Carryouts are prohibited for "Class C" licensed premises. This section does not apply to a "Class B" license issued to a winery under section 60-380. 
(b)  Hotels and restaurants whose principal business is the furnishing of food, drinks or lodging to patrons, bowling alleys, indoor horseshoe-pitching facilities, curling clubs and golf courses may remain open for the conduct of their regular business but may not sell alcohol beverages during the hours specified in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.10(8)(b), (c))  
Sec. 60-664. - Regulation of closed retail space. 
Only the licensee, employees, salespersons or service personnel shall be present on Class "A," "Class A" premises during hours when the premises are not open for business. Such persons may be present only if they are performing job related activities. All other employees and patrons shall vacate the premises at 9:00 p.m. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.10(8)(e))  
Sec. 60-665. - Class "A" premises. 
Class "A" premises may remain open for the conduct of their regular business but may not sell fermented malt beverages between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.10(6))  
Sec. 60-666. - "Class A" premises. 
No premises for which a "Class A" license has been issued may remain open for the sale of intoxicating liquor between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.10(7))  
Sec. 60-667. - Class "B," "Class B" and "Class C" premises. 
No premises for which a Class "B" "Class B" or "Class C" license has been issued may remain open between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., except as otherwise provided in this section and section 60-663(b). On Saturday and Sunday, no premises may remain open between 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. On January 1 premises operating under a Class "B" "Class B" or "Class C" license are not required to close. This section does not apply to a "Class B" license issued to a winery under section 60-380. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.10(8)(a))  
Sec. 60-668. - Winery. 
No premises for which a "Class B" license has been issued under section 60-380, may remain open for the sale of intoxicating liquors between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.10(8)(d))  
Secs. 60-669—60-694. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ADDITIONAL CLASS B PREMISES REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 60-695. - Compliance with division regulations required. 
A Class "B" malt beverage or "Class B" intoxicating liquor license may only be issued if the premises to be licensed comply with the standards set forth in this division. Failure to comply with these standards shall be cause for revocation or suspension of a license. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.09)  
Sec. 60-696. - Not a dwelling house. 
The premises shall not be a dwelling house or in a dwelling house. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.09(1))  
Sec. 60-697. - Water and sewerage. 
The premises shall be connected to the public sewer and water facilities where they are available and to other adequate facilities where public sewer and water facilities are not available. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.09(2))  
Sec. 60-698. - Toilet facilities. 
The premises shall have a minimum of one toilet for each sex, situated in separate rooms, on the ground floor. The entrance to each such toilet shall designate which sex is to use it. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.09(3))  
Sec. 60-699. - Pre-licensing inspection. 
Prior to the issuance of the license, the premises shall be inspected by the building inspector, the chief of police, and the fire chief; such officers shall file a written report to the public safety and human services committee stating whether or not the premises comply with the standards set forth in this section. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.09(4))  
Sec. 60-700. - Separate business. 
No other business shall be conducted on the licensed premises; provided, however, that this restriction shall not apply to a hotel, to a restaurant not a part of or located in any mercantile establishment, to a combination grocery store and tavern, to a bowling alley or other premises used commercially for recreational purposes or to a bona fide club, society or lodge. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.09(5))  
Sec. 60-701. - Illumination. 
The premises shall satisfy the following minimum illumination requirements measured on a plane 30 inches above the floor at any point in the areas indicated: 
(1)  Hallways and passageways, five footcandles; 
(2)  Dance halls and taverns, three footcandles; 
(3)  Stairways and washrooms, ten footcandles. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.09(6))  
Sec. 60-702. - Physically disabled persons. 
The premises shall conform to the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 101.13 and state rules promulgated thereunder regarding accessibility and usability by all citizens, including those with functional limitations. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.09(7))  
Sec. 60-703. - Compliance with other codes required. 
The premises shall comply with and conform to all local, state and federal ordinances, statutes, and regulations. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.09(8))  
Secs. 60-704—60-734. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 60-735. - Inspection of licensed premises. 
It shall be a condition of any license issued hereunder that the holder shall permit the licensed premises to be entered and inspected at any reasonable hour by any police, building inspector, or fire officer of the city and the submission of an application for a license hereunder shall be deemed to be consent to such entrance and inspection. Any refusal to permit such entrance and inspection shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of the license. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.09(9))  
Sec. 60-736. - Violations by agents and employees. 
A violation of this article by an authorized agent or employee of a licensee shall constitute a violation by the licensee. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.10(19))  
Sec. 60-737. - General penalty applies where chapter not specific. 
Section 1-21 provides penalties for any person who violates a provision of this chapter for which a penalty is not herein provided. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.15(1))  
Sec. 60-738. - Violations are grounds for license suspension, nonrenewal or revocation. 
Violation of any limitations and requirements imposed upon a licensee or upon licensed premises by this chapter shall constitute grounds for revocation, nonrenewal or suspension of the license. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.15(2))  
Sec. 60-739. - Revocation or nonrenewal of malt beverage license. 
Revocation, nonrenewal or suspension of the licensee's malt beverage license shall constitute cause for the revocation, nonrenewal or suspension of any intoxicating liquor license issued for the same premises. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.15(3))  
Secs. 60-740—60-761. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - POINT SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 60-762. - Purpose. 
This section establishes an alcohol beverage demerit point system to assist in determining which retail license holders should be subject to suspension or revocation procedures. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.15(4)(a))  
Sec. 60-763. - Point schedule. 
The scale of demerit points set forth in this section, is listed according to the type of alcohol beverage violation. The following demerit point system is used to identify habitually troublesome license holders for the purpose of recommending suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of their alcohol beverage licenses: 
Section Number 	Type of Violation 	Point Value (in points) 
60-3 	Traffic to underage person 	50 
60-3 	Underage person on premises 	25 
60-4(a) 	Peddling 	25 
60-4(b) 	Sales on streets 	25 
60-27, 60-28, 60-29, 60-328 	Failure to be licensed 	100 
60-637 	Leaving with open container 	25 
60-70, 60-157, 60-566 	False statement on application 	50 
60-38 	Altering premises without permission 	50 
60-98, 60-99 	Transfer of license without permission 	50 
60-601, 60-274 	Wholesalers restrictions 	50 
60-602 	Failure to maintain residence Class A, Class B 	50 
60-603(b), 60-736 	Corporation and agent responsibility violations 	25 
60-631 	Gambling 	25 
60-632 	Discrimination against patrons 	100 
60-634 	Failure to frame and post license 	25 
60-634 	License to be displayed 	25 
60-635 	No licensed bartender 	25 
60-636 	Inadequate parking provided 	25 
60-628 	On-premises consumption, Class A 	50 
60-639 	Traffic to intoxicated person 	50 
60-640 	Sell or serve off-licensed premises 	25 
60-643 	Brand disclosure on tap 	25 
60-662 	After hours consumption, Class B 	50 
60-663(a) 	No carryout after hours 	25 
60-662 	Sell or dispense after hours 	50 
60-666, 60-668 	Open after hours 	50 
60-664 	Regulation of closed retail space 	25 
60-697, 60-698 and 60-703 	Licensed premises to be sanitary 	25 
60-701 	Inadequate lighting 	25 
60-735 	Search of licensed premises 	100 
60-638 	Intoxicated employee 	50 
Art. X, 60-644 	Unlawful sale device 	25 
Any other nonenumerated violation of this chapter or Wis. Stats. ch. 125 	25 
 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.15(4)(b))  
Sec. 60-764. - Violations, how calculated. 
In determining the accumulated demerit points against a licensee within 12 months, the city shall use the date each violation was committed as the basis for the determination. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.15(4)(c))  
Sec. 60-765. - Effect of violations and point accumulation. 
(a)  The committee shall call before it for purposes of a nonrenewal, revocation or suspension hearing, all licensees who have accumulated 100 points in a 12-month period as a result of court imposed convictions or who have been cited by the city attorney, chief of police, fire chief or building inspector for violations which the committee concludes, if referred to a court, would result in 100 demerit points in 12 consecutive months. 
(b)  If the demerit point accumulation, calculated from the dates of the violations or alleged violations, meets or exceeds 100 points in a 12-month period, the committee shall file a written complaint under division 4 of article II of this chapter signed by the committee chair with the city clerk seeking a suspension for not less than ten days nor more than 90 days or revocation of the license. If the license is revoked, no other license shall be granted to such licensee or for such premises for a period of 12 months from the date of revocation. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.15(4)(d)(1), (2))  
Sec. 60-766. - No license shall be renewed during a period of suspension or revocation. 
Any licensee whose license has been suspended or revoked during the preceding 12 month period, and who has accumulated 25 or more demerit points subsequent to said suspension or revocation, at the time of application for renewal, shall be required to appear before the committee to show cause why his/her license should not be nonrenewed after notice and hearing as provided in division 4 of article II of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.15(4)(d)(4))  
Sec. 60-767. - State law procedure applicable. 
The procedure to be used for suspension, revocation or nonrenewal shall be that found in division 4 of article II of this chapter and in Wis. Stats. § 125.12. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 11.15(4)(d)(5))  
Chapter 62 - MASSAGE PARLORS AND ADULT ENTERTAINMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Licensing and regulation of amusement places, Wis. Stats. § 175.20; restrictions with regard to minors in public exhibitions, Wis. Stats. § 103.78; lewd and lascivious behavior, Wis. Stats. § 944.20; disorderly conduct, Wis. Stats. § 947.01. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 62-1—62-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 62-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited where coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, videos, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment that: 
(1)  As one of its principal or secondary business purposes (for purposes of this definition, the term "principal or secondary business" shall not include business purposes that constitute ten percent or less of the business' income), offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
a.  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations that depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
b.  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use with specified sexual activities; or 
(2)  Has facilities, including, but not limited to, booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls, for the presentation of adult entertainment, as defined in this article, including adult-oriented films, movies or live performances for observation by patrons therein; or an establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, for sale, rent, trade, lease, inspection or viewing, books, films, videocassettes, magazines or other periodicals, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities as defined therein. 
Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, tavern, restaurant, cafe, or any other alcohol licensed and/or nonalcohol licensed commercial establishment, premises or property that regularly, commonly, habitually or consistently features: 
(1)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity of seminudity; 
(2)  Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, photographic reproductions, or other images producing devices that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; 
(4)  Persons who engage in exotic or erotic dancing or performances that are intended for the sexual interests or titillation of an audience or customers; or 
(5)  Features, provides, employs, displays, permits or allows live topless or bottomless, nude or partially nude dancers, strippers, performers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainers. 
Adult entertainment means any exhibition of any motion picture, live performance, display or dance of any type, that has as its dominant theme or is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on any actual or simulated specified sexual activities or the exposure of any specified anatomical areas as herein defined. 
Adult entertainment establishment. See Adult-oriented establishment. 
Adult entertainment license means a license required and issued under this article. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for presenting material having as its dominant theme or distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to actual or simulated specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as herein defined for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material having as its dominant theme or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to actual or simulated specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as herein defined for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult-oriented establishment. 
(1)  Any premises, property, establishment, site, building, location, or part or portion thereof, including, but not limited to, adult arcades, adult bookstores, adult video store, adult entertainment establishments, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture establishments or adult cabarets, and those locations in which any person, directly or indirectly engages in, permits, employs, solicits, offers, produces, gives, displays, presents, conducts and/or provides live or recorded nude or seminude dancing, singing, performances, exhibits, and/or activities. 
(2)  It further includes any premises or business to which public patrons or members are invited or admitted with or without fee or charge, and that are so physically constructed or arranged so as to: 
a.  Provide booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments, or stalls separate from the common area of the premises for the purposes of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures; and/or 
b.  Wherein an entertainer provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a member, and/or live adult entertainment of any kind occurs, whether or not such adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated, offered, provided or maintained for remuneration or a profit, direct or indirect. 
(3)  Adult-oriented establishment further includes, without being limited to, any adult entertainment studio or any premises that is physically arranged and used as such whether or not advertised or represented as an adult entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio, modeling studio or any other term of like import. 
Booth, cubicle, room, compartment or stall. 
(1)  The term "booth," "cubicle," "room," "compartment" or "stall" means enclosures that are specifically offered to the public or members of an adult-oriented establishment for hire or for a fee as part of a business operated on the premises that offers as part of its business the adult entertainment to be viewed within the enclosure. This shall include, without limitation, all enclosures wherein the entertainment is dispensed for a fee, but a fee is not charged for mere access to the enclosure. 
(2)  The term "booth," "cubicle," "room," "compartment" or "stall" does not mean or include such enclosures that are private offices used by the owners, managers or persons employed on the premises for attending to the tasks of their employment, which enclosures are not held out to the public or members of the establishment for hire or for a fee or for the purpose of viewing entertainment for a fee, are not open to any persons other than employees. The term "booth," "cubicle," "room," "compartment" or "stall" shall not apply to private motel and hotel sleeprooms, boardinghouse rooms, private residences and places of abode, or other similar establishments. 
Genitals means the visible and related human sex organs including, but not limited to, the penis, testicles and vulva. 
Nudity or state of nudity means the intentional or knowingly showing or revealing of a human bare buttock, anus, perineum, anal region, anal or natal cleft or cleavage, pubic area, male genitals, testicle, female genitals, or vulva, or female nipple, female areola, or female breast below the point immediately above the top of the areola, whether or not in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal, with less than a fully opaque covering; or the showing or revealing of human male genitals in a discernible erect or turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Operator means any person, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, joint venture, assembly, organization or legal or other entity, of whatever kind or nature, whether for profit, nonstock or nonprofit, and includes the agent, person in charge, manager and/or other principal, that owns, leases, rents, possesses, operates, conducts, maintains, manages, oversees in any capacity or manner, or acts as a principal of any adult-oriented establishment or adult entertainment establishment, or who by law or operation of facts directly or vicariously is, acts, holds himself/herself out to be an operator and/or responsible for the adult entertainment establishment and the activities occurring therein. 
Person includes, but is not limited to, an operator, other legal entity, patron, employee, performer or other natural person. 
Private viewing means viewing by one person in a separate room, booth, cubicle or facility. 
Specified anatomical areas means and includes: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, perineum, anal region, natal or anal cleft, female nipples, female areola, and female breasts below the point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernible erect or turgid state, even if opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes whether actual or simulated: 
(1)  Showing or revealing of his/her human genitals, the pubic region, perineum, anal region, natal or anal cleft, female nipples, female areola, whether or not in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal, with less than a fully opaque covering. 
(2)  Showing of acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, necrophilia, sadomasochistic abuse, fellatio or cunnilingus. 
(3)  Fondling or touching of human genitals, the pubic region, perineum, anal region, natal or anal cleft, female nipples, female areola, whether of himself/herself or another. 
Turgid means swollen, in a state of distension, or erect. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(2))  
Sec. 62-20. - Violations; penalties; other relief. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall forfeit and pay to the city a penalty as set forth in section 1-21. 
(b)  If any person is in default of the payment of such penalty, such person shall be subject to the remedies vested in the court for such nonpayment. 
(c)  In addition to and not in lieu of any of the penalties and remedies set forth in this article, the common council may conduct a hearing to revoke, suspend, not renew and/or not issue a license under this article and/or alcohol licenses, as applicable. 
(d)  In addition to and not in lieu of the penalties and remedies set forth in this article, the city may seek, obtain and enforce one and/or more forms of injunctive and other equitable and/or legal relief against the licensee and/or applicable persons for said violations. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(15))  
Sec. 62-21. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  It is a lawful purpose of the common council of the city to enact regulatory ordinances protecting and promoting the general welfare, peace, security, health and safety of its citizens and good order of the city and its neighborhoods. 
(b)  The city is empowered to enact such ordinances pursuant to Wis. Const. art. XI, § 3 and Wis. Stats. §§ 62.11(5), 62.23, 66.0101, 66.0107, and other home rule, police power and applicable provisions of the state statutes, all as from time to time amended or renumbered, for the public health, welfare, peace, tranquility, good order and public benefit. 
(c)  It is the purpose of this article to regulate public nudity and sexually oriented activities to protect and promote the general welfare, peace, security, health and safety of its citizens, and good order of the city and its neighborhoods; to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city; to reasonably license such activities to facilitate the public welfare; and to limit the negative, adverse and undesirable secondary effects flowing from such establishments. 
(d)  The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials, or adult entertainment; nor is it the intent or effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials or adult sexually oriented entertainment protected by the First Amendment, nor to deny access by the distributors or exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment in their intended market; nor is it the intent or effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials. 
(e)  The common council, based upon the actual experience, studies, findings and reports of other cities, communities and local governments from across the United States including, but not limited to, Erie, Pennsylvania; Seattle and Renton, Washington; Detroit, Michigan; Phoenix and Tucson, Arizona; Los Angeles and Whittier, California; Times Square and New York, New York; Cleveland, Ohio; Austin, Dallas, Houston, El Paso and Amarillo, Texas; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Indianapolis, Indiana; St. Paul and Minneapolis, Minnesota; to name a few, find that: 
(1)  Adult oriented entertainment establishments and public nudity in such establishments by performers, employees and patrons, can and do contribute to the impairment of the character and quality of surrounding residential neighborhoods; 
(2)  Contribute to the decline and the value of surrounding properties; 
(3)  Contribute to physical deterioration and blight of neighborhoods; 
(4)  Have a deleterious effect on both existing businesses around them and surrounding residential areas, including increased transiency, increased levels of criminal activities including prostitution, promotion of prostitution, rape, sexual, assaults, or other assaults, other sex related crimes; robbery; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; sexual molestation; molestation of a child; disorderly conduct; disturbances of the peace; drinking in public; littering; and other violations of the law; 
(5)  Contribute to a decline in the value of the surrounding properties which in turn could and often do have a detrimental effect upon development, growth of nearby development and tax incremental financings districts; 
(6)  Harm the economic welfare of the communities; 
(7)  Negatively and adversely affect the quality of life in the communities; 
(8)  Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to unhealthy activities that are generally uncontrolled by owners and operators without regulations and that there is presently no mechanism without this article to effectively make the owners and operations of such establishments responsible for the activities that occur upon the premises; 
(9)  Crime statistics show that all types of crimes, especially sex-related crimes, occur with more frequency in neighborhoods where sexually oriented businesses are located; 
(10)  Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing files, videos, or live sex shows. See, e.g., California vs. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109, 93 S.Ct. 390, 34 L.Ed.2d 342 (1972). See also Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986) at 377; 
(11)  Offering and providing such booths and/or cubicles encourages such activities, which creates unhealthy conditions. See, e.g., Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986) at 376-77; 
(12)  Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades and other sexually oriented businesses, for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses. See, e.g., Arcara vs. Cloud Books, Inc. , 478 U.S. 697, 106 S.Ct. 3172, 92 L.Ed.2d 568 (1986). See also Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986) at 376-77; 
(13)  Many adult entertainment establishments provide live entertainment in which physical contact between performers and customers, often sexual in nature, occurs and can occur, thus facilitating the transmission of various diseases, including AIDS; 
(14)  In Milwaukee and Kenosha Counties, Wisconsin; the city of Waukesha, Wisconsin; the city of Janesville, Wisconsin; the Village of Somerset, Wisconsin; Chattanooga, Tennessee; Newport New, Virginia; and Marion County, Indiana; to name a few locales, it has been found that the viewing booths in adult-oriented establishments have been and are being used by patrons of said establishments for engaging in sexual acts, particularly between males, including, but not limited to, intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation and masturbation, resulting in unsafe and unsanitary conditions in said booths; 
(15)  Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) is a sexually transmitted disease which destroys the body's immune system, is fatal, and has no known cure; 
(16)  The viral agents responsible for AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases have all been isolated at one time or another from semen; 
(17)  At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses including, but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, genital chlamydia trachomatis, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non-A, Non-B amebiasis, salmonella infections, and shigella infections. See, e.g., Study of Fort Myers, Florida; 
(18)  As of December 2002, the total number of reported cases of AIDS in the United States caused by the immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was 886,575. See, e.g., statistics of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention at www.cdc.gov.; 
(19)  In 2004, statistics from the state had indicated that as of December 31, 2003, 8,328 cases of AIDS were reported in the state including 3,301 that resulted in death; 
(20)  As of January 1, 1995, the state department of health and family services AIDS/HIV program reported that between 1998 and 2003, 372 new cases of HIV infection were diagnosed on average each year, and the county's annual average rate of infection is surpassed in the state only by Milwaukee County; 
(21)  The total number of cases of genital chlamydia trachomatis infections in the United States reported in 2002 was 834,555, according to the Centers for Disease Control. However, under-reporting is substantial and it is estimated that 2,800,000 people become infected each year. See, e.g., statistics of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention at www.cdc.gov.; see also Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986) at 376-77); 
(22)  In 2002, there were over 32,000 reported cases of syphilis in the United States, of which 6,862 cases were of primary and secondary syphilis, an increase of 12.4 percent from 2001. The rate of infection for males is 3.5 times that in women. See, e.g., statistics of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention at www.cdc.gov.; 
(23)  The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported annually remains at a high level, with an estimated 700,000 infections occurring each year. See, e.g., statistics of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention at www.cdc.gov.; 
(24)  The Center for Disease Control in July 1999 advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug use, exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her newborn; 
(25)  According to the best scientific evidence available, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts. See, e.g., statistics of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention at www.cdc.gov.; 
(26)  Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities. See, e.g., Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986) at 377; 
(27)  Numerous studies and reports have determined that bodily fluids, including semen and urine, are found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view adult-oriented films. See, e.g., Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986) at 377; 
(28)  Nude dancing in adult establishments encourages prostitution, increases sexual assaults, and attracts other criminal activity. See, e.g., Barnes vs. Glen Theatre, 501 U.S. 560, 111 S.Ct. 2456, 115 L.Ed.2d 504 (1991); 
(29)  Nude dancing in adult establishments increases the likelihood of drug-dealing and drug use. See, e.g., Kev, Inc. vs. Kitsap County, 793 F.2d 1053, 1056 (9th Cir. 1986); 
(30)  Sexually oriented businesses have operation characteristics that should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns; 
(31)  A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and operators of sexually oriented businesses. Further, such licensing procedure will place an incentive for operators to see that the sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent with health, safety, and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the city. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein; 
(32)  Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on the premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult establishments; 
(33)  The disclosure of certain information by those ultimately responsible for the day to day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases and criminal activity; 
(34)  The fact that an applicant for a sexually oriented business license has been convicted of a sex-related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct prohibited in this article and a sex-related crime is substantially related to the licensed activity of operating, owning or controlling a sexually oriented business. 
(f)  The United States Supreme Court and various federal and state courts have held that a local unit of government, such as the city, may rely upon and incorporate by reference such findings and experiences into its own findings and legitimate concerns about the adverse and undesirable secondary effects arising from and pertaining to adult-oriented entertainment establishments, public nudity therein, crime, prostitution, gambling, littering, and other adverse secondary impacts described in this article, and jointly and severally use such findings and determinations of the United States Supreme Court in previous rulings, as well, including, but not limited to, City of Erie vs. Pap's A.M., 539 U.S. 277, 146 L. Ed. 2d 265, 120 S. Ct. 1382 (2000); Barnes vs. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560, 111 S.Ct. 2456, 115 L.Ed.2d 504; City of Renton vs. Playtime Theatres, Inc. , 475 U.S. 41, 106 S.Ct. 925, 89 L.Ed.2d 29 (1986); Arcara vs. Cloud Books, Inc., 478 U.S. 697, 106 S.Ct. 3172, 92 L.Ed.2d 568 (1986); City of Newport, Ky vs. Iacobucci , 479 U.S. 92, 107 S.Ct. 383, 93 L.Ed.2d 334 (1986); Young vs. American Mini Theatres, 427 U.S. 50, 96 S.Ct. 2440, 49 L.Ed.2d 310 (1976); California vs. Larue , 409 U.S. 109, 93 S.Ct. 390, 34 L.Ed.2d 342 (1972); United States vs. O'Brien, 391 U.S. 367, 88 S.Ct. 1673, 20 L.Ed.2d 672 (1968); Ben's Bar, Inc. vs. Village of Somerset , 316 F.3d 702 (7th Cir. 2003); DLS, Inc. vs. City of Chattanooga , 107 F.3d 403 (6th Cir. 1997); Key, Inc. vs. Kitsap County , 793 F.2d 1053 (9th Cir. 1986); Hang On, Inc. vs. City of Arlington , 65 F.3d 1248 (5th Cir. 1995); South Florida Free Beaches, Inc. vs. City of Miami , 734 F.2d 608 (11th Cir. 1984); and N.W. Enterprises vs. City of Houston, 27 F. Supp. 2d 754 (S.D. Tex. 1998), as the basis for content neutral regulation of such establishments and the behavior therein without affecting the substance of verbal or nonverbal speech, with the legitimate intent and goal of reducing or eliminating such negative secondary effects to as great a degree as possible. 
(g)  The common council of the city believes that the experiences, evidence and studies from the other cities and communities cited, set forth herein, and/or considered by the common council in whole, part or summary, are relevant and important in understanding and addressing the secondary effects adult entertainment oriented establishments can and do have upon neighborhoods, persons, economies, the areas surrounding such establishments and the city. 
(h)  The common council of the city relies upon the findings, studies, evidence and experiences of such other cities and communities, and previous applicable United States Supreme Court and other federal and state court holdings, and hereby adopt and incorporate such findings, studies, evidence, experiences and court rulings and holdings herein by reference as if fully set forth verbatim as part of their findings and basis for this article and its regulations. 
(i)  Adult-oriented establishments in proximity to residential areas, places of worship, parks, day care centers and schools may and do often lead to an increase in criminal activities in the surrounding areas and the city desires to protect the youth of the community from the deleterious effects such businesses can have on adjacent areas by restricting their close proximity to certain public and private uses and protect its citizens and residents from increased crime as well as increased ordinance violations such as, but not limited to, disorderly conduct, drinking in public, possession of intoxicants by underage persons, public disturbances of the peace, littering, illegal drug use and sales, prostitution and gambling. 
(j)  Among these secondary effects described in greater detail above are: 
(1)  The potential increase in prostitution and other sex-related offenses, as well as other crimes and offenses; 
(2)  The potential depreciation of property values in neighborhoods where bars and taverns featuring nude dancing exist; 
(3)  Health risks associated with the widespread of sexually transmitted diseases; and 
(4)  The potential for infiltration by organized crime for the purpose of unlawful conduct. 
(k)  The common council of the city recognizes they lack authority to regulate obscenity in light of Wis. Stats. § 66.0107(3) and do not intend by adopting this article to regulate obscenity, since nudity in and of itself is not obscene, and declare their intent to enact an ordinance addressing the secondary effects of live, totally nude, nonobscene, erotic dancing in bars, taverns and other adult-oriented establishments. 
(l)  The common council of the city recognizes that the U.S. Supreme Court has held that nude dancing is expressive conduct within the outer perimeters of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution and therefore entitled to some limited protection under the First Amendment, and the common council further recognizes that freedom of speech is among our most precious and highly protected rights, and wishes to act consistently with full protection of those rights. 
(m)  The common council of the city desires to minimize, prevent and control these adverse effects and thereby: 
(1)  Protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city; 
(2)  Protect the citizens from increased crime; 
(3)  Preserve the equality of life; 
(4)  Preserve the property values and character of surrounding neighborhoods; 
(5)  Deter the spread of urban blight; and 
(6)  Ensure and facilitate health, welfare, peace, tranquility and good order of the city and its residents and neighborhoods. 
(n)  The common council of the city has determined that enactment of this article legitimately promotes the valid goals and intent of minimizing, preventing and controlling the negative and adverse secondary effects associated with such activities, and does so in a content neutral manner while preserving numerous other means of free expression while regulating only certain behavior in a uniform yet limited manner. 
(o)  The United States Supreme Court in the case of City of Renton vs. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41, 106 S. Ct., 925, 89 L. Ed. 2d 29 (1986) and Young vs. American Mini Theaters , 427 U.S. 50, 96 S. Ct. 2440, 49 L. Ed. 2d 310 (1976) have approved efforts by local governments to regulate the location of adult-oriented establishments through land use plans. 
(p)  A reasonable regulation of the location of adult entertainment establishments will provide for the protection of the image of the community and its property values and protect the residents of the community from the adverse secondary effects of an adult-oriented establishment, while providing to those who desire to patronize adult-oriented establishments, such an opportunity in areas within the city which are appropriate for a location of adult-oriented establishments, while reasonably regulating the disorderly effects of public nudity as herein defined. 
(q)  Whereas, pursuant to the city's authority, and in furtherance of the legitimate and reasonable health, welfare, peace, tranquility, safety, good order police power interest intent, goals and content neutral objections of the common council as set forth in this article and related ordinances, that find it is the intent of the common council to adopt by ordinance reasonable regulations, including the licensing and restricting the location of adult-oriented establishments, as defined herein, to promote the city's interest to protect and to preserve the quality of its neighborhoods, commercial and industrial districts, and quality of urban life through effective land-use planning, as well as the other legitimate governmental goals and objectives articulated and enumerated elsewhere in this article, all of such regulations are found the least intrusive. 
(r)  Although the provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, the common council deems it to be in the interests of the city to provide for licensing, regulation and zoning of adult-oriented establishments including, but not limited to, adult bookstores, adult mini-motion picture establishments, adult motion picture theaters and adult cabarets to combat and curb the adverse, undesirable and harmful secondary effects of such establishments. 
(s)  The public safety and human services committee, plan commission and common council each separately conducted a public hearing in conjunction with and prior to the consideration and adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, with the plan commission recommending the adoption of the zoning code provisions of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and the zoning code provisions in Ordinance No. 2004-O-36, as amendments to chapter 22, the city's existing zoning code. 
(t)  The proposed licensing, regulation and zoning ordinances jointly and severally serve and directly promote substantial and legitimate government interest and do not unreasonably limit alternative avenues of communication. Based upon the above findings and recitals, the common council of the city hereby adopts this article and its various reasonable, content-neutral and legitimate governmental interest components, provisions, re-creations, regulations and amendments. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(1)) 
State Law reference— City planning, Wis. Stats. § 62.23; powers of common council, Wis. Stats. § 62.11; municipal home rule, Wis. Stats. § 66.0101; powers of municipalities to prohibit criminal conduct, Wis. Stats. § 66.0107; obscenity, Wis. Stats. § 944.20 et seq.  
Sec. 62-22. - Exemptions. 
Exempt from the applicability of the provisions of this article are the following: theaters, performing arts centers, civic centers and dinner theaters where live dance, ballet, music and dramatic performances of serious artistic merit are offered on a regular basis and in which the predominant business or attraction is not the offering to customers of nudity or of entertainment which is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers, and where the establishment is not distinguished by an emphasis on, or the advertising or promotion of, employees or others engaging in nude erotic dancing or nudity. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(11))  
Sec. 62-23. - Severability. 
It is the intention of the common council that each section, paragraph, sentence, clause, and provision of this article is severable, and if any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, provision or part hereof is found unconstitutional, invalid, or unenforceable for any reason, such decision shall not affect the remainder of this article nor any part thereof other than those specifically affected by such decision; such remaining sections, paragraphs; sentences, clauses and provisions shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(14))  
Secs. 62-24—62-49. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 
 
Sec. 62-50. - Required. 
(a)  No person may own, lease, rent, possess, operate, conduct, maintain, manage, permit, oversee in any capacity or manner, act as a principal or agent of any adult-oriented establishment or adult entertainment establishment, or use any real property or part thereof in the city for adult-oriented entertainment activities or as an adult-oriented entertainment establishment without first applying for, paying the fee for, being issued and holding a current and valid license required by this article. 
(b)  An adult entertainment license may be issued only for one adult entertainment or adult-oriented establishment located at a fixed and certain place. Any person who desires to operate more than one adult entertainment or oriented establishment must have a separate annual license for each location and site. 
(c)  No license or interest in a license may be transferred from person-to-person or from place-to-place. The common council may issue adult entertainment establishment licenses, which licenses shall be granted only upon application, in writing, on forms provided by the city clerk, and upon fulfilling the requirements of this division. Such license is only valid for operation within the limits of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, §§ 12.04(3), (9)(A), 12.04(4)(A))  
Sec. 62-51. - Zoning compliance required; termination of grandfather status. 
(a)  No establishment, premises or property for which a license is issued, or for which a license is required under this division, may be located or operated contrary to any zoning, distancing, land use or other requirements set forth in this chapter or any related city zoning or other ordinance. 
(b)  In a zoning district in which a use licensed under this division is a nonconforming use under the zoning provisions of this city, no location or premises for which a license has been issued under this division shall be used as an adult entertainment establishment or adult-oriented establishment if more than one year elapses from the date the nonrenewal or revocation of the license takes effect. For purposes of this section, a nonrenewal of a license takes effect when the licensed premises is no longer lawfully licensed due to annual expiration of the license without renewal, revocation, or for any other reason. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, §§ 12.04(9)(F), 12.04(13)(P))  
Sec. 62-52. - Application form and contents. 
The application shall include the information required by this division and shall be submitted on a form provided by the city clerk. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(4)(B))  
Sec. 62-53. - Application to be signed and dated; attachment to be included. 
Each fully completed application shall be signed and dated by the applicant or a duly appointed agent for the applicant before a notary public, and filed with the city clerk together with all diagrams and other information required by this division. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(4)(C))  
Sec. 62-54. - Payment of fees prerequisite to license issuance. 
The original and renewal license fees shall be paid by the applicant at the time the license is issued by the city clerk and shall be contingent upon the payment of all outstanding fees owed to the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(4)(D))  
Sec. 62-55. - Information to be furnished by applicant. 
Each applicant for a license shall furnish the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's legal name, current address, home phone number, if any. 
(2)  Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age. 
(3)  The street address of the adult-oriented establishment to be operated by the applicant. 
(4)  If the applicant is other than a natural person, the application shall specify: 
a.  The name of the entity, the date and state of incorporation or registration, the name and address of the registered agent; 
b.  The names of all principals, officers, directors, members, and general partners; 
c.  The names of all managers and persons in charge; and 
d.  The names of all shareholders who will directly and regularly participate in the management of the business. 
(5)  The trade or other name under which the establishment is to be operated. 
(6)  A general description of the services to be provided. 
(7)  The expected start-up date it will be open to the public. 
(8)  Every applicant shall provide with the application: 
a.  A sketch or diagram showing an accurate configuration of the premises sought to be licensed, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a reasonable designated scale with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises that is reasonably accurate. 
b.  A certified copy of the domestic articles of incorporation or registration; or if a foreign entity, a certified copy of authority to do business in this state, together with all amendments thereto. 
c.  A true and correct photocopy of proof of ownership to the property where the establishment is located and/or of a legal right to lease, possess and use such property/location with the owner's signature. 
d.  An accurate diagram showing that the location for which the application is being made satisfies all zoning and distancing requirements of this article and related ordinances. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(4)(E))  
Sec. 62-56. - Complete application required; rejection of incomplete applications. 
All questions on each application must be completed truthfully and in full in order to be processed. No license under this division may be issued unless the application is complete on its face with all questions answered and required information provided. An incomplete application may be rejected and not processed by the city clerk and no license shall be issued for an incomplete application. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(4)(F))  
Sec. 62-57. - Supplements to application. 
Within ten business days, every applicant has an affirmative duty to supplement an application with new information received or occurring subsequent to the date that the application was originally submitted, including all renewals thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(4)(G))  
Sec. 62-58. - Distribution of application for investigation. 
(a)  A photocopy of the filed application shall be distributed promptly by the city clerk, to conduct an investigation of the application, to the following city departments: 
(1)  The police department; 
(2)  The planning/zoning administrator; 
(3)  The public safety and human services committee; 
(4)  The finance department; 
(5)  The utility department; and 
(6)  The court clerk. 
(b)  The clerk shall also provide a photocopy of the application to the applicant upon request. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(4)(H))  
Sec. 62-59. - Duty of police, zoning, public safety and human services personnel to provide information. 
The city police department, planning/zoning administrator, the public safety and human services committee, finance, utility and the court clerk must provide information relevant to the new or renewal application to the city clerk within ten working days. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(4)(J))  
Sec. 62-60. - Report of police department regarding applicant qualifications. 
The police department shall make an investigation of the applicant to determine whether the applicant possesses the qualifications necessary for granting a license under this division. In the case of a corporation the agent and all corporate officers will be investigated as under chapter 60, relating to alcohol beverages. All partners will similarly be investigated if the application is for a partnership. The chief of police, or his/her designee, shall report his/her findings to the public safety and human services committee. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(4)(J))  
Sec. 62-61. - Report of zoning personnel regarding compliance of business premises with zoning regulations. 
The planning/zoning administrator shall make an investigation of the applicant to determine whether the applicant requests a license for an establishment in accordance with the zoning provisions of this article and chapter 22, pertaining to zoning. The planning/zoning administrator shall report his/her findings to the public safety and human services committee. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(4)(K))  
Sec. 62-62. - Verification that no monies are due city by applicant. 
The finance director, utility clerk and court clerk shall determine whether there are any outstanding fees owed to the city. All outstanding fees, including, but not limited to, real estate taxes, personal property taxes, utility bills, special assessments, any invoices due to the city, fines for any violations (including parking tickets), and any outstanding warrants, must be paid in full and satisfied prior to the application being approved. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(4)(L))  
Sec. 62-63. - Report of public safety and human services committee. 
The public safety and human services committee shall make a report and recommendation to the common council as to whether the application should be granted, conditioned or denied. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(4)(M))  
Sec. 62-64. - Authorization of common council required. 
No license may be granted until and unless the common council, by a majority vote of those members present and voting, have authorized granting the license. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(4)(N))  
Sec. 62-65. - Notification to applicant of grant or denial of license. 
To the extent reasonably possible, within 45 days of receiving a fully completed, executed, dated and notarized application with all required attachments and addenda thereto for a new license or an application to renew a license, or as soon as reasonable thereafter, the city clerk shall notify the applicant whether the application is granted, conditioned or denied by the common council, and if denied the reasons therefore. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(4)(O))  
Sec. 62-66. - Effect of failure or refusal of applicant to complete application process. 
Failure or refusal of the applicant to: 
(1)  Provide information required by the application or this division; 
(2)  Execute and date the application; 
(3)  File a fully complete and truthful application with all attachments and documentation required by this division; 
(4)  Supplement information previously provided as required by this division; 
(5)  Appear at a reasonable time or place for examination under oath regarding such application; 
shall each constitute an admission and acknowledgement by the applicant that he/she is ineligible for such license and the same shall be grounds for administrative denial thereof by the city clerk. Such acts may also form the basis for suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of the license by the common council after a hearing in the manner provided for in this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(4)(P))  
Sec. 62-67. - Licensure not right but privilege. 
The issuance of a license under this division is a privilege and not a right. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(4)(Q))  
Sec. 62-68. - Reversion of license upon expiration, revocation or suspension. 
Upon expiration, revocation, suspension or nonrenewal of a license issued under this division, the issued license shall revert back and be immediately returned to the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(4)(R))  
Sec. 62-69. - Inspection of proposed business premises. 
Prior to issuance of a license under this division, the premises shall be inspected by the appropriate city code, police and fire officials, and county and state health officials. No license may be issued unless and until the premises satisfies every applicable city, county and state ordinance and code provision for building, plumbing, fire, electric, HVAC, zoning, parking, health, sanitation, and related laws. Those responsible for such inspections shall inform the city clerk. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(4)(S))  
Sec. 62-70. - License contents. 
A new and renewal license issued under this division shall state on its face the name of the person or entity to whom it is granted, the date of issuance, the date it expires, the address of the establishment, the city clerk's signature. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(4)(T))  
Sec. 62-71. - Renewal applications. 
Renewal applications need not be accompanied by the requirements set forth in this section except for signature and dating before a notary and the payment of the fee, unless there is a change requiring new or supplemental documentation, in which event such must be provided by the renewing applicant at the time the renewal is submittal. Failure to provide such required information and documentation may alone be sufficient grounds for denial of a renewal application. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(4)(U))  
Sec. 62-72. - Standards for issuance of license. 
(a)  To be issued a new license to operate an adult entertainment establishment, an applicant must meet the following standards: If the applicant is a natural person (individual): 
(1)  The applicant must be at least 18 years of age. 
(2)  The applicant shall not have been found to have previously violated any provision of this article within five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(b)  The city clerk shall issue a license to the applicant if all of the requirements of this division are timely and fully satisfied. 
(c)  The city clerk shall not issue a license to the applicant if all of the requirements of this division are not timely and fully satisfied including, but not limited to, any of the following: 
(1)  The applicant has failed to provide the information required by this division; 
(2)  The applicant has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form or required documentation, sketches or diagrams, within the last six months; 
(3)  The applicant if a natural person or principal, officer, director or member is under the age of 18 years; 
(4)  The property is not properly zoned; 
(5)  The premises fails any inspection required by law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(5))  
Sec. 62-73. - Fees. 
A license fee as set forth in the annual fee schedule shall be paid for a new or renewal license at the time that the license is issued by the city clerk. The following shall apply: 
(1)  There shall be no proration of a new license fee or proration or refund upon any suspension, revocation or voluntary surrender of a license. 
(2)  A new license application and fee are required for each separate new location and upon any change of ownership involving ten percent or more beneficial or actual change in ownership interest in the establishment. 
(3)  In addition to the renewal fee, a late penalty as set forth in the annual fee schedule shall be assessed against and paid by any applicant who files an annual renewal application after July 1. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(6))  
Sec. 62-74. - Display of license or permit. 
The license issued under this division shall be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the adult entertainment or oriented establishment. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(7))  
Sec. 62-75. - Renewal procedure. 
(a)  Every license issued pursuant to this division, regardless of when issued during the year, shall terminate annually on August 31, unless sooner revoked or nonrenewed and must be timely renewed before operation is allowed in the following year. 
(b)  Any operator desiring to renew a license shall make application to the city clerk. The application for renewal must be filed not later than July 1. 
(c)  If the police chief or zoning administrator is aware of any information bearing on the zoning of the property or on the operator's qualifications, that information shall be filed in writing with the city clerk. 
(d)  The building and fire inspectors shall inspect the establishment prior to the renewal of a license to determine compliance with the provisions of this article and related codes. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(8))  
Secs. 62-76—62-93. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SUSPENSION, REVOCATION AND REFUSAL TO RENEW 
 
Sec. 62-94. - Grounds. 
The common council may revoke, suspend or refuse to renew a license for any one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Discovery that false or misleading information or data was given on any new or renewal application or material facts were omitted from any such application. 
(2)  The operator violated any provision of this article or any rules or regulations adopted by the common council pursuant to this article; provided, however, that in the case of a first offense by an operator where the conduct was solely that of an employee, the penalty shall not exceed a suspension of 30 days in the event that the common council finds that the operator (as defined in section 62-19) had no prior actual or constructive knowledge of the underlying facts for such violation and could not have had such actual or constructive knowledge by the operation of due diligence. 
(3)  The operator becomes ineligible to obtain a license. 
(4)  Failure to pay any cost or fee required under this article or any other provision of law or ordinance. 
(5)  The transfer of a license or any interest in a license shall automatically and immediately revoke the license. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(12)(A))  
Sec. 62-95. - Complaints against licensee; service of notice. 
(a)  The chief of police or his/her designee may file charges against an operator or licensee for violations of this article. Such charges shall be in writing and shall be signed and dated by the filing complainant who shall legibly provide his/her full name, address, and phone number, and with reasonable particularity describe the violations. 
(b)  A failure by a complainant to provide any of this information renders the complaint insufficient. A determination whether the filed written charges satisfy these requirements shall be made by the city clerk before proceeding further. No action shall be pursued by the city upon an anonymous complaint unless independently verified by the police department, in which event the complaint may be signed, dated and filed by the chief of police. 
(c)  Upon receipt of such written filed charges, the city clerk shall provide copies to the chief of police, city administrator, mayor and city attorney, and shall provide written notice of such charges to the operator. Service upon the operator, agent, any officer, director, partner or member shall be sufficient for service upon the operator if service is made in the manner provided by state law for service in civil action in civil court. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(12)(B), (C))  
Sec. 62-96. - Written charges form basis of complaint; response required. 
The filed written charges shall form the basis of the complaint against the operator who must respond to the allegations set forth therein. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(13)(F))  
Sec. 62-97. - Request for hearing. 
(a)  The operator in writing may request a hearing concerning the charges if the operator files a written request with the city clerk within ten days of the operator's receipt of notice of the violations. The hearing shall be held before the public safety and human services committee (referred to herein as "the committee"), unless the common council directs that the hearing shall be held before the common council. If the operator fails to timely request such a hearing, the charges shall be deemed proven and true in any proceeding before the committee or the common council concerning the license issued under this article, and if the public safety and human services committee or common council find the charges sufficient the license shall be revoked, suspended or not renewed. 
(b)  If the operator timely requests a hearing on the charges as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, a public hearing shall be held within 30 days after receipt of the written request by the city clerk. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(13)(A), (B))  
Sec. 62-98. - Notice of hearing. 
(a)  The city clerk shall provide not less than ten days prior written notice of the hearing date, time and place to the appealing operator, the complainant who filed charges, the chief of police, city administrator, mayor and city attorney. Service upon the operator, agent, any officer, director, partner or member shall be sufficient for service upon the operator if service is made in the manner provided by state law for service in civil action in civil court. 
(b)  The city clerk shall prepare and provide the proper legal notices of the public meeting, the closed session deliberations, and the reconvening into open session to determine the sufficiency of the charges and any applicable penalty. The clerk shall also arrange for and provide that the hearing be recorded in some customary manner. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(13)(C), (D))  
Sec. 62-99. - Effect of refusal or failure to appear at hearing. 
Refusal or failure by an operator to appear at the hearing shall be sufficient grounds to find the charges proven and true for all purposes. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(13)(G))  
Sec. 62-100. - Procedure for hearing before common council or committee. 
(a)  The hearing is a quasi judicial process. The hearing shall be open to the public and shall be recorded. A quorum is necessary to conduct a hearing. 
(b)  A hearing may be continued from time to time upon mutual agreement of the parties or upon a majority vote of the members attending and voting. 
(c)  All parties may appear at the hearing, be represented by legal counsel, present evidence and witnesses in their respective behalf, cross examine witnesses, and make opening and closing arguments. The length of either opening and closing arguments by a party shall not exceed 15 minutes. 
(d)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the governmental body before whom the hearing is held may convene into closed session to deliberate upon the record and then reconvene into open session to make its determination. A majority vote of all members present and voting shall be necessary to carry any motion or to make any determination. For all voting purposes, an abstention or pass is not a vote. Decisions of the governing body can be conditioned or made contingent. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(13)(E), (H))  
Sec. 62-101. - Procedure for hearing before committee. 
(a)  If the hearing is held before the committee, the committee shall submit its decision to the common council. Either the complainant or the operator may file an objection to the committee's decision and shall have the opportunity to present written and oral arguments supporting the objection to the common council. 
(b)  If the common council, after considering the committee's decision and any arguments presented by the complainant or operator, finds the complaint to be true, of if there is no objection to the a decision recommending suspension, nonrenewal or revocation, the license shall be suspended, nonrenewed or revoked. If the common council determines that the allegations are untrue or if true are not grounds for suspension, nonrenewal or revocation, it shall dismiss the complaint. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(13)(K))  
Sec. 62-102. - Transcript of proceedings. 
Either party may request and obtain a copy of the hearing in written form upon payment of the estimated transcribing fee therefor in advance and is obligated to pay the actual cost thereof upon completion. As an alternative to providing such written transcript, the city clerk may provide a true and correct complete copy of the audio tape of the hearing. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(13)(I))  
Sec. 62-103. - Determination; penalties; costs of proceeding. 
The governing body must first determine if the charges is/are proven and true. If so found, then the governing body shall decide what, if any, appropriate penalty or remedy should be imposed concerning the license for the proven violations. Imposition of the city's costs and expenses arising from such proceeding by the governing body against an operator found to be in violation of this article are discretionary. If imposed, such costs and expenses must be paid in full by the operator to the city clerk within ten days of the conclusion of the hearing. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(13)(H))  
Sec. 62-104. - Content and distribution of copies of written decision. 
(a)  The governing body shall reduce its decision to writing within 20 days of the end of the hearing and provide true and correct copies of its decision to the operator, complainant, chief of police, city administrator, mayor and city attorney and shall briefly set forth the reasons for their decision in such written notice. Service upon the operator, agent, any officer, director, partner or member shall be sufficient for service upon the operator if service is made in the manner provided by state law for service in civil action in civil court. 
(b)  If the hearing is held before the committee, the decision shall be a findings of fact, conclusions of law, and recommendation as to what action, if any, the common council should take with respect to the license. If the hearing is held before the common council, the decision shall be a findings of fact, conclusions of law and a determination of the action, if any, to be taken with respect to the license. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(13)(J))  
Sec. 62-105. - Judicial review. 
(a)  Appeal from the common council's determination shall be taken to the county circuit court pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 68.13. Judicial review shall be governed by Wis. Stats. § 68.13 all as from time to time amended or renumbered. 
(b)  If the operator makes a timely appeal, no suspension, revocation, nonrenewal or other conditions affecting the license shall take effect until a final determination is rendered by the circuit court, or as otherwise agreed by the city and operator. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(13)(L), (M))  
Sec. 62-106. - Eligibility for new license after revocation or denial of renewal. 
(a)  Under this article any operator, person or licensee whose license is revoked or not renewed shall not be eligible to receive a license under this article for two years from the date of revocation or nonrenewal. 
(b)  No location or premises for which a license has been issued shall be used or licensed as an adult-oriented establishment or adult entertainment establishment for six months from the date of revocation or nonrenewal of the license. 
(c)  Revocations, suspensions, nonrenewals and/or nonissuances may be subject to such additional reasonable restrictions, conditions and regulations as the common council may impose. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(13)(N), (O), (Q))  
Secs. 62-107—62-125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 62-126. - Nudity prohibited in alcohol licensed establishments. 
No person, with or without consideration, may perform or engage in, or be in a state of undress, or for any operator, licensee, manager, agent, principal or person in charge of a premises of the licensee, to permit any entertainer, employee, patron or other person to perform or engage in, any live act, live demonstration, live performance, live dance, or live exhibition, or to be in a state of undress upon the premises or property of an establishment that is or should be licensed as an alcohol licensed establishment, that: 
(1)  Shows or exposes his/her genitals, pubic area, vulva, perineum, anus, natal or anal cleft with less than a complete and fully opaque covering; 
(2)  Shows or exposes any portion of the female nipple, areola or breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola with less than a complete and fully opaque covering; or 
(3)  Shows the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(9)(B))  
Sec. 62-127. - No minors allowed. 
No operator, employee, manager, agent or other person in charge of an establishment, premises or property that is or that should be licensed under this article may allow or permit any minor (a person under 18 years of age) to enter, be present upon or loiter on or near the facility, or to view adult-oriented entertainment or specified sexual activities. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(9)(C))  
Sec. 62-128. - No touching of or by patrons or performers. 
No person who is an entertainer, employee or patron may knowingly or intentionally, and no licensee, operator, manager, agent, principal or other person in charge of a premises or establishment may knowingly or intentionally permit any entertainer, employee, patron or other person to, touch or come in contact with the genitals, perineum, anus, anal region, pubic area, vulva, natal or anal cleft of any other person, or the breasts, nipples or areola of any female, upon the premises, property or establishment that is or should be licensed under this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(9)(D))  
Sec. 62-129. - Hours of operation. 
No licensee, operator or other person who owns, operates, manages, is the agent for, or is in charge of an establishment that is or should be licensed under this article, may conduct, permit or keep open, or operate any adult-oriented activity: 
(1)  Between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Monday through Friday; and 
(2)  Between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday and Sunday mornings. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(9)(E))  
Sec. 62-130. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  No person, with or without consideration, may perform or engage in, and no operator, licensee, manager, agent, principal or person in charge of a premises of the licensee may permit any entertainer, employee, patron or other person to perform or engage in, any act of masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, necrophilia, sadomasochistic abuse, fellatio or cunnilingus upon the premises or property of an establishment that is or should be licensed under this article. 
(b)  No nude or seminude entertainer or employee shall be visible from outside the licensed premises. 
(c)  No employee or entertainer of the licensed premises shall in any manner orally encourage or solicit any other person to come into the premises on the basis of the entertainment or service policies of the establishment. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(9)(I))  
Secs. 62-131—62-158. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - RESPONSIBILITIES OF LICENSEE OR AGENT 
 
Sec. 62-159. - Age restrictions; compliance with law required. 
Each operator, licensee, person in charge, manager, agent and principal shall be at least 18 years of age or older and shall comply with and obey every federal and state law, ordinance, code, rule and regulation at all times upon and within the immediate vicinity of the licensed facility. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(10)(A))  
Sec. 62-160. - Premises must be clean and sanitary. 
The owner, licensee, operator and person in charge shall be responsible to ensure that the premises is maintained in a clean and sanitary manner at all times. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(10)(B))  
Sec. 62-161. - Lighting requirements. 
The owner, licensee, operator and person in charge shall be responsible to ensure that the premises is maintained with at least ten footcandles of light in the public portions of the establishment, including aisles, at all times. However, if a lesser level of illumination in the aisles shall be necessary to enable a patron to view the adult entertainment in a booth, room or cubicle adjoining an aisle, a lesser amount of illumination may be maintained in such aisles; provided, however, at no time shall there be less then one footcandle of illumination in said aisles, as measured from the floor. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(10)(C))  
Sec. 62-162. - Responsibility to ensure compliance of establishment and patrons. 
The owner, licensee, operator and person in charge shall ensure compliance of the establishment and its patrons with each of the provisions of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 12.04(10)(D))  
Chapter 64 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Regulation of public utilities generally, Wis. Stats. § 196.01 et seq.; video service, Wis. Stats. § 66.0420 et seq.; municipal video service, telecommunications and broadband facilities, Wis. Stats. § 66.0422; municipal public utility franchises and service contracts, Wis. Stats. § 66.0815. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 64-1—64-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS TRANSMISSION FACILITIES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 64-19. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms when used in this article shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly states otherwise: 
Antenna means any transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower, building, or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies, radar signals, wireless telecommunications signals, or other communications signals including, but not limited to, directional antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes, and satellite dishes, and omnidirectional antennas, such as whip antennas. 
Available site means any existing telecommunications facility which has fewer current users than it was designed or intended to accommodate. 
City-owned site means any property owned by the city which the plan commission has designated as a potential telecommunications site. 
Collocation means the provision of multiple antennas of more than one wireless telecommunications service provider or government entity on a single tower or structure. 
Commercial use means a use that involves the exchange of cash, goods, services, barter, forgiveness of indebtedness, or any other remuneration in exchange for goods, services, lodging, meals, entertainment in any form, or the right to occupy space over any period of time. 
Concealed site means any site in which a tower and antenna are completely hidden from view, such as a church steeple, a building cupola, or other structure. Concealed sites may be permitted with space for a minimum one potential user with specific approval of the plan commission. 
Equipment building, shelter or cabinet means a cabinet or building used by telecommunications providers to house equipment at a facility. 
Guyed communications tower means a tower that is supported in whole or in part by wires or cables and ground anchors. 
Height of a communications antenna or tower means the height of a communications antenna or tower is determined as the distance from ground level to the highest point on the tower, including the antenna and lightning rod. 
Monopole means a tower consisting of a single pole constructed without guy wires and anchors. 
Telecommunications facility means any plant or equipment used to carry wireless telecommunications services by radio signal or other electromagnetic waves or optical signals, including towers, antennas, equipment buildings, parking areas, and other accessory development. 
Telecommunications site means any parcel of land or any building which contains, houses, or supports an antenna, tower, or facility used for telecommunications. 
Telecommunications tower means a mast pole, spire, monopole, guyed communications tower, lattice tower, freestanding tower, other structure, or combination thereof, including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and masts, designed and primarily used to support antennas above grade. 
Unused telecommunications facilities means telecommunications facilities corresponding with a tower which has not carried a telecommunications signal for a period of 90 days. 
Wireless telecommunications service provider means licensed wireless telecommunications services including cellular, personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging, and similar services that are marketed to the general public or used within a private system. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 36.02)  
Sec. 64-20. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $250.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 36.18)  
Sec. 64-21. - Purpose. 
The purpose and intent of this article shall be to: 
(1)  Facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunications services to the residents and businesses of the city; 
(2)  Minimize adverse visual effects of towers; 
(3)  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure; 
(4)  Maximize the use of existing and approved towers and buildings to accommodate new wireless telecommunications antennas in order to reduce the number of visible towers needed to serve the community; 
(5)  Eliminate the need for multiple backup generators at telecommunications facilities; 
(6)  Protect residential areas and land uses from the potential adverse impacts of towers and antennas; 
(7)  Encourage the joint use (collocation) of new and existing tower sites as a primary siting option rather than the construction of single-use towers; and 
(8)  Minimize the number of towers required to serve the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 36.01)  
Sec. 64-22. - Exempt facilities. 
The following facilities shall be exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Private antennas designed for reception of television and reception of radio signals which are less than 45 feet in height if freestanding and less than eight feet in height if roof mounted. 
(2)  Private antennas designed for the reception and transmission of radio signals which are used for amateur radio purposes, provided they comply with the following: 
a.  The tower, if any, is used by a federally licensed amateur radio operator. 
b.  The tower, if any, is installed, erected, maintained, and/or operated within a residential zoning district. 
c.  The height of the tower, if any, is less than 60 feet in height if freestanding and 15 feet in height if roof mounted. A freestanding tower in excess of 60 feet in height or a roof mounted antenna in excess of 15 feet in height shall require a telecommunications facilities permit. 
d.  The antenna use involved is accessory to the primary use of the property, which is not a telecommunications facility. 
e.  The use of more than one support structure on any parcel shall require a telecommunications facilities permit. 
f.  Sufficient anticlimbing measures have been incorporated into the structure, as needed, to reduce the potential for trespass and injury. 
g.  The tower, if any, shall not be located in the front yard. 
h.  The tower, if any, shall not infringe upon the requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(3)  Publicly owned and operated telecommunications facilities required in the public interest to provide and maintain a radio frequency telecommunications system, including digital, analog, wireless or electromagnetic waves, for police, fire and other municipal services. 
(4)  Private utility providers who co-locate on a utility pole within the public right-of-way or utility easement where the antenna height is no more than 39 inches above the height of the pole. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 36.12; Ord. No. 2013-O-04, § 1, 4-23-2013)  
Secs. 64-23—64-47. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 64-48. - Required; fee. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct in place, place or re-erect, or replace any tower without first making application to the plan commission and securing a telecommunications facilities permit to effect the regulation of this article. This also applies to the erection of any new antenna and related equipment not previously approved for that tower. Minor alterations as specified in section 64-50 and routine maintenance of towers and related structures shall not require the issuance of a telecommunications facilities permit. 
(b)  It is the applicant's duty to obtain all required zoning or building approvals. 
(c)  A public hearing with a class 1 notice and notification to property owners within 300 feet of the shall be conducted in the manner provided by law. This hearing may be noticed and held concurrent with any conditional use public hearing that may be required by underlying zoning. 
(d)  The telecommunications facilities permit fee shall be set forth in the city fee schedule. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 36.13)  
Sec. 64-49. - Existing antennas and towers. 
All telecommunications sites approved after August 26, 2008, shall conform with this article. Telecommunications facilities in existence as of August 26, 2008, which do not conform to or comply with this article are subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Telecommunications facilities may continue in use for the purpose now used and as now existing but may not be replaced or materially altered without complying in all respects with this article. 
(2)  If such telecommunications facilities are hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or cause whatsoever, the tower and corresponding telecommunications facilities may be repaired and restored to its former use, location, and physical dimensions upon obtaining a building and zoning permit therefore, but without otherwise complying with this section; provided, however, that such repair is fully completed within 12 months of the date of damage, that if the cost of repairing the tower to its former use, physical dimensions, and location would exceed 50 percent of the cost of a new tower of like kind and quality, then the tower may not be repaired or restored except in full compliance with this section. 
(3)  An additional equipment building or cabinet may be approved at an existing site if additional antennas can be accommodated on the tower. Such buildings or cabinets will be subject to architectural and design review, and will require the approval of the architectural control commission. The architectural control commission may require design alterations, landscaping improvements, and other improvements as conditions for approval. 
(4)  If an applicant desires to reestablish an unused telecommunications antenna, or establish an antenna not previously permitted on an existing tower with at least one user, subsection (3) of this section shall apply. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 36.14)  
Sec. 64-50. - Minor alterations. 
Replacement of previously approved antennas affixed to an existing telecommunications facility or repairs to an existing telecommunications facility not subject to section 64-49 shall be considered a minor alteration to an existing telecommunications facilities permit. Such a minor alteration may be approved by the zoning administrator. If the zoning administrator does not approve the alteration, the applicant may apply to the plan commission in accordance with the telecommunications facilities permit standards contained herein. If such replacement is not fully accomplished within one year of the date of damage then the antenna shall be treated as a new antenna. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 36.15)  
Sec. 64-51. - Additional submittal requirements. 
In addition to the information required elsewhere in this Code, development applications for towers shall include the following supplemental information: 
(1)  A report from a qualified and state-licensed professional engineer which: 
a.  Describes the tower placement, height, and design including a cross section and elevation. 
b.  Documents the height above grade for all potential mounting positions for collocated antennas and the minimum separation distances between antennas. 
c.  Describes the tower's capacity, including the number and type of antennas that it can accommodate. 
d.  Assesses the impacts of the proposed site to existing telecommunications facilities or other facilities which may be impacted. 
e.  Identifies all potential mitigation measures which may be necessary to eliminate the impacts to other facilities. 
f.  Describes the area affected in the event of a tower failure or collapse. 
(2)  It is preferred that equipment be placed in underground vaults. For all aboveground equipment and towers, a visual analysis shall be prepared by or on behalf of the applicant which identifies the potential visual impacts to the satisfaction of the planning department. The analysis should include views from public areas as well as from nearby private residences. In addition, the analysis shall: 
a.  Document the floor plan with all dimensions of the equipment building. 
b.  Provide elevations of all four sides of the equipment building. 
c.  Include a landscaping plan for the proposed site. 
(3)  A complete stormwater analysis for the proposed site. 
(4)  All technical specifications for the backup generator, including all noise data. 
(5)  For all wireless telecommunications service towers, a letter of intent committing the tower owner and his/her successors to allow the collocation of other users on the tower if additional users agree in writing to meet reasonable terms and conditions for collocation. 
(6)  Before the issuance of a building permit, the following supplemental information shall be submitted: 
a.  Affirmation that the proposed tower will comply with any applicable regulations administered by the Federal Aviation Administration; 
b.  A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer which demonstrates the tower's compliance with the aforementioned structural, electrical, and radio frequency standards; 
c.  A performance bond guaranteeing to the city the full cost, at the time of removal: 
1.  To remove the tower; 
2.  Its accessory buildings; 
3.  Generators; and 
4.  All other infrastructure; 
if the owner of the site is financially unable to remove the tower and associated facilities; and 
d.  Three sets of plans approved by the state department of commerce, safety and buildings division for any proposed tower. 
(7)  Other information necessary to evaluate the request. 
(8)  On wooded or partially wooded land area, document a forestry and restoration plan: 
a.  Describing removal of trees and related understory woody and herbaceous plants; 
b.  Effect on the root zones and crowns of any heritage or specimen trees; and 
c.  Activities to prevent introduction of invasive species or species not suited to the environment. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 36.11)  
Secs. 64-52—64-75. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - WAIVERS 
 
Sec. 64-76. - Collocation requirements. 
Unless a waiver is granted, new telecommunications facilities shall: 
(1)  Use existing telecommunications sites unless the location is a concealed site. 
(2)  Be located on city-owned sites unless the location is a concealed site. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 36.03)  
Sec. 64-77. - Waiver of requirements. 
(a)  The plan commission may grant a waiver from the collocation requirement in section 64-76 only if it finds that one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of all existing or approved towers or buildings, as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced or modified to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment. 
(2)  The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment at all available towers or buildings, as documented by a qualified professional, and the interference cannot be prevented. 
(3)  Existing or approved towers and buildings within a search radius of one mile cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably as documented by a professional engineer. 
(4)  In spite of its best efforts, within 180 days, the applicant was unable to obtain approval to collocate on an existing or approved tower or building. In this case, the city shall have 90 days to assist in negotiating a lease before granting a waiver from section 64-76. 
(5)  Other reasons that make it impractical to locate the planned telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved tower or building, or to place the facility in a location as described in this article. 
(b)  The cost of collocating on an existing facility according to the provisions of this article or the cost of mitigating subsection (a)(1) or (2) of this section cannot be the sole factor in granting a waiver. 
(c)  The plan commission may grant a waiver from the requirements of section 64-122(1), (2), (21) and (22) for city-owned sites. 
(d)  The plan commission may grant a waiver, for non-city-owned sites, from the requirement of section 64-122(21), tillage history, for A-X, A-T, and R-D zoning districts, if the applicant can show, to the satisfaction of the plan commission, that: 
(1)  No other potential telecommunications site within the proposed service territory, as decided by the plan commission based on input from the city's telecommunications consultant, can meet the tillage requirement and still provide a reasonable level of service. 
(2)  The proposed telecommunications site is as close as practical to a fence line or nontilled land and located so as not to disrupt farming operations. 
(3)  The telecommunications site is designed with the least disruption to land with a tillage history. 
(e)  The plan commission may grant a waiver, for non city-owned sites, from the requirements of section 64-122(22), distance from a public roadway, for A-X, A-T, and R-D zoning districts if the applicant can show, to the satisfaction of the plan commission, the following: 
(1)  Meeting the 200-foot distance from a public roadway will cause the use of more land with a tillage history than a site exceeding the 200-foot requirement. 
(2)  An existing driveway, fire lane, or other means of appropriate access effectively serves the proposed telecommunications site. 
(3)  Where no driveway exists to the proposed telecommunications site, the applicant shall show that there is no other feasible location that can be provided within 200 feet of a public roadway, or on an existing public access, and not cause disruption of land with a tillage history or to wooded or partially wooded lands. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 36.16)  
Sec. 64-78. - Application for waiver; appeal. 
(a)  An applicant desiring a waiver shall file a petition, noting the specific waivers desired and their basis for such waiver, with the city planning department. At the sole cost of the applicant, an analysis shall be prepared by or on behalf of the city that verifies the applicant's basis for its waiver request. An application fee, as set forth in the city fee schedule, shall be paid at the time a petition is filed and shall not be refundable unless the application is withdrawn at least ten days prior to the hearing. Applications originated by the city shall be exempt from application fee. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the plan commission may, within five days of the plan commission's determination, appeal that determination to the common council. All waiver applications shall be submitted concurrent with the application for a telecommunications facilities permit under section 64-48. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 36.17)  
Secs. 64-79—64-99. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - USE OF CITY-OWNED SITES 
 
Sec. 64-100. - Conditions for use. 
The city may permit the installation of telecommunications equipment on city-owned sites so long as the use of those sites does not interfere with current or anticipated city or other governmental uses. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 36.04)  
Sec. 64-101. - Minimum requirements. 
Minimum requirements for location on a city-owned site are as follows: 
(1)  The user, other than a city user, shall enter into a lease with the city, under the following requirements: 
a.  The lessee shall pay rent as determined by the city; 
b.  The antennas or tower shall not interfere with the purpose for which the city-owned property is intended; 
c.  The antennas or tower shall have minimal adverse impact on surrounding private property; 
d.  The applicant shall obtain adequate liability insurance and commit to a lease agreement which includes equitable compensation for the use of public land and other necessary provisions and safeguards. The fees shall be established by the common council after considering comparable rates in other cities, potential expenses, risks to the city and other appropriate factors; 
e.  The antennas or tower shall not interfere with other users; 
f.  The applicant shall maintain its equipment properly, and will address all safety concerns brought to its attention by the city in a reasonable manner; and 
g.  The applicant shall reimburse the city for any costs which it incurs because of the presence of the applicant's antennas or towers. 
(2)  Wireless telecommunications antennas or towers will be considered appropriate in city parks only after the approval of the park commission. An antenna proposed to be mounted to a city-owned park structure may extend a maximum of 20 feet above existing structures, unless the park commission specifically approves a greater height. 
(3)  The applicant shall receive all approvals required by city zoning. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 36.04(1))  
Sec. 64-102. - Application process. 
All applicants who wish to locate a wireless telecommunications antenna or tower on city-owned property must submit to the zoning administrator, or his/her designee, a completed application and detailed plan that complies with the submittal requirements of this article along with other pertinent information requested by the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 36.04(2))  
Sec. 64-103. - Termination. 
The common council, by a two-third's vote of those present and voting, may terminate any lease if it determines that any one of the following conditions exists: 
(1)  A user's frequency broadcast unreasonably interferes with other users of a higher priority, regardless of whether or not this interference was adequately predicted in the technical analysis; or 
(2)  A user violates any of the standards in this article or the conditions attached to the city's permission. Before taking action, the city will provide 30 days notice to the user of the intended termination and the reasons for it, and provide an opportunity for the user to address the common council regarding the proposed action. This procedure need not be followed in emergency situations. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 36.04(3))  
Sec. 64-104. - Use of revenue. 
All revenue generated through the lease of city-owned property for wireless telecommunications towers and antennas shall be made payable to the city and transmitted to the city's department of finance. Revenue shall be used as follows: 
(1)  The money shall be placed in a dedicated fund for operating and maintaining city-owned sites. 
(2)  If located on a water tower, 100 percent of the revenue shall be placed in the utility fund, however the utility fund shall be responsible for all of the operation and maintenance costs of such sites. 
(3)  If located in a park, 25 percent of the revenue shall be placed in the park dedication fund. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 36.04(4))  
Secs. 64-105—64-121. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - DESIGN REQUIREMENTS AND USE RESTRICTIONS 
 
Sec. 64-122. - Tower and antenna design requirements. 
Proposed or modified towers and antennas shall meet the following design requirements: 
(1)  Any new proposed tower shall have a single equipment building designed and constructed to securely and separately house all necessary equipment for all potential users of the tower. 
(2)  Any new proposed site shall have a single backup generator capable of providing backup power to all potential users of the site. The generator shall comply with all applicable noise and sound regulations, and may be required, by the plan commission, to incorporate additional noise abatement measures. 
(3)  Towers and antennas shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment through the use of color and design, except in instances where the color is dictated by federal or state authorities such as the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(4)  The size of the structure shall be in proportion with the neighborhood and shall not unreasonably disrupt the aesthetic character of the neighborhood. 
(5)  Telecommunications towers shall be of a monopole design unless the plan commission determines that an alternative design is preferred in cases where structural or design considerations, neighborhood compatibility, location availability or the number of potential collocations warrants this consideration. 
(6)  All towers shall be designed so that the tower site and setbacks will contain guyed wires, debris, and the tower in the event of a collapse. 
(7)  Any proposed new wireless telecommunications facility, unless a concealed site, shall be designed, in all respects, to accommodate at least four users. 
(8)  No part of any communications antenna or tower, equipment, guyed wires, or braces shall at any time extend across or over any part of the public right-of-way, public street, highway, sidewalk, or recreation trail. 
(9)  Towers constructed within residential zoning districts shall meet the underlying zoning setbacks in addition to a setback equal to the height of the tower plus ten feet from any lot line. 
(10)  Telecommunications facilities shall meet all standard setback and other requirements for the underlying zoning. 
(11)  Towers shall not be located between a principal structure and a public street, unless the tower is located within an industrial zoning district and the placement meets all setbacks and other requirements of the underlying zoning district. 
(12)  If the parcel has no principal structure, the plan commission shall not approve a tower unless it determines that the construction of the tower shall not interfere with a typical principal structure consistent with the zoning and will not conflict with the provisions of this article if the structure were built. 
(13)  The setback shall be measured between the base of the tower located nearest the property line and the actual property line. Equipment structures shall be measured in a manner common to zoning code standards. 
(14)  A tower's setback, as required by this article, may be reduced or its location in relation to a public street varied, at the discretion of the plan commission, to allow the integration of a tower into an existing or proposed structure such as a church steeple, building cupola, silo, light standard, power line support device or similar structure. Facilities shall comply with underlying zoning. 
(15)  The height of a telecommunications tower shall not exceed 150 feet. 
(16)  Multiuser towers may exceed the height requirements as stated in subsection (15) of this section by up to an additional 50 feet provided that a minimum of six users are being accommodated in the design, including the design of the equipment building and the backup generator. 
(17)  The plan commission may approve a tower in excess of the height limits in subsection (15) of this section if it rules that the additional height is in the public interest and does not pose a public safety concern in the area for which it is proposed. 
(18)  Towers shall be constructed out of metal or other nonflammable material, unless specifically permitted by the plan commission to be otherwise. 
(19)  Telecommunications facilities shall ensure that sufficient anticlimbing measures have been incorporated into the facility to reduce the potential for trespass and injury. 
(20)  Every telecommunications facility shall be designed and constructed so as to comply with the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code chs. COMM 60 through 66, as amended from time to time. 
(21)  Telecommunications facilities in agricultural districts A-X, A-T and R-D shall not be located on land tilled in or after 1980. 
(22)  Telecommunications facilities in agricultural districts A-X, A-T and R-D shall not be located further than 200 feet from a public roadway. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 36.05)  
Sec. 64-123. - Tower lighting. 
Towers shall not be illuminated and shall not display strobe lights unless such lighting is specifically required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other federal or state authority for a particular tower, or if required by the plan commission for safety reasons. The plan commission may specifically approve lighting for a tower if it determines that it would be of aesthetic value. When incorporated into the approved design of the tower, light fixtures used to illuminate recreation facilities, parking lots or similar areas may be attached to the tower. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 36.06)  
Sec. 64-124. - Signs and advertising. 
The use of any portion of a tower for signs, other than warning or equipment information, is prohibited. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 36.07)  
Sec. 64-125. - Accessory utility buildings. 
All utility buildings and structures accessory to a tower shall be architecturally designed to blend in with the surrounding environment and shall meet the minimum setback requirements of the underlying zoning district. Groundmounted equipment shall be screened from view by suitable vegetation, except where a design of nonvegetative screening better reflects and complements the architectural character of the surrounding neighborhood, as determined by the plan commission. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 36.08)  
Sec. 64-126. - Unused telecommunications facilities. 
Unused telecommunications facilities shall be removed or acquired by the city as follows: 
(1)  All unused telecommunications facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the plan commission. 
(2)  If an unused telecommunications facility is not removed according to subsection (1) of this section, the city may remove the tower or facility and assess all costs of removal to the owner of the property on which the tower or facility is located. 
(3)  All city permits and approvals for the telecommunications facility shall expire upon the facility becoming unused. 
(4)  Telecommunications providers shall notify the city within 30 days of any damage to, or removal or alteration of, any telecommunications equipment. Such notice shall include the date of the occurrence. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 36.09)  
Sec. 64-127. - Interference with public safety telecommunications. 
No new or existing telecommunications service shall interfere with public safety telecommunications, in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission. Before the introduction of new service or changes in existing service, telecommunications providers shall notify the city at least ten calendar days in advance of such changes and allow the city to monitor interference levels during the testing process. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 36.10)  
Chapter 66 - SECONDHAND GOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-O-05, adopted February 10, 2015, amended the Code by repealing former ch. 66, §§ 66-1, 66-2, 66-23—66-34, and 66-57—66-59, and adding a new ch. 66. Former ch. 66 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Compiled Ordinances of 2009, §§ 12.01—12.03. 
State Law reference— Regulations and licensing of businesses generally, Wis. Stats. § 440.01 et seq.; pawnbrokers and secondhand article and jewelry dealers, Wis. Stats. § 134.71; pawnbrokers, Wis. Stats. § 138.10. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 66-1. - Statutes adopted. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the statutory provisions of Wis. Stats. § 134.71, describing and defining regulation of pawn brokers and secondhand article and jewelry dealers, including procedures for prosecution, are adopted and by reference made a part of this section as if set forth fully herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any regulation incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this section. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutory regulations in Wis. Stats. § 134.71, as incorporated herein, are intended to be made part of this section and are adopted by reference. Any person who shall within the city, violate any provisions of any statute incorporated herein by reference shall be deemed guilty of an offense under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-05, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 66-2. - Reporting system established. 
This chapter implements and establishes the required use of a reporting system to help the police department better regulate current and future pawnshops, secondhand article and second hand jewelry dealers and to increase identification of criminal activities associated with these uses through the timely collection and sharing of transaction information. Pawnbrokers, secondhand article and second hand jewelry dealers must submit every reportable transaction to the police department. Persons licensed under this chapter must provide to the police department all required information pursuant to state statute, through means designated by the city police department. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-05, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 66-3. - Inspection of items. 
At all times during the term of the license, the pawnbroker, secondhand article, or second hand jewelry dealer shall allow the police department to enter the premises where the licensed business is located, including all off-site storage facilities, during normal business hours (or at other times in the case of an emergency), for the purpose of inspecting such premises and inspecting the items, wares, merchandise, and records therein to verify compliance with this chapter or other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-05, 2-10-2015)  
Secs. 66-4—66-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 
 
Sec. 66-21. - Required. 
No person, firm or corporation may operate as a pawnbroker, secondhand article, or second hand jewelry dealer in the city without first obtaining a license under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-05, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 66-22. - Display of license. 
Each license issued under this chapter shall be displayed in a conspicuous place visible to anyone entering a licensed premise. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-05, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 66-23. - Application. 
Written applications for licenses under this section for specific premises, together with the applicable license fees, shall be filed with the city clerk for presentation to the public safety and human services committee who shall make the final decision on any new or renewal application. The clerk shall file a copy of such application with the police department and the planning department within five business days after receipt. Licenses issued under this section shall not be transferable. The application shall state the following: 
(1)  The applicant's name, place and date of birth, residence address, and residence addresses for the ten-year period prior to the date of the application. 
(2)  The name and address of the business and of the owner of the business premises. 
(3)  Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation, limited liability company, or partnership, and: 
a.  If the applicant is a corporation, the state where incorporated and the names and addresses of all officers and directors. 
b.  If the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners. 
c.  If the applicant is a limited liability company, the names and addresses of all members. 
d.  The name of the manager or proprietor of the business. 
e.  Any other information that the clerk may reasonably require. 
(4)  A statement as to whether the applicant, including an individual, agent, officer, director, member, partner, manager, or proprietor, has been convicted of any crime, statutory violation punishable by forfeiture, or county or municipal ordinance violation. If so, the applicant must furnish information as to the time, place, and offense of all such convictions. 
(5)  Whether the applicant or any other person listed in subsection (4) above has ever used or been known by a name other than the applicant's name, and if so, the name or names used and information concerning dates and places used. 
(6)  Whether the applicant or any other person listed in subsection (4) above has previously been denied or had revoked or suspended a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or secondhand jeweler license from any other governmental unit. If so, the applicant must furnish information as to the date, location, and reason for the action. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-05, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 66-24. - Investigation of license applicant. 
The police department shall investigate each applicant and any other person listed in section 66-23(3) above for a pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer license. The department shall furnish the information derived from that investigation in writing to the city clerk. The investigation shall include each agent, officer, member, partner, manager, or proprietor. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-05, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 66-25. - Issuance. 
(a)  The city council shall grant the license if all of the following apply: 
(1)  The applicant, including an individual, a partner, a member of a limited liability company, a manager, a proprietor, or an officer, director, or agent of any corporate applicant, does not have an arrest or conviction record, subject to Wis. Stats. §§ 111.321, 111.322 and 111.335. 
(2)  With respect to an applicant for a pawnbroker's license, the applicant provides to the governing body a bond of $1,000.00, with not less than two sureties, for the observation of all municipal ordinances or state or federal laws relating to pawnbrokers. 
(3)  All zoning approvals have been obtained for the property upon which the pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer operation will be conducted, and, general conformance with the city's development standards on the subject site is established or maintained. 
(b)  No license issued under this subsection may be transferred to another party, or another site owned or operated by the applicant or another party. 
(c)  Each license is valid from January 1 until the following December 31. 
(d)  Notwithstanding anything above, public safety and human services committee may place conditions on the conduct of the operation as may be appropriate to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-05, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 66-26. - Fees. 
The license fee under this chapter shall be as contained in the city's fees and licenses schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-05, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 66-27. - Appeal to common council. 
If the applicant for a license wishes to appeal the decision made by the public safety and human services committee, the applicant shall have the right to have the committee's decision heard by the common council, as long as the applicant requests said appeal within five business days from the committee's decision. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-05, 2-10-2015)  
Secs. 66-35—66-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 66-51. - Identification requirements. 
No pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer may engage in a transaction of purchase, receipt, or exchange of any secondhand article from a customer without first securing adequate identification from the customer. At the time of the transaction, the pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer shall require the customer to present one of the following types of identification: 
(1)  Current, valid Wisconsin driver's license; 
(2)  Current, valid Wisconsin identification card; 
(3)  Current, valid photo identification card or photo driver's license issued by another state or province of Canada. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-05, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 66-52. - Transactions with minors. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b), no pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer may engage in a transaction of purchase, receipt, or exchange of any secondhand article from any minor, defined as a person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(b)  A pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer may engage in a transaction described under subsection (a) if the minor is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian at the time of the transaction and the parent or guardian signs the transaction form and provides identification as required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-05, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 66-53. - Records required. 
At the time of any reportable transaction other than renewals, extensions, or redemptions, every pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer must immediately record in English the following information by using ink or other indelible medium on forms or in a computerized record approved by the police department: 
(1)  A complete and accurate description of each item, including, but not limited to any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand name, or other identifying mark on such an item. 
(2)  The purchase price, amount of money loaned upon or pledged therefore. 
(3)  The maturity date of the transaction and the amount due, including monthly and annual interest rates and all pawn fees and charges. 
(4)  Date, time, and place the item of property was received by the pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or secondhand jeweler, and a unique alpha and/or numeric transaction identifier that distinguishes it from all other transactions in the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer's records. 
(5)  Full name, current residence address, current residence telephone number, date of birth, and accurate description of the person from whom the item of property was received, including sex, height, weight, race, color of eyes, and color of hair. 
(6)  The identification number and state of issue from any of the following forms of identification of the seller: 
a.  Current, valid Wisconsin driver's license; 
b.  Current, valid Wisconsin identification card; 
c.  Current, valid photo identification card or photo driver's license issued by another state or province of Canada. 
(7)  The signature of the person identified in the transaction. 
(8)  Renewals, extensions, and redemptions. The pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer shall provide the original transaction identifier, the date of the current transaction, and the type of transaction for renewals, extensions, and redemptions. 
(9)  Record retention. Data entries shall be retained for at least one year from the date of transaction. 
(10)  For every secondhand article purchased, received, or exchanged by a pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer from a customer of the pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer's premises, or consigned to the pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer for sale on their premises, the pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer shall keep a written inventory. In this inventory the pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer shall record the name and address of each customer, the date, time, and place of the transaction, and a detailed description of the article that is the subject of the transaction. The customer shall sign his or her name on a declaration of ownership of the secondhand article identified in the inventory and shall state that he or she owns the secondhand article. The pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer shall retain an original and a duplicate of each entry and declaration of ownership relating to the purchase, receipt, or exchange of any secondhand article for not less than one year after the date of the transaction, except as provided in subsection 66-56, and shall make duplicates of the inventory and declarations of ownership available to any law enforcement officer for inspection at any reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-05, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 66-54. - Premise requirements. 
(a)  At all times the licensee shall have fully functional surveillance equipment of sufficient quantity and quality as determined by the police department. 
(b)  Prior to initial occupancy of the premises described in the license, the police department shall perform a walk-through verifying that all terms and conditions contained in the license have been complied with. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-05, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 66-55. - Holding period. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (c) below, any secondhand article other than gold and silver coins, or bullion purchased or received by a pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer shall be kept on the premises or other place for safekeeping for not less than 30 days after the date of purchase or receipt, unless the person known by the pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer to be the lawful owner of the secondhand article redeems it. The holding period for secondhand jewelry, gold or silver coins or bullion shall be 21 days. 
(b)  During the period set forth in subsection (a) above, the secondhand article shall be held separate from saleable inventory and may not be altered in any manner. The pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer shall permit any law enforcement officer to inspect the secondhand article during this period. Within 24 hours after a request of a law enforcement officer during this period, a pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer shall make available for inspection any secondhand article which is kept off the premises for safekeeping. 
(c)  Subsections (a) and (b) do not apply to a secondhand article consigned to a pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-05, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 66-56. - Redemption period. 
Any person pledging, pawning or depositing any item for security must have a minimum of 60 days from the date of that transaction to redeem the item before it may be forfeited and sold. During the 60-day holding period, items may not be removed from the licensed location. Pawnbrokers, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealers are prohibited from redeeming any item to anyone other than the person to whom the receipt was issued, to any person identified in a written and notarized authorization to redeem the property identified in the receipt, or to a person identified in writing by the pledger at the time of the initial transaction and signed by the pledger, or with the approval of the police department. Written authorization for release of property to persons other than the original pledger must be maintained along with the original transaction record in accordance with subsection 66-53(9). 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-05, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 66-57. - Police order to hold property. 
(a)  Investigative hold. Whenever a law enforcement officer from any agency notifies a pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or removed from the premises. The investigative hold shall be confirmed in writing by the originating agency within 72 hours and will remain in effect for 15 days from the date of initial notification, or until the investigative order is canceled, or until an order to confiscate is issued, pursuant to subsection (b), whichever comes first 
(b)  Order to confiscate. 
(1)  If an item is identified as stolen or evidence in a criminal case, the police department may physically confiscate and remove it from the shop, pursuant to a written order from the police department. 
(2)  When an item is confiscated, the person doing so shall provide identification upon request of the pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer, and shall provide the pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer with the name and phone number of the confiscating officer and the case number related to the confiscation. 
(3)  When an order to confiscate is no longer necessary, the police department shall so notify the pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-05, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 66-58. - Reports to police. 
(a)  Pawnbrokers must submit every reportable transaction to the city police department daily in the following manner. Pawnbrokers must provide to the police department all information required in section 66-53 and other required information, by transferring it from their computer to the electronic reporting system. All required records must be transmitted completely and accurately after the close of business each day in accordance with standards and procedures established by the police department using procedures that address security concerns of the pawnbroker and the police department. 
(1)  Billable transaction fees. Pawnbrokers will be charged for each billable transaction reported to the police department. These fees are intended to pay for the cost of participation in the electronic reporting system. 
(2)  If a pawnbroker is unable to successfully transfer the required reports by computer, the pawnbroker must provide the police department with printed copies of all reportable transactions by 12:00 noon the next business day. 
(3)  For each transaction of purchase, secondhand article and secondhand jewelry dealers must submit a completed copy of a report containing all information required in section 66.53 to the city police department daily. The report shall be submitted in the electronic reporting system. 
a.  The pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer must display a sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous place on the premises which informs all patrons that all transactions are reported to the department. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-05, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 66-59. - Exception for customer return or exchange. 
Nothing in this section applies to the return or exchange from a customer to a pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer of any secondhand article purchased from the pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer. 
(1)  Every pawnbroker, secondhand article, or second hand jewelry dealer must provide a receipt to the party identified in every reportable transaction and must maintain a duplicate of that receipt for three years. The receipt must include at least the following information: 
a.  The name, address, and telephone number of the licensed business. 
b.  The date and time the item was received by the pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer. 
c.  Whether the item was pawned or sold, or the nature of the transaction. 
d.  An accurate description of each item received, including, but not limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand name, or other identifying mark on such an item. 
e.  The signature or unique identifier of the pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer or employee that conducted the transaction. 
f.  The amount advanced or paid. 
g.  The monthly and annual interest rates, including all pawn fees and charges. 
h.  The last regular day of business by which the item must be redeemed by the pledger without risk that the item will be sold, and the amount necessary to redeem the pawned item on that date. 
i.  The full name, residence address, residence telephone number, and date of birth of the pledger or seller. 
j.  The identification number and state of issue from any of the following forms of identification of the seller: 
1.  Current, valid Wisconsin driver's license. 
2.  Current, valid Wisconsin identification card. 
3.  Current, valid photo driver's license or identification card issued by another state or province of Canada. 
k.  Description of the pledger or seller, including approximate sex, height, weight, race, color of eyes, and color of hair. 
l.  The signature of the pledger or seller. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-05, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 66-60. - Label required. 
Pawnbrokers, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealers must attach a label to every item at the time it is pawned, purchased, or received in inventory from any reportable transaction. Permanently recorded on this label must be the number or name that identifies the transaction in the shop's records, the transaction date, the name of the item and the description or the model and serial number of the items as reported to the police department, whichever is applicable, and the date the item is out of pawn or can be sold, if applicable. Labels shall not be reused. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-05, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 66-61. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No person under the age of 18 years may pawn or sell or attempt to pawn or sell goods with any pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer, nor may any pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer receive any goods from a person under the age of 18 years, except as permitted by subsection 66-52(b). 
(b)  No pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer may receive any goods from a person of unsound mind or an intoxicated person. 
(c)  No pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer may receive any goods unless the seller presents identification in the form of a valid driver's license, a valid State of Wisconsin identification card, or current, valid photo driver's license or identification card issued by the state of residency of the person from whom the item was received. 
(d)  No pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer may receive any item of property that possesses an altered or obliterated serial number or other identification number, or any item of property that has had its serial number removed. 
(e)  No person may pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit any article of property not their own, nor shall any person pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit the property of another, whether with permission or without, nor shall any person pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit any article of property in which another has a security interest with any pawnbroker. 
(f)  No person seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit any article of property with any pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer shall give a false or fictitious name, nor give a false date of birth, nor give a false or out-of-date address of residence or telephone number, nor present a false or altered identification or the identification of another to any pawnbroker, secondhand article, or secondhand jewelry dealer. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-05, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 66-62. - Revocation. 
(a)  A license issued hereunder may be denied, revoked, or suspended by the city clerk upon administrative determination that the licensee has committed fraud, misrepresentation, or provided a false statement in the application for a license, or violated this chapter or Wis. Stats. § 134.71, 943.34, 948.62 or 948.63, or violated any local, state, or federal law substantially related to the businesses licensed under this chapter. 
(b)  The city clerk may deny, suspend, or revoke any license issued under this section upon administrative determination that the applicant is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien, or upon whom it is impractical or impossible to conduct a background or financial investigation due to the unavailability of information. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-05, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 66-63. - Additional regulation of flea markets. 
In addition to the requirements adopted under section 66-1, the following shall also apply to flea markets: 
(1)  Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
Flea market means a market, indoors or out of doors, where new or used items are sold from individual locations, with each location being operated independently from the other locations. Items sold include but are not limited to household items, antiques, rare items, decorations, used books and used magazines. A flea market does not include the sale of produce or other perishable products at retail or wholesale by a resident of this state. 
Flea market seller means a person, firm or corporation selling items or offering items for sale at a flea market. 
Market means a place where goods are sold to the public. 
(2)  License required. No person, firm or corporation shall operate the business of renting space or allocating space to flea market sellers without first obtaining a license therefore from the city. Applications for license shall be made to the city clerk, on forms provided by the city clerk, and in accordance with the provisions adopted in section 66-1. The common council may restrict the license for use on certain dates and times. The site for the flea market shall comply with city zoning requirements. 
(3)  Information to be filed. The information to be filed with the city clerk, pursuant to this chapter and in addition to any information required under section 66-1, shall be as follows: 
a.  Name of person, firm, group, corporation, association, or organization conducting the sale; 
b.  Name of owner of the property on which the sale is to be conducted, and consent of owner if applicant is other than the owner; 
c.  Location at which sale is to be conducted; 
d.  Number of days of sale; 
e.  Date, nature of any past sale; 
f.  Relationship or connection applicant may have had with any other person, firm, group, organization, association, or corporation conducting the sale and the date or dates of such sale; 
g.  Whether or not applicant has been issued any other vendor's license by any local, state or federal agency; 
h.  Sworn statement or affirmation by the person signing that the information therein given is full and true and known to him or her to be so. 
(4)  Records to be kept by licensee. Each person required by this chapter to obtain a license shall keep accurate records of the names and addresses of each flea market seller, together with a brief description of the type or types of merchandise offered for sale by that seller. 
(5)  More than one market. Any person, firm or corporation renting or allocating space to flea market sellers in more than one place of business shall be required to obtain a license for each place of business, provided that one license shall be adequate for locations that are on the same lot, adjacent lots or lots separated only by an alley. 
(6)  Unlawful transactions. No person shall sell or offer for sale at any flea market any goods known to such person to be stolen. 
(7)  Hours. Flea market may remain open for business between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., unless otherwise specified on the license at time of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-05, 2-10-2015)  
Chapter 67 - SALES ON PUBLIC STREETS 
 
Sec. 67-1. - License for selling on public streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to vend, sell or offer for sale or procure the sale of any services, goods, wares, tokens, or foodstuffs, or any other article of any kind by putting up a booth, preparing or setting up the vending cart, stand or equipment, preparing food, beverage or articles for sale, stopping a vehicle or person on foot, interacting with potential customers in or around a vending site, taking names for the purpose of making future sales, offering applications or other materials for future sales, or in any other manner participating in the vending operation or attempting to publicly sell or offer for sale any such articles or services upon any highway, street, alley, sidewalk, unless such person shall have first applied for and obtained the appropriate license required by this chapter. 
For purposes of this section, "vending" includes the activities described above and any other activity that furthers a vending operation at a vending site. "vending" does not include the act of delivering the cart, equipment, or necessary equipment and supplies to and from a vending site. However, unlicensed individuals shall not remain in or around a vending cart, stand or site for any length of time, whether open or closed for business, unless expressly permitted under another subsection of this chapter or unless they are customers waiting to be served. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-13, § 1, 5-24-2011)  
Sec. 67-2. - Vending in parks. 
No vending shall be conducted, upon any park, playground, recreation area, or athletic field owned or operated by the city unless approved by the parks director, pursuant to policies adopted by the parks commission. The parks director's decision may be appealed to the parks commission. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-13, § 1, 5-24-2011)  
Sec. 67-3. - Applications. 
An application for a vending license shall be filed with the director of community and economic development or designee, shall contain such information as the director may require, shall specify in detail the food, goods or services to be offered for sale and shall designate a specific vending site, unless the type of vending sales proposed are those typically performed in a non- stationary manner i.e., summer ice cream sales. The application shall be approved if all applicable ordinance requirements have been met. Licenses shall be issued and signed by the city clerk and shall be conspicuously displayed at the place where such sales are being made. 
(1)  Vendor license fees and durations: 
a.  Vendor license (annual). Annual licenses shall be issued on the fifteenth day of April each year or thereafter when applied for, and shall expire on the fourteenth day of April following its issuance. 
b.  Vendor license (monthly). Such license shall be issued for 30 days and shall set forth the date of expiration. 
c.  Vendors license (special events). Such license may be issued for a community festival or other special event. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, there shall be no fee for such license, such license may cover multiple vendors, and the director may in his or her sole discretion modify the requirements of this Chapter in order to facilitate the event. 
d.  The license fees under this chapter are as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(2)  To hold a valid license, the vendor must have in force adequate liability insurance and must agree to indemnify, defend, and hold the city, its employees and agents harmless against all claims, liability, loss, damage, or expense incurred by the city as the result of any injury to or death of any person or damage to property caused by or resulting from the activities for which the license is granted. As evidence of liability insurance, the applicant shall furnish a certificate of insurance, on a form acceptable to the city, evidencing the existence of commercial general liability insurance (including contractual liability insurance) naming the city, its employees and agents as additional insureds, with minimum limits of $1,000,000.00 in the aggregate. The certificate of insurance shall provide 30 days written notice to the city upon cancellation, or nonrenewal or material change in the policy. 
(3)  A vendor to whom a vending license has been issued under this subsection shall inform the designee of the city clerk of any change of address of the primary vendor named on the vending license, in writing, if the address change occurs during the time period for which the vending license was issued. 
(4)  Issuance of the license shall be contingent upon payment of all fees owed to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-13, § 1, 5-24-2011)  
Sec. 67-4. - General restrictions on vending sites. 
All vending pursuant to this section shall be subject to the following, requirements: 
(1)  All licenses shall be for a specific vending site, unless specifically exempted pursuant to section 67-3. 
(2)  The maximum size of the "vending site" shall be the actual dimensions of an assigned site, or a perimeter of not more than ten by 12 feet around the vendor 
(3)  No vending or vending site shall be permitted within a ten-foot radius of a fire hydrant nor within a five-foot radius of a standpipe. 
(4)  No vending or vending site shall be permitted within five feet of the sides of bus shelters or bus stops nor in a manner which interferes with the use of the bus stop or with ingress or egress to the bus shelters. 
(5)  No vending site shall be permitted within ten feet of a curbcut or a marked crosswalk. 
(6)  All vending shall be conducted so as to maintain a minimum width of six feet of unobstructed public pedestrian walkway adjacent to the vending site. 
(7)  No vending shall be permitted adjacent to any truck, freight or passenger loading zone or adjacent to any parking space for people with disabilities or loading zone. 
(8)  Vending is prohibited upon any highway, street, alley, sidewalk, pleasure drive, if the street is located directly adjacent to, or directly across the street, alley or highway from any school property. For purposes of this paragraph, "school property" includes all property owned or operated by a public school as defined in Wis. Stat. § 115.01 (1) or owned or operated by a private school as defined in Wis. Stat. § 115.001(3r). 
(9)  Any license issued under this chapter and any vending site assignment made under this chapter or under regulations adopted pursuant to it shall be nontransferable. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-13, § 1, 5-24-2011)  
Sec. 67-5. - Appearance of vending site and equipment. 
Vendors must maintain their vending site areas and vending equipment in a clean and hazard-free condition. 
(1)  All equipment present at the vending site shall be completely contained within the perimeter of the vending site and no equipment shall extend or be placed outside this perimeter. 
(2)  No vendor shall be permitted to use any of the amenities, such as benches, flower planters, trees, bus shelters, kiosks, light poles or any other utility poles for display of merchandise or to attach any ropes or other vending equipment to any of the aforementioned. 
(3)  Vending equipment and displays, including signage, shall be directed away from the street. In addition, merchandise shall be displayed in a manner in which attention to it is not focused from the street and which does not require or encourage prospective buyers to enter or walk upon the street in order to examine it. 
(4)  Each vendor vending from an enclosed cart or push cart may only use the vending cart, one chair, and one trash receptacle. Vendors vending from an enclosed cart or push cart are limited to the equipment listed above and may not use any additional freestanding equipment; however umbrellas or awnings securely attached to the cart may be used. If using vending apparatus other than a cart, one freestanding tent or similar structure may be used but must maintain a minimum vertical clearance of seven feet measured from ground level to the lowest point of the tent or other structure and a maximum height of 11 feet at the highest point. Any freestanding structures of any kind shall be sufficiently wind-resistant and securely anchored. 
(5)  A vendor shall be present within the vending site at all times during which items are displayed or sold. 
(6)  No vending equipment or merchandise may be stored on any street, sidewalk or alley or public square when the vendor is not present. 
(7)  All vending equipment, including carts, tables, apparatus and merchandise shall be removed from the streets, sidewalks, terrace area or other vending location during times when vending is prohibited. 
(8)  It is unlawful for any vendor to permit any other person to vend at that vendor's vending site. 
(9)  The police department shall have authority to remove or cause the removal of any vending equipment or merchandise found on the street, sidewalk, terrace or other vending location in violation of this chapter. In addition to any forfeiture, the violator shall be liable for any removal, towing and storage charges incurred by either department. 
(10)  Street vending shall be prohibited between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any street or sidewalk located within any residentially zoned district. 
(11)  The approved dimensions of any assigned street vending site are not guaranteed to remain available. Public construction, street improvements or redesign may result in a vending site being moved, reduced in size or eliminated at any time. All vending site dimensions are subject to change if the city makes changes to the construction of the sidewalk and/or streetscape that affect the vending site, including but not limited to the addition or removal of planters, trees, benches, bike racks, bus shelters, sculptures, or any other public amenity. 
(12)  Noise levels emanating from the vending site shall be kept to a minimum, shall not be directed toward the street or sidewalk, and shall be reasonable so as not to disturb the peace and quiet of those in the vicinity, including but not limited to residents, merchants, and customers. No sound amplification shall be permitted. 
(13)  No vendor shall drive or permit another to drive a motor vehicle upon any sidewalk area for the purpose of depositing vending carts or other equipment thereon. This prohibition does not apply to permanent or temporarily established driveways. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-13, § 1, 5-24-2011)  
Sec. 67-6. - Penalties. 
Penalties for conviction of any offenses under this chapter shall be as provided in section 1-21. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-13, § 1, 5-24-2011)  
Sec. 67-7. - Procedure for revocation, suspension or nonrenewal of vending license general procedure. 
In addition to any other penalty provided under this chapter, an category or type of street vending license issued hereunder may be revoked, suspended or not renewed for a stated period of time or otherwise limited by the imposition of conditions or restrictions by the public safety and human services committee, after notice and hearing, for any of the following: any violation of this chapter, serious or repeated violations of restrictions on parking, stopping or standing; and violations of any other city general ordinance or state statute where the circumstances of the offense are substantially related to vending activities. Any party aggrieved by the decision of the public safety and human services committee may within ten days of the decision appeal in writing to the city clerk for review of the decision by the common council. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-13, § 1, 5-24-2011)  
TITLE VI OFFENSES AND NUISANCES  
Chapter 68 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles generally, Wis. Stats. § 110.001 et seq.; vehicles generally, Wis. Stats. § 340.01 et seq.; storage of junked automobiles, Wis. Stats. § 175.25; rules of the road, Wis. Stats. § 346.01 et seq.; obedience to traffic officers, Wis. Stats. § 346.04; vehicle equipment generally, Wis. Stats. § 347.01 et seq.; vehicle size, weight, and load, Wis. Stats. § 348.01 et seq.; authority of local governments with regard to vehicles, Wis. Stats. § 349.01 et seq.; local licensing authority regarding vehicles for hire, Wis. Stats. § 349.24 et seq.; snowmobiles, Wis. Stats. § 350.01 et seq.; local authority to prohibit leaving keys in parked vehicles, Wis. Stats. § 66.0431. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 68-1. - State statutes adopted. 
(a)  Wis. Stats. ch. 340 which defines words and phrases used in Wis. Stats. chs. 340 through 348, together with any existing or future amendments thereto, is adopted and incorporated herein by reference as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, each and every provision of Wis. Stats. chs. 341 through 348, for which the penalty for violation thereof is as provided in section 1-21, and the penalties imposed for violation, and procedures for prosecution set forth in those chapters, together with any existing or future amendments thereto, are adopted and incorporated herein by reference as though fully set forth in this chapter. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statutes incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this chapter. 
(c)  The sections of state statutes set forth in this subsection are adopted and incorporated herein by reference. However, the prosecution for any violation of the following statutes under this chapter shall be as provided in Wis. Stats. chs. 340 through 348 and the penalty imposed for a violation thereof shall be limited to a forfeiture as provided in section 70-309: 
(1)  Wis. Stats. § 941.01(1), negligent operation of vehicle off highway. 
(2)  Wis. Stats. § 947.04, drinking in common carriers. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.01(1))  
Sec. 68-2. - State vehicle equipment standards adopted. 
(a)  Wis. Admin. Code ch. Trans. 305 regulating standards for vehicle equipment is hereby adopted by reference and made part of this chapter as if set forth in full. The penalty for violations of this section shall be as prescribed in Wis. Admin. Code § Trans. 305.04; therefore, the penalty provisions set forth in section 70-309 shall not apply to violations of this section. 
(b)  The bond deposit schedule amount for any violation of this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  Any violation of this section, which also constitutes a violation of Wis. Stats. ch. 347, shall have a bond deposit in the amount specified for the specific violation under Wis. Stats. ch. 347 as set forth by the revised uniform state traffic deposit schedule, as now enacted and as hereinafter amended by the state judicial conference. 
(2)  Any violation of this section, which does not constitute a violation of Wis. Stats. ch. 347, shall have a bond deposit in the amount specified for violations of Wis. Admin. Code ch. Trans. 305 as set forth by the revised uniform state traffic deposit schedule, as now enacted and as hereinafter amended by the state judicial conference. 
(c)  A copy of the provisions of the Wisconsin Administrative Code which has been adopted in this chapter by reference shall be kept on file at the office of the chief of police and shall be made available to the public for inspection and copying upon request. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, §§ 8.01(3), 14.01(10))  
Sec. 68-3. - State snowmobile statutes adopted. 
Each and every provision of Wis. Stats. ch. 350 relating to the operation and maintenance of snowmobiles, together with any existing or future amendments thereto, are adopted and incorporated into this Code by reference. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by the statutes incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.01(2))  
Secs. 68-4—68-24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SIGNS, SIGNALS AND STREET DESIGNATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 68-25. - Installation of signs and signals. 
The chief of police or a designated subordinate, is hereby authorized and directed to procure and erect and maintain appropriate standard traffic signs, signals and markings conforming to the rules of the state highway division giving such notice of the provisions of this article as required by state law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.06(1))  
Sec. 68-26. - Removal of unofficial signs and signals. 
The chief of police shall have the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 349.09 and is hereby directed to remove or order the removal any sign, signal, marking or device placed, maintained, or displayed in violation of this chapter or Wis. Stats. § 346.41. Any charge imposed on a premises for removal of such an illegal sign, signal or device shall be reported to the common council at its next regular meeting for review and certification. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.06(2))  
Secs. 68-27—68-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - OFFICIAL TRAFFIC MAP 
 
Sec. 68-56. - Established. 
The public works department is hereby directed to prepare an official traffic map for the city upon which shall be indicated no parking and restricted parking areas, required stops, arterial intersections, through highways, safety zones, turns and lanes, heavy traffic routes, yield signs, special speed limits, one-way highways, school crossings and all other restrictions or limitations adopted by ordinance, order or resolution of the common council under the authority of Wis. Stats. ch. 349, as from time to time amended or modified. When the laws of the state require the erection or use of official traffic control devices to enforce any such restrictions or limitations, the location and nature of such signs shall be indicated on the official traffic map hereby established. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.07(1))  
Sec. 68-57. - Violations prohibited. 
When official traffic control devices giving notice of the restrictions, prohibitions and limitations shown on the official traffic map are erected and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this section, a violation of the restriction, prohibition or limitation shown on the official traffic map shall be a violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.07(2))  
Sec. 68-58. - Maintenance; display. 
A copy of the official traffic map shall be maintained by the department of public works and displayed in the office of the police department and municipal court. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.07(3))  
Sec. 68-59. - Additions or deletions. 
The council may from time to time, in accordance with Wis. Stats. ch. 349, make additions to or deletions from the official traffic map and the director of public works shall keep such official traffic map current. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.07(4))  
Secs. 68-60—68-76. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - HIGHWAY AND CROSSWALK DESIGNATIONS 
 
Sec. 68-77. - Through highways designated. 
In the interest of public safety and pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.07, the following streets or portions thereof are declared to be through highways, and traffic signs or signals giving notice thereof shall be erected on: 
(1)  Seminole Highway between the city line and the north line of County Trunk Highway PD; between the south line of County Trunk Highway PD and the north line of Lacy Road; and between the south line of Lacy Road and the north line of Whalen Road. 
(2)  Syene Road between the north city limit and the north line of McCoy Road; between the south line of McCoy Road and the north line of E. Cheryl Parkway; between the south line of E. Cheryl Parkway and the north line of Lacy Road; and between the south line of Lacy Road and the north line of Byrne Road. 
(3)  Fish Hatchery Road between the city line and the north line of County Trunk Highway M. 
(4)  Whalen Road between the west line of Fish Hatchery Road and the east line of Fitchrona Road. 
(5)  Lacy Road between the east line of Fitchrona Road and the west line of Seminole Highway; between the east line of Seminole Highway and the west line of Fish Hatchery Road; between the east line of Fish Hatchery Road and the west line of Syene Road; between the east line of Syene Road and the west line of Haight Farm Road; between the north line of Haight Farm Road and the south line of E. Cheryl Parkway; and between the north line of E. Cheryl Parkway and the west line of County Highway MM. 
(6)  Irish Lane between the east line of Fish Hatchery Road and the west line of Syene Road, and between the east line of Syene Road and U.S. Highway 14. 
(7)  Fitchburg Road between the south line of Whalen Road and the north line of County Trunk Highway M. 
(8)  Osmundsen Road between Verde View and Mutchler Road except at its intersections with CTH PD, Schumann Drive and Lacy Road and Devoro Road. 
(9)  Woods Edge Road between the south line of McKee Road (CTH PD) and the west line of Osmundsen Road. 
(10)  Timber Ridge Trail between the north line of Woods Edge Road and the west line of Osmundsen Road. 
(11)  Cheryl Drive between the west line of Fish Hatchery Road and a point 30 feet west of the west line of Jacquelyn Drive. 
(12)  Tree Line Drive. 
(13)  East Cheryl Parkway between the east line of CTH D (South Fish Hatchery Road) and the west line of Syene Road; and between the east line of Syene Road and the west line of Lacy Road. 
(14)  Schumann Drive between the east line of Osmundsen Road and the west line of Richardson Street. 
(15)  King James Way from the south line of Williamsburg Way to the west line of Anton Drive. 
(16)  Richardson Street between the south line of CTH Highway PD and the north line of Wilshire Drive, and between the south line of Wilshire Drive and the north line of Pembroke Drive/Cheryl Drive and between the south line of Pembroke Drive/Cheryl Drive and the north line of Lacy Road and between the south line of Lacy Road and the southerly termini of Richardson Street. 
(17)  Byrneland Street except at its intersection with CTH D (Fish Hatchery Road). 
(18)  Market Place from McKee Road southerly to the Wisconsin Calumet Railroad Line. 
(19)  Longford Terrace from McKee Road northerly to Leopold Way. 
(20)  Commerce Park Drive from McKee Road southerly to the future connection at Lacy Road. 
(21)  Brendan Avenue from Chapel Valley Road easterly to CTH D. 
(22)  Yarmouth Greenway from CTH PD northerly to Longford Terrace. 
(23)  Cahill Main from CTH D to Caddis Bend. 
(24)  Buds Drive from Market Place Drive northerly to the future connection at CTH PD (McKee Road). 
(25)  Edenberry Street from north Longford Terrace northerly to Longwood Lane. 
(26)  Research Park Drive between the south line of Lacy Road and the north line of Nobel Drive. 
(27)  Nobel Drive between the east line of CTH D (Fish Hatchery Road) and the future connection to the west line of Syene Road. 
(28)  Fahey Glen Road from the south line of Lacy Road to the north line of the southerly termini. 
(29)  Red Arrow Trail from the south line of Thurston Lane to the north line of Crescent Road. 
(30)  Notre Dame Drive from the south line of Lacy Road to the north line of the southerly termini. 
(31)  Fitchrona Road from the south line of CTH PD to the north line of Nesbitt Road. 
(32)  Post Road between the east line of Fish Hatchery Road (CTH D) and the eastern city limits. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.03; Ord. No. 2012-O-11, § 1, 9-11-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-13, § 1, 7-9-2013)  
Sec. 68-78. - School crosswalks. 
Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 118.08, school crosswalks with appropriate markings are established on: 
(1)  Lacy Road at its westerly intersection with Osmundsen Road. 
(2)  Osmundsen Road immediately south of its intersection with Lacy Road. 
(3)  Aberdeen Court immediately south of its intersection with Lacy Road. 
(4)  Richardson Street immediately south of its intersection with Pennwall Street. 
(5)  Schumann Drive between Seminole Glen Park and Lot 1, CSM No. 5383. 
(6)  Tudor Drive immediately west of its intersection with Richardson Street. 
(7)  Norwich Street west of its intersection with Tudor Drive. 
(8)  Norwich Street immediately east of its intersection with Osmundsen Road. 
(9)  Devoro Road west of its intersection with Osmundsen Road. 
(10)  Post Road 385 feet east of Leopold Way. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.035)  
Secs. 68-79—68-99. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - INTERSECTION DESIGNATIONS 
 
Sec. 68-100. - Required stop—North-south streets. 
All vehicles proceeding: 
(1)  Northerly on Westchester Road, Harley Drive or Shafer Drive shall stop before entering the intersection of said streets with Raymond Road. 
(2)  On Carling Drive shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Lovell Lane. 
(3)  On Seminole Highway shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with County Trunk Highway PD. 
(4)  Southerly on Fitchrona Road shall stop before entering the intersections of said street with County Trunk Highway M and Purcell Road. 
(5)  Northerly on Fitchrona Road shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Nesbitt Road. 
(6)  Northerly on Borchert Road or Blizzard Road shall stop before entering the intersection of said streets with County Trunk Highway M. 
(7)  Southerly on Fitchburg Road, Fish Hatchery Road, Barry Drive or Syene Road shall stop before entering the intersection of said streets with County Trunk Highway M. 
(8)  Northerly on Nesbitt Road shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with U.S. Highway 14. 
(9)  Southerly on McCoy Road shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with W. Clayton Road. 
(10)  Southerly on East Clayton Road shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Goodland Park Road. 
(11)  Northerly on Conover Circle or Heywood Circle shall stop before entering the intersection of said streets with Branson Road. 
(12)  Northerly on Stable View Road shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Winsome Way. 
(13)  Southerly on Timber Lake Road shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Schneider Road. 
(14)  Northerly on Tower Hill Road shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Barbara Drive. 
(15)  Southerly on Anderberg Drive, Rimrock Road or Clausen Street shall stop before entering the intersection of said streets with U.S. Highway 14. 
(16)  Northerly on Anderberg Drive shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Rimrock Road. 
(17)  All vehicles proceeding southerly on Tami Trail shall stop before entering the intersection with Barbara Drive. 
(18)  Southerly on Jacquelyn Drive shall stop before entering the intersection with Barbara Drive. 
(19)  South on Whitney Way shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Williamsburg Way. 
(20)  On Bosshard Drive shall stop before entering the intersection with Verde View Road. 
(21)  On Auburn Drive shall stop before entering the intersection with Verde View Road. 
(22)  On Jasmine Drive shall stop before entering the intersection with Devoro Road. 
(23)  On Verona Frontage Road shall stop before entering the intersection with the north Fitchburg entrance to U.S. Highway 18/151. 
(24)  Northerly on Wilshire Drive shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Chapel Valley Road. 
(25)  On Coho Street shall stop before entering the intersection with Pike Drive. 
(26)  Southerly on Syene Road shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Byrne Road. 
(27)  On Smithfield Drive shall stop before entering the intersection with Norfolk Drive. 
(28)  On Renaissance Drive shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Crescent Road. 
(29)  Southerly on Hardrock Road shall stop before entering the intersection with Limestone Lane. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.04(1); Ord. No. 2011-O-25, § 1, 1-10-2012)  
Sec. 68-101. - Same—East-west streets. 
All vehicles proceeding: 
(1)  On County Trunk Highway PD shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with U.S. Highway 151. 
(2)  Westerly on Lacy Road or Grand View Road shall stop before entering the intersection of said streets with Fitchrona Road. 
(3)  Westerly on East Clayton Road, Goodland Park Road, Murphy Road, CTH B, Schneider Road or Schuster Road shall stop before entering the intersection of said streets with U.S. Highway 14. 
(4)  Easterly on Lacy Road, Irish Lane, Byrne Road or CTH M shall stop before entering the intersection of said streets with U.S. Highway 14. 
(5)  On Maloney Drive shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Rimrock Road. 
(6)  Westerly on Burroughs Street shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Rimrock Road. 
(7)  Easterly on Whalen Road shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Caine Road. 
(8)  Westerly on Maves Road shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Kathleen Street. 
(9)  Westerly on Beth Lane shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Lisa Lane. 
(10)  Easterly on Dorcas Circle shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Branson Road. 
(11)  Westerly on Harris Circle shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Branson Road. 
(12)  On Chicory Drive shall stop before entering the intersection of Devoro Road. 
(13)  Easterly on Research Park Drive shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Woods Hollow Road. 
(14)  Easterly on Kinsale Drive shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Chapel Valley Road. 
(15)  Westerly on Triverton Pike Drive shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Chapel Valley Road. 
(16)  On Stoneman Drive shall stop before entering the intersection with Sunflower Drive. 
(17)  On Carriage Street shall stop before entering the intersection with Anton Drive. 
(18)  On King James Way shall stop before entering the intersection with Kapec Road. 
(19)  On Sparkle Stone Crescent shall stop before entering the intersection with Castle Rock Drive. 
(20)  On Nannyberry Drive shall stop before entering the intersection with Crinkle Root Drive. 
(21)  Easterly on Limestone Lane shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Nesbitt Road. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.04(2))  
Sec. 68-102. - Same—Other streets. 
All vehicles proceeding: 
(1)  Southerly on Osmundsen Road shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Lacy Road. 
(2)  Northerly on Ledgemont Street shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Pembroke Drive. 
(3)  Southerly on Ledgemont Street shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Raritan Road. 
(4)  Northerly or southerly on the Marledge Street shall stop before entering intersection of said street with Pembroke Drive or Raritan Road. 
(5)  Northerly on Raritan Road shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Pembroke Drive. 
(6)  Easterly or westerly on Restal Street shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Raritan Road or Marledge Street. 
(7)  Easterly on Ledgemont Court shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Ledgemont Street. 
(8)  Northerly on Tower Hill Drive shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Barbara Drive. 
(9)  Northerly or southerly on Lyman Lane shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Cheryl Drive. 
(10)  Easterly on Vineyard Road shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Fish Hatchery Road. 
(11)  Easterly on High Ridge Trail shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Fish Hatchery Road. 
(12)  Westerly on Candle Tree Court shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Fish Hatchery Road. 
(13)  Northerly on Barbara Drive shall stop before entering the intersection with Devoro Road. 
(14)  On Tudor Drive shall stop before entering the intersection of the street with Norwich Street and all vehicles proceeding on Norwich Street shall stop before entering the intersection of the street with Tudor Drive. 
(15)  On Hilltop Road shall stop before entering the intersection with Gold Drive. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.04(3))  
Sec. 68-103. - Four-way stop intersections. 
All vehicles proceeding on: 
(1)  County Trunk Highway M shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Fish Hatchery Road, and all vehicles proceeding on Fish Hatchery Road shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with County Trunk Highway M. 
(2)  Osmundsen Road shall stop before entering the intersection of the street with Schumann Drive and all vehicles proceeding on Schumann Drive shall stop before entering the intersection of the street with Osmundsen Road. 
(3)  Red Arrow Trail shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Thurston Lane, all vehicles proceeding on Thurston Lane shall stop before entering the intersection of said street with Red Arrow Trail. 
(4)  Richardson Street shall stop before entering the intersection of the street with Wilshire Drive and all vehicles proceeding on Wilshire Drive shall stop before entering the intersection of the street with Richardson Street. 
(5)  Richardson Street shall stop before entering the intersection of the street with Cheryl Drive/Pembroke Drive and all vehicles proceeding on Cheryl Drive/Pembroke Drive shall stop before entering the intersection of the street with Richardson Street. 
(6)  Cahill Main shall stop before entering the intersection of the street with Caddis Bend and all vehicles proceeding on Caddis Bend shall stop before entering the intersection of the street with Cahill Main. 
(7)  Anton Drive shall stop before entering the intersection of the street with King James Way and all vehicles proceeding on King James Way shall stop before entering the intersection of the street with Anton Drive. 
(8)  Lacy Road shall stop before entering the intersection of the street with Seminole Highway and all vehicles proceeding on Seminole Highway shall stop before entering the intersection of the street with Lacy Road. 
(9)  Lacy Road shall stop before entering the intersection of the street with S. Syene Road and all vehicles proceeding on S. Syene Road shall stop before entering the intersection of the street with Lacy Road. 
(10)  E. Cheryl Parkway shall stop before entering the intersection of the street with S. Syene Road and all vehicles proceeding on S. Syene Road shall stop before entering the intersection of the street with E. Cheryl Parkway. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.04(4); Ord. No. 2012-O-11, § 2, 9-11-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-13, § 2, 7-9-2013)  
Sec. 68-104. - Required yields—East-west streets. 
All vehicles proceeding: 
(1)  On Sassafras Drive shall yield before entering the intersection with Crinkle Root Drive. 
(2)  On Quarry Hill Drive shall yield before entering the intersection with Mica Road. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-05, § 1, 5-8-2012; Ord. No. 2015-O-10, § 1, 4-14-2015)  
Secs. 68-105—68-134. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC RULES AND REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 68-135. - Traffic and pedestrian safety. 
(a)  Purpose. Pedestrians are increasingly using highways in ways for which the roads were not designed. These uses include approaching vehicles when in use or staying upon medians for purposes other than crossing the highway. These activities create safety hazards for pedestrians and distract drivers, making automobile crashes more likely. This section is designed to decrease the safety hazards by restricting such activity. These safety concerns are most acute on the busiest streets within the city, identified as arterial and collector streets or highways, and some streets intersecting with those arterial streets. This section applies to those "covered highways" identified in subsection (g) herein. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
(1)  Covered highway is defined in subsection (g) herein. 
(2)  In operation. A vehicle is "in operation" when it has an operator, as defined in Wis. Stat. § 340.01(41). 
(3)  Median. A "median" is a paved or unpaved area dividing a street or highway that separates lanes of traffic traveling in opposite directions, or in the case of left or right hand turn lanes, vehicles traveling in the same direction. 
(c)  No person, other than a person in or on a vehicle, shall be on a covered highway listed in subsection (g) and approach any vehicle in operation, except a vehicle that is legally parked at the curb or the shoulder. 
(d)  No person shall be upon a median of a covered highway listed in subsection (g) unless that person is in the process of crossing the highway in a safety zone or crosswalk. It is prima facie evidence of a violation of this section if a person stays on the median through two consecutive opportunities to cross the highway in a legal manner under this chapter and the state traffic laws adopted herein. This may include a change in the traffic control signal or lack of traffic, as applicable. After such two consecutive opportunities, such person shall not be considered to be "using the safety zone or crosswalk to cross the highway" for purposes of the exception in subsection (f)(2). 
(e)  No operator of a vehicle shall park, stop or leave standing a vehicle on a covered highway listed in subsection (g) where prohibited or suddenly decrease the speed of said vehicle or deviate from a traffic lane for the purpose of responding to persons violating subsection (c) or (d). 
(f)  Exceptions. This section does not apply to: 
(1)  Persons on the sidewalk; 
(2)  Persons using the safety zone or crosswalk to cross the highway; 
(3)  Persons engaged in law enforcement or rescue activities, including providing assistance to an injured or disabled vehicle or person; 
(4)  Persons entering a vehicle as an invited passenger where it is lawful to do so, including activity permitted under Wis. Stat. § 346.29(1) (taxis); 
(5)  Persons engaged in repair or maintenance activities on the highway under the direction or authority of the city or the state; or 
(6)  Streets or portions thereof that have been closed pursuant to a street use permit or other express authorization from the city. 
(g)  Covered highways. This section applies only to covered highways, which are those highways or portions of highways listed in subsection (1) and (2) below: 
(1)  The following highways are designated as arterial and collector streets, the streets and highways within the city that have the most traffic, and are covered highways under this section: 
Cheryl Dr 	Kapec Rd (between King James Way and McKee Rd) 	Rothmore Ln 
Crescent Rd 	King James Way 	S. Seminole Hwy 
CTH B 	Lacy Rd 	S. Syene Rd (between McCoy Rd and Irish Ln) 
CTH D/Fish Hatchery Rd 	Leopold Way 	Seminole Hwy 
CTH M 	Longford Terrace 	Sentinel Pass (between Crescent Rd and Seminole Hwy) 
CTH MM/Rimrock Rd 	McCoy Rd 	Syene Rd 
CTH PD/McKee Rd 	Nesbitt Rd 	USH 14 
E. Cheryl Pkwy 	Osmundsen Rd (between Verde View Rd and Lacy Rd) 	USH 18/151/Verona Rd 
Fitchrona Rd 	Pembroke Dr 	Verde View Rd 
Greenway Cross (between Fish Hatchery Rd and Index Rd) 	Post Rd 	Whalen Rd (between Fitchrona Rd and Fish Hatchery Rd) 
Haight Farm Rd 	Raymond Rd 	Williamsburg Way 
Irish Ln 	Richardson St 	
 
(2)  In addition to the arterial highways designated above, this section applies to any highway containing a median that intersects with any of the arterial highways, but only for the first 200 feet of the intersecting highway from the arterial highway, as measured along the center line of the intersecting highway from the point the intersecting highway touches the right of way of the arterial highway. 
(h)  Any person violating this section may be required to forfeit not less than $25.00 nor more than $300.00. 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-15, § 1, 6-27-2017)  
Secs. 68-136—68-151. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - VEHICLE NOISE 
 
Sec. 68-152. - Compression brakes prohibited. 
No person shall use motor vehicle brakes which are in any way activated or operated by compression of the engine of any motor vehicle. It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the compression brakes were applied in an emergency and were necessary to prevent immediate danger to life or property. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.04(7))  
Sec. 68-153. - Excessive radio and other vehicle noise prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  Except as provided under subsection (b) of this section or as provided in Wis. Stats. § 347.38(1), which is adopted in this chapter, no person may: 
(1)  Operate, park, stop or leave stand a motor vehicle while using a radio or other electric sound amplification device emitting sound from the vehicle, which includes, but is not limited to, a horn, that is clearly audible under normal conditions from a distance of 50 or more feet, unless the electric sound amplification device is being used to request assistance or warn against an unsafe condition. 
(2)  Operate a motor vehicle so as to cause unreasonable and excessive noise levels whether by excessive acceleration or braking causing the tires to squeal, by excessive horn blowing, by excessive racing of the motor, by having a modified or inadequately maintained exhaust or braking system or by any other means. 
(b)  This section does not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  The operator of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm. 
(2)  The operator of a vehicle of a public utility. 
(3)  The operator of a vehicle that is being used for advertising purposes. 
(4)  The operator of a vehicle that is being used in a community event or celebration, procession or assemblage. 
(5)  The activation of a theft alarm signal device. 
(6)  The operator of a motorcycle being operated outside of a business or residence district. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.04(8))  
Secs. 68-154—68-164. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SCHOOL ZONES AND BUSES 
 
Sec. 68-165. - School crossing guards. 
Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.215, those adult persons hired by the department of police to act as school crossing guards shall have the authority to stop traffic and to keep it stopped as long as necessary at school crossings for the protection of persons who are crossing a street in the vicinity of a school. The school crossing guards shall wear insignia or uniforms which designate them as school crossing guards and shall be equipped with signals or signs to direct traffic to stop at school crossings. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.04(5))  
Sec. 68-166. - School bus warning lights in residence and business zones. 
Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.21, whenever a duly licensed school bus is equipped with flashing red warning lights, such lights shall be used by a bus operator within a residence or business district in the city when pupils or other authorized passengers are to be loaded or unloaded at a location at which there is no traffic signals and such persons must cross the street or highway before being loaded or after being loaded. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.04(6))  
Secs. 68-167—68-177. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - SPEED LIMITS 
 
Sec. 68-178. - Increased to 50 miles per hour. 
The speed limits are increased to 50 miles per hour upon the following streets: 
(1)  Adams Road, entire length. 
(2)  Caine Road, entire length. 
(3)  Fitchburg Road from County Trunk Highway M to Whalen Road. 
(4)  Fitchrona Road from County Trunk Highway M to Tonto Trail. 
(5)  Grandview Road from Fitchrona Road to a point 2,000 feet west of Seminole Highway. 
(6)  Lacy Road from Fitchrona Road to Seminole Highway. 
(7)  Haight Farm Road from Lacy Road easterly to County Highway MM. 
(8)  Mutchler Road from Whalen Road to a point 950 feet south of Osmundsen Road. 
(9)  Purcell Road, entire length. 
(10)  Seminole Highway from Whalen Road to Schumann Drive. 
(11)  Whalen Road from Fitchrona Road to Mutchler Road. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.02(1); Ord. No. 2012-O-11, § 3, 9-11-2012)  
Sec. 68-179. - Increased to 45 miles per hour. 
The speed limits are increased to 45 miles per hour upon the following streets: 
(1)  Blizzard Road, entire length. 
(2)  Irish Lane from Fish Hatchery Road (CTH D) to 300 feet west of West Hill Drive. 
(3)  Irish Lane from 200 feet east of Raceway Street to 300 feet west of Maple Avenue. 
(4)  Schuster Road from CTH MM to city limit. 
(5)  Syene Road from Irish Lane to the Chicago Northwestern railroad tracks. 
(6)  Whalen Road from Fish Hatchery Road to Caine Road. 
(7)  McCoy Road, entire length. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.02(2))  
Sec. 68-180. - Increased to 40 miles per hour. 
The speed limits are increased to 40 miles per hour upon the following streets: 
(1)  Borchert Road, entire length. 
(2)  Byrne Road, entire length. 
(3)  East Clayton Road, entire length. 
(4)  Fitchrona Road from Tonto Trail to Nesbitt Road. 
(5)  Goodland Park Road, entire length. 
(6)  Lalor Road from County Trunk Highway B to Murphy Road. 
(7)  Larsen Road from Goodland Park Road to East Clayton Road. 
(8)  Murphy Road, entire length. 
(9)  Mutchler Road from Lacy Road to a point 950 feet south of Osmundsen Road. 
(10)  Seminole Highway from Schumann Drive northerly to the railroad tracks, 710 feet south of the centerline of Sentinel Pass. 
(11)  Whalen Road from Mutchler Road to Fish Hatchery Road. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.02(3))  
Sec. 68-181. - Increased to 35 miles per hour. 
The speed limit is increased to 35 miles per hour upon the following streets: 
(1)  Fitchburg Road from Whalen Road to Grandview Road. 
(2)  Grandview Road from Seminole Highway to a point 2,000 feet west of Seminole Highway. 
(3)  Irish Lane from 300 feet west of West Hill Drive to 200 feet east of Raceway Street. 
(4)  Irish Lane from 300 feet west of Maple Avenue to County Highway MM. 
(5)  Lacy Road from Seminole Highway to E. Cheryl Parkway. 
(6)  Nesbitt Road from Fitchrona Road to a point 1,070 feet north of Limestone Lane. 
(7)  Schneider Drive from County Trunk Highway MM to the city limits. 
(8)  Seminole Highway from the railroad tracks (710 feet south of the centerline of Sentinel Pass) northerly to a point 270 feet north of the centerline of Sentinel Pass. 
(9)  Syene Road from Byrne Road to Irish Lane. 
(10)  Wendt Street, entire length. 
(11)  West Clayton Road, entire length. 
(12)  Whalen Road from Caine Road to easterly end. 
(13)  East Cheryl Parkway from CTH D to Syene Road. 
(14)  Nobel Drive, entire length. 
(15)  Fahey Glen Road, entire length. 
(16)  Notre Dame Drive, entire length. 
(17)  Fitchrona Road, from Nesbitt Road to CTD PD. 
(18)  Lacy Road from USH 14 Interchange to CTH MM. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.02(4); Ord. No. 2012-O-11, § 3, 9-11-2012; Ord. No. 2017-O-10, § 1, 4-25-2017)  
Sec. 68-182. - Increased to 30 miles per hour. 
The speed limit is increased to 30 miles per hour upon the following streets: 
(1)  Research Park Drive, from Lacy Road to the southerly end. 
(2)  Post Road, from city limits to Fish Hatchery Road. 
(3)  Lacy Road from E. Cheryl Parkway easterly to USH 14 Interchange. 
(4)  East Cheryl Parkway, from Syene Road easterly to Lacy Road. 
(5)  Post Road, from Fish Hatchery Road easterly to city limits. 
(6)  Nesbitt Road from a point 1,070 feet north of Limestone Lane to McKee Road (CTH PD). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.02(5); Ord. No. 2012-O-11, § 3, 9-11-2012; Ord. No. 2017-O-10, § 1, 4-25-2017)  
Sec. 68-183. - Increased to 25 miles per hour. 
As provided by Wis. Stats. §§ 346.57 through 346.59, the speed limits on the entire lengths of streets located within residential subdivisions within the city shall be 25 miles per hour unless otherwise provided by official traffic signs. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.02(6))  
Sec. 68-184. - In school zones or at crosswalks. 
Speed limits in marked school zones and at marked school crosswalks shall be 20 miles per hour when children are present. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.02(7))  
Secs. 68-185—68-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - HEAVY VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 68-201. - Weight restrictions. 
Except for motor buses, and except when necessary for the purpose of obtaining orders; delivering and moving supplies or other necessary commodities to or from any place of business or residence fronting any such streets, and except when necessary for the purpose of leaving or returning to the terminal or place of garaging of any such vehicle, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle having a gross weight of more than 8,000 pounds on the following designated streets: 
(1)  Seminole Highway from McKee Road north to the city limits. 
When it is necessary for the operator of such a vehicle to travel upon a street which is designated with this restriction, such operator shall leave and re-enter at the point closest to their immediate destination. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-11, § 4, 9-11-2012)  
Secs. 68-202—68-206. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PARKING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 68-207. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Large vehicle means as any automobile, truck, trailer, truck power unit, bus, recreational vehicle and/or combination of vehicles: 
(1)  Having a gross vehicle weight in excess of 8,000 pounds and exceeding 16 feet in length (including accessories, racks or other physical extensions); or 
(2)  Exceeding eight feet in height measured from the roadway to the highest point of the vehicle, excluding only antennas. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.05(9)(a)(1))  
Sec. 68-208. - Vehicle abandonment prohibited; removal. 
(a)  Whenever any vehicle has been left unattended on any public highway, public property or private property without the permission of the property owner, for more than 48 hours the vehicle is deemed abandoned within the meaning of Wis. Stats. § 342.40, adopted in this chapter, and constitutes a public nuisance. 
(b)  In addition to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 342.40, adopted in this chapter, relating to abandoned vehicle removal, whenever any traffic officer finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in violation of a prohibition, limitation or restriction on stopping, standing or parking, he/she is authorized to move such vehicle to a place of safekeeping by towing at the owner's expense or to require the operator in charge thereof to move such vehicle to a position where such stopping, standing, or parking is not prohibited. Such removal shall not relieve the owner or operator of such vehicle from any penalty incurred because of such violation. 
(c)  Whenever any vehicle has been abandoned as defined in subsection (a), or has been taken into custody pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 968.19 and is no longer required for evidence or use in further investigation, certified mail notice shall be sent to the owner and lienholders of record to permit reclamation of the vehicle after payment of accrued charges of towing and impoundment, if any. Such notice shall set forth the year, make, model, and serial number of the vehicle, the place where the vehicle is held, and shall inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to reclaim the vehicle. The notice shall state that the failure of the owner or lienholders to exercise their rights to reclaim the vehicle within 30 days is a waiver of all right, title, and interest in the vehicle and consent to the sale, donation, or junking of the vehicle. Each retained vehicle not reclaimed by its owner or lienholder within 30 days after certified mail notice has been sent may be sold, donated to a nonprofit organization, or, if the police chief and finance director determine that the cost of storage and title transfer would exceed the value of the vehicle, the vehicle may be junked with the approval of the city administrator. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.05(4), (5); Ord. No. 2017-O-02, § 1, 2-14-2017)  
Sec. 68-209. - Temporary parking regulations. 
(a)  When necessary for the cleaning, clearing, or repairing of any street, or for other emergency or special conditions including experimental traffic and parking regulations, the chief of police, or a designated subordinate, is authorized to make temporary regulations of traffic and parking upon the streets as conditions require. Notice shall be given of the regulations by the posting of reasonably conspicuous signs, within a reasonable time before such regulations are to become effective. 
(b)  The experimental temporary regulations, to test new or experimental traffic and parking regulations, shall be allowed for a period of 90 days except that such experiments may be continued for an additional 90-day period unless the common council, by resolution, determines otherwise. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.05(3); Ord. No. 2010-O-17, § 1, 10-26-2010)  
Sec. 68-210. - Snow and ice emergency regulations. 
(a)  When it becomes necessary for the effective movement of vehicles and to remove snow or ice from streets which because of the accumulation of snow or ice thereon causes such a hindrance to traffic as constitutes an emergency unless the snow or ice is promptly removed, the chief of police or a designated subordinate, after consultation with the superintendent of streets or a designated subordinate, shall by appropriate public media announcement declare the beginning of an emergency and the application of emergency snow parking regulations. The regulations shall remain in force and effect until lifted by the chief of police or a designated subordinate. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the accumulation of snow and ice on any street or area is sufficient for the declaration of an emergency when any accumulation hinders the safe movement of traffic or impedes the safe and expeditious travel of emergency and public transportation vehicles. 
(c)  Emergency snow parking regulations shall mean there will be parking permitted only on the even-numbered side of any street or any street in any specified aldermanic district or any street in any specified geographical area from 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. and there shall be parking permitted only on the odd-numbered side of any street or any street or streets in any specified aldermanic district or any street in any specified geographical area from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
(d)  All parking regulations under this section shall remain in full effect except that enforcement of alternate side parking shall be suspended during the pendency of the emergency regulations on those streets in the areas affected. In addition, there shall be no parking on either side of any street or court of a width of 20 feet or less between face of curb and face of curb or of a roadway width of 20 feet or less. Vehicles in violation will be ticketed and towed. 
(e)  Signs shall be erected at or reasonably near the corporate limits of the city giving notice that snow emergency parking regulations are in effect in the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.05(3m))  
Sec. 68-211. - Parking on street limited to 24 hours. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall stop or leave standing any vehicle upon any street for a period exceeding 24 hours. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.05(1))  
Sec. 68-212. - Winter parking restrictions. 
(a)  Between November 15 and March 15, no person may park, stop or leave standing any vehicle between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on the even-numbered side of the street on odd-numbered calendar days, and on the odd-numbered side of the street on even-numbered calendar days except streets which prohibit parking at all times on one side of the street. 
(b)  Official traffic signs shall be placed or erected at or reasonably near the corporate limits of the city on all state and county trunk highways and connecting highways informing motorists that calendar night parking regulations are in effect in the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.05(2))  
Sec. 68-213. - School area parking restrictions. 
No person may park a vehicle on the following streets from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. or from 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. on days when the schools of the Verona Area School District are in session: 
(1)  On the westside of Osmundsen Road from Lacy Road to Cordley Street. 
(2)  On the westside of Richardson Street from Lacy Road to Tudor Drive. 
(3)  On the southside of Norwich Street from Tudor Drive to Osmundsen Road. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.05(6))  
Sec. 68-214. - Parking of all vehicles restricted during certain time periods in specific areas. 
No person may park a vehicle on any of the following streets at the time indicated: 
(1)  On the westside of Richardson Street between Pennwall Street and Lacy Road from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. on days when the schools of the Verona Area School District are in session. 
(2)  On the eastside of Richardson Street between Pennwall Street and Lacy Road from 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. on days when the schools of the Verona Area School District are in session. 
(3)  On the northside of Norwich Street between Tudor Drive and Osmundsen Road from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. on days when the schools of the Verona Area School District are in session. 
(4)  On the southside of Norwich Street between Tudor Drive and Osmundsen Road from 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. on days when the schools of the Verona Area School District are in session. 
(5)  On the southside of King James Way from 200 feet west of Chesapeake Drive to 100 feet west of Chesapeake Dr. from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 6:30 p.m. 
(6)  On the southside of Post Road from a point 120 feet east of Leopold Way to a point 70 feet west of Traceway Drive between 7:00 a.m. and 8:30 a.m. and between 2:00 p.m. and 3:30 p.m. on days when the schools of Madison Metropolitan School District are in session. 
(7)  On the southside of Post Road from Leopold Way east 120 feet between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on days when the schools of Madison Metropolitan School District are in session. 
(8)  On the south side of Post Road from 370 feet east of Leopold Way to 525 feet east of Leopold Way between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on days when the schools of Madison Metropolitan School District are in session. 
(9)  On the north and south side of East Cheryl Parkway from 180 feet east of Research Park Drive to 460 feet east of Research Park Drive on Thursdays from 2:00 pm to 7:00 pm. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.05(7), (10); Ord. No. 2010-O-17, § 2, 10-26-2010; Ord. No. 2017-O-10, § 2, 4-25-2017)  
Sec. 68-215. - Parking prohibited during certain periods; handicapped loading zone. 
(a)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park any vehicle within a handicapped loading zone, at the indicated times, unless they are directly engaged in loading or unloading a handicapped person. Vehicles may park in the handicapped loading zone for up to 15 minutes for the purpose of loading or unloading a handicapped passenger. 
(b)  The board of public works may authorize, by resolution or otherwise, the issuance of permits for handicapped loading zones upon recommendation of the chief of police or director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-7, § 1(8.05(7a)), 5-11-2010)  
Sec. 68-216. - Large vehicle parking restricted. 
No person shall park or leave standing any large vehicle upon any street between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or for more than two hours between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless otherwise lawfully parked and engaged in continuous loading and unloading or directly engaged in activities for which such vehicles are necessary, including without limitation, loading and unloading goods, digging, hauling and trimming. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.05(9)(a)(2))  
Sec. 68-217. - Motor homes, mobile homes and certain trailer parking restricted; parking permits. 
(a)  No person shall, without a permit, park or store any motor home, mobile home, manufactured homes, camper trailer or any trailer having two or less axles, on any street in excess of 24 hours. 
(b)  The board of public works may authorize, by resolution or otherwise, the issuance of complimentary parking permits to motor vehicle owners or operators visiting the city for the purpose of a convention, conference, tournament or other function determined to be primarily for a public charitable religious philanthropic, educational or other nonprofitable purpose. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.05(9)(b))  
Secs. 68-218—68-230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PROHIBITED PARKING 
 
Sec. 68-231. - Specific streets. 
No person shall at any time park a vehicle: 
(1)  On the southside of McKee Road (CTH PD) from Verona Road to Seminole Highway. 
(2)  On both sides of Chalet Gardens Court from the west end of the cul-de-sac to a point 100 feet east therefrom. 
(3)  On the southside of Big Bow Road from Big Bow Court to Tawhee Drive. 
(4)  On the eastside of Seminole Highway from Sentinel Pass north to the city limits. 
(5)  On both sides of the Verona Frontage Road. 
(6)  On the westside of Carling Drive for the entire length. 
(7)  On the westside of Red Arrow Trail from the city limit southerly to Thurston Lane. 
(8)  On both sides of Lacy Road from Seminole Highway easterly to CTH D (Fish Hatchery Road) except for parking areas as determined and prescribed by the department of public works. 
(9)  On both sides of Commerce Park Drive from CTH PD south 375 feet. 
(10)  On the north and south sides of Pike Drive from Coho Drive east 70 feet and from Coho Drive west 70 feet. 
(11)  On the north and south sides of Williamsburg Way from a point 250 feet west of Anton Drive to Verona Road (USH 18/151) and on the south side from Whitney Way west to Chesapeake Drive. 
(12)  On the east and west sides of Woods Hollow Road from east Cheryl Parkway north 30 feet. 
(13)  On the north side of East Cheryl Parkway from Woods Hollow Road east 30 feet and from Woods Hollow Road west 30 feet. 
(14)  On the east and west sides of Red Arrow Trail from Jenewein Road north 40 feet. 
(15)  On the east and west sides of Kathleen Street from the south plat line of the First Addition to Hillside Heights north 30 feet. 
(16)  On the west side of Research Park, 93 feet north and 75 feet south of the intersection of Castle Rock Drive. 
(17)  On the east and west sides of the Castle Rock Drive from the intersection of Research Park Drive south 75 feet. 
(18)  On the north and south sides of Caddis Bend from Cahill Main east to CTH D. 
(19)  On the east side of Rosenberry Road for the entire length. 
(20)  On the west side of Royal Wulff Terrace from the intersection of High Ridge Trail south 215 feet. 
(21)  On the west side of Woods Hollow Road from the intersection of Research Park Drive north 115 feet. 
(22)  On the south side and the Fitchburg section of the north side of Post Road from Coho Street east to CTH "D." 
(23)  On the east side of Leopold Way from Post Road south 30 feet. 
(24)  On the east side of Gallagher Drive from Research Park Drive north to Shale Road. 
(25)  On the north side of E. Cheryl Parkway from the intersection with S. Syene Road to the intersection with No Oaks Drive. 
(26)  On the north and south sides of E. Cheryl Parkway for a distance of 100 feet in each direction of the crossing with the Wisconsin and Southern Railroad. 
(27)  On the north side of East Cheryl Parkway from Woods Hollow Road west 70 feet. 
(28)  On the south side of East Cheryl Parkway starting 1,560 feet east of Woods Hollow Road to 30 feet east of the roundabout. 
(29)  On the north side of East Cheryl Parkway starting 1,640 feet east of Woods Hollow Road to 30 feet east of the roundabout. 
(30)  On the east and west sides of Anton Drive from Williamsburg Way to a point 200 feet south of the intersection. 
(31)  On the north and south side of Pike Drive starting 388 feet east of Coho Drive to a point 623 east of Coho Drive. 
(32)  On the north and south side of Lacy Road from Fish Hatchery Road to Syene Road. 
(33)  On the south side of Subzero Parkway from Commerce Park Drive to Seminole Highway. 
(34)  On the east and west side of Stanley Park Place from East Cheryl Drive to a point 45 feet north. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.05(8); Ord. No. 2010-O-17, § 3, 10-26-2010; Ord. No. 2011-O-25, § 1, 1-10-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-30, § 1, 10-22-2013; Ord. No. 2014-O-33, § 1, 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2016-O-01, § 1, 1-26-2016; Ord. No. 2017-O-10, § 2, 4-25-2017; Ord. No. 2018-O-39, §§ 1—4, 12-11-2018)  
Sec. 68-232. - Public right-of-way and public property. 
No person shall park any vehicle for sale within any public right-of-way or property controlled by the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.05(11))  
Sec. 68-233. - Traffic calming devices. 
No person shall at any time park at or along any traffic calming devices (excluding speed humps) throughout the city, including a minimum distance of 30 feet in either direction of the device, as determined necessary by city engineer. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.05(12))  
Sec. 68-234. - Fire hydrants. 
No person shall, at any time, park any vehicle at or along a fire hydrant including a minimum distance of ten feet in either direction of the hydrant. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.05(13))  
Sec. 68-235. - Bus stops. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in any bus stop when such stop has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily park therein for the purpose and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus about to enter such stop, and while such vehicle is attended by a licensed operator. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.05(14))  
Secs. 68-236—68-252. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PERSONAL TRANSPORTATION DEVICES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 68-253—68-282. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BICYCLES 
 
Sec. 68-283. - Registration and license—Required. 
Every owner of a bicycle within the city shall, within ten days of acquisition of said bicycle, properly register and tag said bicycle, except as provided in Wis. Stats. § 349.18 (1991—1992), as may be amended. No person shall operate a bicycle in the city unless said bicycle has been properly registered and tagged in the city or has a valid current registration in another municipality. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.075(1))  
Sec. 68-284. - Same—Fees. 
A registration and fee schedule for bicycles shall be set forth in the city fee schedule. The fee schedule shall be kept on file in the police department's and city clerk's office and shall be made available for reference and public inspection during normal business hours. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.075(2))  
Sec. 68-285. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Licenses shall be issued to owners by the city police department upon payment of the required fee and presentation of the following required registration information. The registration information shall include: 
(1)  A license number; 
(2)  The owner's name and address; and 
(3)  A complete description of the bicycle including: 
a.  Make; 
b.  Model; 
c.  Color; 
d.  Serial number; and 
e.  Any additional descriptive information. 
(b)  The license shall be a tag or sticker of durable material bearing the license number and the name of the city in which it is issued. Bicycle licenses are nontransferable and nonexpiring. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.075(3))  
Sec. 68-286. - Attachment of license to bicycle. 
The owner or operator shall securely attach the license to the bicycle frame so that it is plainly visible. Any bicycle without the proper license properly attached to the bicycle shall be presumed to be unregistered and unlicensed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.075(4))  
Sec. 68-287. - Abandoned bicycles. 
(a)  Violation. 
(1)  No person may leave unattended any bicycle on any public street, highway, building, place or park upon any public or private property, for such time and under such circumstances as to cause the bicycle to reasonably appear to be abandoned. 
(2)  Any bicycle left on any public street, highway, public place, or park, and not affixed with a lock to a post, pole, or bicycle rack, or otherwise secured by a lock, is deemed to be abandoned. 
(b)  Notice of abandonment—Locked bicycle. Any bicycle that is affixed with a lock to a post, pole, or bicycle rack, or otherwise secured with a lock, in violation of subsection (a)(1) may have a notice affixed to it which informs the owner of the bicycle, that the bicycle appears to be abandoned. Only a police officer, civilian service employee, or other police department designee shall have authority to affix such notices upon bicycles. The notice shall indicate: 
(1)  The date and time the notice was affixed; 
(2)  A phone number for the owner to call to inform the agency which affixed the notice, that the bicycle is not abandoned; 
(3)  The date and time after which the bicycle may be removed under subsection (c). 
A bicycle shall be deemed as "not abandoned" if the owner of the bicycle, within 48 hours of the affixing of a notice of abandonment, notifies the agency affixing that notice, that the bicycle is not abandoned. 
(c)  Removal. If a bicycle is deemed to be abandoned under subsection (a)(2) or remains in violation of subsection (a)(1) more than 48 hours after the notice of abandonment has been affixed in compliance with subsection (b), that bicycle may be removed by any police officer, civilian service employee, or other police department designee, and immediately thereafter delivered to the police property storage room. However, before any designated person removes a bicycle they shall first determine whether their agency has designated the bicycle as "not abandoned." A bicycle designated "not abandoned" may not be removed. A bicycle removed under this section shall remain in the custody of the police department until it is retrieved by the owner or otherwise disposed of according to subsection (d). 
(d)  Disposal of abandoned bicycles. 
(1)  Upon removal, an abandoned bicycle shall be held a minimum of 30 days by the police department unless earlier claimed by the owner. The police department shall make a reasonable effort to identify and notify the owner of the bicycle. 
(2)  For purposes of disposal, a bicycle that has remained unclaimed for a period of 30 days becomes the property of the city. Bicycles that are not claimed within 30 days may be disposed of in any of the following ways: public auction, sale of the bicycle through the Internet, donation to non-profit entities, or disposal as waste. Bicycles shall only be donated to non-profit entities or disposed as waste where the police chief and finance director determine that the cost of storage and transportation exceeds the value of the bicycle, and city administrator grants approval to such disposal. In case of donation, preference shall be given to local non-profit entities. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-30, § 1, 9-25-2018)  
Secs. 68-288—68-305. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 68-306. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Connecting highway has the same meaning as in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(9). 
Neighborhood electric vehicle has the same meaning as in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(36r). 
State trunk highway has the same meaning as in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(60). 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.076(1))  
Sec. 68-307. - Penalties. 
(a)  Each violation of this division shall result in the issuance of a citation and the payment to the city of a penalty by the violator in an amount not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00. 
(b)  Each violation of a state or local traffic code not contained within this division shall subject the operator of the neighborhood electric vehicle to the citations and penalties set forth for such violations in the applicable state statutes and Code provisions. Such violations are cumulative to and not in lieu of those set forth in this division. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.076(4))  
Sec. 68-308. - Use permitted on city streets. 
(a)  The use of a neighborhood electric vehicle on a public street within the city is prohibited except as explicitly specified in this division. 
(b)  The use of a neighborhood electric vehicle that has been registered with the state department of transportation is hereby authorized on roadways under the jurisdiction of the city with a speed limit no greater than 35 miles per hour with the following provisions: 
(1)  A neighborhood electric vehicle may be used upon connecting highways within the city, but only upon those sections where the speed limit is no greater than 35 miles per hour. 
(2)  A neighborhood electric vehicle may cross state trunk highways within the city, but only at public intersections where the speed limit upon the state trunk highway at that particular intersection is no greater than 35 miles per hour. 
(3)  Subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section are subject to the approval of the state department of transportation as outlined in Wis. Stats. § 349.26(3). 
(4)  A neighborhood electric vehicle may be used upon county trunk highways in which jurisdiction is shared by the city and the county, but only upon those sections where the speed limit is no greater than 35 miles per hour. 
(5)  A neighborhood electric vehicle may cross a county trunk highway with posted speeds in excess of 35 miles per hour only at intersections with traffic control signals. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.076(2)(A), (B))  
Sec. 68-309. - City engineer authorized to designate additional restricted areas; location map. 
(a)  The city engineer may, at his/her discretion, restrict out certain collector and arterial roadways, which have a 35 miles per hour or lower speed limit, where the use of neighborhood electric vehicles would pose a public safety issue. Such restrictions shall be subject to the approval of the board of public works. 
(b)  A list of all such locations on which a neighborhood electric vehicle may be operated shall be compiled, kept and updated in written form by the city engineer or his/her designee. The list shall be kept on file for inspection during normal business hours in the police department, city clerk's department and public works department. 
(c)  The city engineer or his/her designee shall produce a map showing all such locations on which a neighborhood electric vehicle may be operated. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.076(2)(C), (D))  
Sec. 68-310. - Operation. 
The operation of a neighborhood electric vehicle as permitted in this division shall comply in all respects with this chapter and other applicable provisions of this Code, as applicable to the operation of motor vehicles. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.076(3))  
Secs. 68-311—68-338. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 68-339. - Penalties—Costs, assessments and surcharges to be included. 
The penalty for violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a penalty as provided in section 1-21 together with any costs of prosecution, penalty assessments, and surcharges authorized or imposed by the state statutes adopted by reference in this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.08)  
Sec. 68-340. - Same—For adopted state offenses. 
Except as provided in section 68-341 for nonmoving traffic offenses, penalties for violation of any provision of Wis. Stats. chs. 341 through 348 adopted by reference in this chapter shall conform to penalties for violation of the comparable state offense, including any variations or increases for second offenses. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.08(1))  
Sec. 68-341. - Same—For nonmoving and other violations. 
Penalties for nonmoving violations and all other violations of this chapter not specifically addressed in this article shall be as provided in section 1-21.  
Sec. 68-342. - Enforcement in accordance with state law. 
This chapter shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0114 and 345.20 through 345.53 and Wis. Stats. chs. 299 and 800. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.09)  
Sec. 68-343. - Stipulation of guilt or no contest. 
(a)  Stipulations of guilt or no contest may be made by persons arrested for violations of this chapter in accordance with Wis. Stats. §§ 345.27 or 66.0114, whenever the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 345.27 are inapplicable to such violations. 
(b)  The uniform traffic citation promulgated under Wis. Stats. § 345.11 shall be used for all moving traffic violations under this article. Stipulations may be accepted by the police department. 
(c)  Citations for all nonmoving traffic violations under this article shall permit a direct mail payment of the applicable penalty to the police department in lieu of a court appearance. The issuing officer shall specify on the citation the amount of the applicable penalty provided in this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.09(1))  
Sec. 68-344. - Deposits. 
Any person stipulating guilt or no contest must make the deposit required under Wis. Stats. § 345.26 or, if the deposit is not established under such statute, shall deposit a forfeiture penalty as provided in the schedule established by the chief of police and approved by the common council. Deposits may be brought or mailed to the office of the police department as directed by the arresting officer. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.09(2))  
Sec. 68-345. - Officer to furnish receipt; alleged violator to sign citation and complaint. 
Every officer accepting a forfeiture, made as a deposit under section 68-344, shall furnish a receipt therefor as provided in Wis. Stats. § 345.26(3)(b). Every officer accepting a stipulation under the provision of this article shall comply with the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 343.27, 345.26(1)(a) and 345.27(2) and shall require the alleged violator to sign a traffic citation and complaint promulgated under Wis. Stats. § 345.11. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.09(3))  
Sec. 68-346. - Forfeitures in treasury; officer to post bond, qualify. 
Any officer accepting deposits of forfeiture under this article shall deliver them to the city treasurer within 20 days after receipt. Any officer authorized to accept deposits under Wis. Stats. § 345.26 or this chapter shall qualify by taking the oath prescribed by Wis. Stats. § 19.01 and filing an official bond in the sum of $1,000.00, as described by Wis. Stats. § 19.01. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 8.09(4))  
Chapter 70 - OFFENSES GENERALLY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Crimes generally, Wis. Stats. § 938.01 et seq.; municipal authority to prohibit certain criminal conduct, Wis. Stats. § 66.0107; penalties under county and municipal ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.0109; local regulation of firearms, Wis. Stats. § 66.0409; local regulation, impoundment, seizure, and forfeiture of sound-producing devices, Wis. Stats. § 66.0411; authority of municipalities to prohibit criminal conduct, Wis. Stats. § 66.0107; gaming, Wis. Stats. § 562.001 et seq.; penalty for violation of ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.0109; bail generally, Wis. Stats. § 66.0417; outstanding unpaid forfeitures, Wis. Stats. § 66.0115; actions for violations of municipal ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.0114; fines and costs in municipal court, Wis. Stats. § 814.65; State Alcohol, Drug Abuse, Developmental Disabilities and Mental Health Act, Wis. Stats. § 51.001 et seq.; sale of cigarettes or tobacco products to minors, Wis. Stats. § 254.911 et seq.; Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Wis. Stats. § 961.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 70-1. - State offense statutes and regulations adopted. 
The following sections of the state statutes, together with any future amendments thereto, are adopted and incorporated in this Code by reference as if fully set forth in this chapter. Every act prohibited or required by said statutes is prohibited or required by this chapter; provided the penalty for violation of the statutory provisions incorporated by reference in this chapter shall be limited to a forfeiture as provided in section 70-309 plus applicable penalty assessment, penalty surcharge, jail assessments and court costs: 
Statute Section 	Description 
Wis. Stats. § 134.66(2)(a) 	Restrictions on sale or gift of cigarettes or tobacco products to children prohibited 
Wis. Stats. § 134.66(2)(cm)(1m) 	Cigarette vending machines prohibited in public places open to persons under 18 years 
Wis. Stats. § 134.66(2)(cm)(2) 	Cigarette vending machines prohibited near schools 
Wis. Stats. § 134.66 	Restrictions on sale or gift of cigarettes or tobacco products 
Wis. Stats. § 254.92 	Purchase/possession of cigarettes or tobacco products by person under 18 years prohibited 
Wis. Stats. § 256.35(10)(a) 	False 911 call 
Wis. Stats. § 938.344 	Disposition; certain intoxicating liquor, beer and drug violations 
Wis. Stats. § 940.19(1) 	Battery 
Wis. Stats. § 940.225(3m) 	Sexual assault 
Wis. Stats. § 940.41 	Definitions 
Wis. Stats. § 941.20(1) 	Endangering safety by use of dangerous weapon 
Wis. Stats. § 941.23 	Carrying concealed weapon 
Wis. Stats. § 941.235 	Carrying firearm in a public building 
Wis. Stats. § 941.237 	Carrying handgun where alcohol beverages may be sold and consumed 
Wis. Stats. § 941.24 	Possession of switchblade 
Wis. Stats. § 941.28 	Possession of short-barreled shotgun or rifle 
Wis. Stats. § 941.29 	Possession of firearm 
Wis. Stats. § 941.291 	Possession of body armor 
Wis. Stats. § 941.295 	Possession of electric weapon 
Wis. Stats. § 941.299 	Restrictions on use of laser pointers 
Wis. Stats. § 941.325 	Placing foreign objects in edibles 
Wis. Stats. § 941.35 	Emergency telephone call 
Wis. Stats. § 941.375 	Throwing or discharging bodily fluids at public safety workers 
Wis. Stats. § 943.11 	Entry into locked vehicle 
Wis. Stats. § 943.12 	Possession of burglarious tools 
Wis. Stats. § 943.13 	Trespass to land 
Wis. Stats. § 943.125 	Entry into locked coin box 
Wis. Stats. § 943.15 	Entry of construction site or into locked building, dwelling or room 
Wis. Stats. § 943.20(1) 	Theft (less than $500.00) 
Wis. Stats. § 943.23 	Operate vehicle without owner's consent 
Wis. Stats. § 943.34 	Receiving stolen property (less than $500.00) 
Wis. Stats. § 943.37 	Alteration of property identification marks 
Wis. Stats. § 944.20 	Lewd and lascivious behavior 
Wis. Stats. § 946.40 	Refusing to aid officer 
Wis. Stats. § 946.42 	Escape 
Wis. Stats. § 946.415 	Failure to comply with officer's attempt to take into custody 
Wis. Stats. § 947.012 	Unlawful use of telephone 
Wis. Stats. § 947.013 	Harassment 
Wis. Stats. § 948.40 	Contributing to delinquency of children 
Wis. Stats. § 948.45 	Contributing to truancy 
Wis. Stats. § 948.60 	Possession of a dangerous weapon by a person under 18 years of age 
Wis. Stats. § 961.571 	Drug paraphernalia; definitions 
Wis. Stats. § 961.572 	Drug paraphernalia; determination 
Wis. Stats. § 961.573 	Drug paraphernalia; possession of drug paraphernalia 
Wis. Stats. § 961.574 	Drug paraphernalia; manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia 
Wis. Stats. § 961.575 	Drug paraphernalia; delivery of drug paraphernalia to a minor 
Wis. Stats. § 961.576 	Drug paraphernalia; advertisement of drug paraphernalia 
 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.001; Ord. No. 2012-O-12, § 1, 8-28-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-02, § 1, 2-12-2013) 
State Law reference— Authority of municipalities to prohibit criminal conduct, Wis. Stats. § 66.0107; authority for municipal ordinances regarding drug paraphernalia, Wis. Stats. § 961.77.  
Sec. 70-2. - Intent defined. 
(a)  When the term "intent" is an element of an offense in this chapter, such intent is indicated by the term "intentionally," the phrase "with intent to," the phrase "with intent that," or some form of the verbs "know" or "believe." 
(b)  The term "know" requires that the actor believes that the specified fact exists. 
(c)  The term "intentionally" means that the actor either has a purpose to do the thing or cause the result specified or believes that his/her act, if successful, will cause the result. 
(d)  The term "with intent to" or "with intent" means that the actor either has a purpose to do the thing or cause the result specified or believes that his/her act, if successful, will cause that result. 
(e)  The term "intent" does not require proof of knowledge of the existence or constitutionality of the provision under which he/she is prosecuted or the scope of meaning of the terms used in that section. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.12(3)) 
State Law reference— Criminal intent, Wis. Stats. § 939.23.  
Secs. 70-3—70-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PEACE AND QUIET 
 
Sec. 70-21. - Disorderly conduct. 
No person shall: 
(1)  In a public or private place, engage in violent, abusive, indecent, profane, boisterous, unreasonably loud, or otherwise disorderly conduct under circumstances in which such conduct tends to cause or provoke a disturbance; or 
(2)  With intent to annoy another, make a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.01(1)) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Wis. Stats. § 947.01.  
Sec. 70-22. - Indecent conduct or language. 
No person shall use any indecent, vile, profane or obscene language or conduct himself/herself in an indecent, lewd, lascivious or obscene manner. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.01(2)) 
State Law reference— Lewd and lascivious behavior, Wis. Stats. § 944.20.  
Sec. 70-23. - Loitering. 
No person shall loiter. 
(1)  Loitering defined. The term "loitering" means that a person loiters if he/she stands idly, moves slowly about, lingers, or remains in an area for no obvious reason in a manner or under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such an alarm is warranted is the fact that the actor takes flight upon the appearance of a peace officer, refuses to identify himself/herself or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself/herself or any object. 
(2)  Opportunity to dispel alarm. Unless flight by the actor or other circumstances make it impracticable, a peace officer shall, prior to any arrest for any offense under this subsection, afford the actor an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted, by requesting him/her to identify himself/herself and explain his/her presence and conduct. 
(3)  Exception. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the peace officer did not comply with the provisions of subsection (2) of this section, or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the actor was true and, if believed by the peace officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.01(3)) 
State Law reference— Standing or loitering in roadway or highway prohibited, Wis. Stats. § 346.29; vagrancy, Wis. Stats. § 947.02; presence of minors restricted on premises licensed for sale of alcoholic beverages, Wis. Stats. § 125.07; vagrancy, Wis. Stats. § 947.02.  
Sec. 70-24. - Obstructing public buildings. 
No person shall obstruct in any manner the entrance or any stairway or hallway in any public place, business or building. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.01(4)) 
State Law reference— Unlawful assembly, Wis. Stats. § 947.06.  
Sec. 70-25. - Picketing or mass demonstrations. 
No person shall, either singly or in concert with others, engage in picketing or mass demonstration in such a manner as to obstruct or unreasonably interfere with free ingress to or egress from any public premises, or so as to obstruct or unreasonably interfere with the free use of the public streets, sidewalks, or other public ways. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.01(6)) 
State Law reference— Unlawful assembly, Wis. Stats. § 947.06.  
Sec. 70-26. - Intoxicants on the property of another. 
No person shall possess or consume any amount of an alcoholic beverage, whether in an open or closed container, on the property of another without the permission of the owner or a lawful tenant of the property. 
(Ord. No. 2013-O-11, § 1, 6-11-2013)  
Secs. 70-27—70-38. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Crimes against public health and safety generally, Wis. Stats. § 941.01 et seq.; crimes against public peace, order, and other interests, Wis. Stats. § 947.01 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 70-39. - Discharging firearms. 
No person, except a sheriff, constable, police officer, or other deputy, shall fire or discharge any pistol, firearm, rifle, spring or airgun within the city or have any pistol, firearm, rifle, spring or airgun in his/her possession or under his/her control unless it is unloaded and knocked down or enclosed within a carrying case or other suitable container, except as follows: 
(1)  Firearms may be discharged at skeet or trap shooting courses or at dog training or field trials, but in such cases permission must first be obtained in writing from the common council and the owner of the land. 
(2)  Firearms may be discharged by a person at his/her home or in his/her premises in the defense of his/her life or of his/her property. 
(3)  Firearms may be discharged for hunting purposes during lawful hunting seasons and within the provisions and rules of the state department of natural resources and with written permission of the landowner. 
(4)  Firearms may be discharged with cause by a private detective or private security person while going in accordance with the rules promulgated by the state department of regulation and licensing; provided, however, that any private detective or private security person, who has his/her principal place of business located in the city, must first obtain written authorization to discharge firearms from the city chief of police after providing documentation to the city chief of police pertaining to policies, procedures, qualifications and training. 
(5)  Firearms may be discharged with cause by armored car carriers licensed by the state department of regulation and licensing, while actually employed in the shipment, transportation or delivery of any money, bullion, bonds or any other thing of value within the city. Such individuals must be completely attired in the uniform of their employer; provided, however, that any armored car carrier, who has his/her principal place of business located in the city, must first obtain written authorization to discharge firearms from the city chief of police after providing documentation to the city chief of police pertaining to policies, procedures, qualifications and training. 
(6)  Firearms may be discharged with cause by a correctional officer while in conformance with the officer's duties. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.02(1)) 
State Law reference— Endangering safety by use of dangerous weapon, Wis. Stats. § 941.20; carrying concealed weapon, Wis. Stats. § 941.23; carrying handgun where alcohol beverages may be sold and consumed, Wis. Stats. § 941.237; local regulation of firearms, Wis. Stats. § 66.0409; use of firearms near parks, Wis. Stats. § 167.30; safe use and transportation of firearms and bows, Wis. Stats. § 167.31.  
Sec. 70-40. - Blocking fire hydrants. 
No person shall park any motor vehicle within ten feet of any fire hydrant or otherwise interfere with the accessibility of any fire hydrant by piling, dumping or placing any other obstructive material or object within ten feet of a fire hydrant without first obtaining written permission from the fire chief. Every day during which such interference continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.02(4)) 
State Law reference— Interfering with firefighting, Wis. Stats. § 941.12.  
Secs. 70-41—70-56. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FIRES AND BLASTING 
 
Sec. 70-57. - Fires and trash burning regulated. 
(a)  No person shall kindle any grass fire within the city without first securing a written permit from the fire chief. 
(b)  No person shall kindle or cause to be kindled any fire in or upon a street, alley, public lake, park, or any other public or private ground within the city within 100 feet of any building or within any fire lane unless the same shall be confined within a wire refuse burner, basket, or metal enclosure with a cover attached to prevent the escape of sparks and burning material, or unless in the care of some responsible person until extinguished. 
(c)  No person shall handle burning material in a negligent manner. Burning material is handled in a negligent manner if, under the circumstances, the person knows or should know that he/she creates a risk of harm to another or damage to another's property. 
(d)  Compliance with DNR regulations. Nothing in this division and no permit issued by the city shall be construed to allow any burning which is prohibited by valid regulations of the state department of natural resources. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.02(5)) 
State Law reference— Solid waste open burning standards, Wis. Stats. § 289.51.  
Sec. 70-58. - Prohibited. 
Except as provided in this division, no person within the city shall set any fire or blast on any land, burn in a dump or engage in open burning within any residential subdivision or commercial district or within 100 feet of the boundary of a residential subdivision or commercial district. As used in this section, the term "residential subdivision" means a subdivision, multifamily development or a planned development district located in the urban service area and created under chapter 15. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.12(1))  
Sec. 70-59. - Exception—Certain fires. 
The setting of fires shall be allowed in any of the following situations provided applicable state regulations are followed: 
(1)  Where a fire is set for the sole purpose of warming persons or cooking food. 
(2)  Where rubbish is burned in a barrel, trash can or other closed burner and a heavy wire screen or cover is used to prevent material or embers from blowing out. 
(3)  Where a written permit has been obtained from the city fire department. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.12(2))  
Sec. 70-60. - Same—Certain blasting. 
Blasting is allowed if all applicable state regulations are followed and if a written permit has been obtained from the city fire department. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.12(3))  
Sec. 70-61. - Careless burning. 
No person shall through negligence allow a fire for the open burning of brush, trash or other permitted combustibles to escape or handle burning material in a highly negligent manner. Burning material is handled in a highly negligent manner if, under the circumstances, the person should realize that manner of handling creates an unreasonable risk and high probability of death or great bodily harm to another or serious damage to another's property. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.12(4))  
Sec. 70-62. - Compliance with state regulations required. 
Nothing in this division shall be construed to allow any burning which is prohibited by regulations of the state department of natural resources. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.12(5))  
Sec. 70-63. - Open excavations. 
No person shall leave open, cause to be left open, or permit to be left open, any cistern, well or other dangerous excavation on any lot, part of a lot, or parcel of land in the city unless the same is securely guarded. Every day during which such excavation continues to be open constitutes a separate offense. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.02(6))  
Sec. 70-64. - Obstructing or interfering with traffic. 
No person shall place an obstacle in or upon a highway, intentionally damage a highway, remove or tamper with a sign or signal used for the guidance of vehicles or pedestrians, give a false traffic signal, or otherwise interfere with the orderly flow of traffic upon any highway, public way, thoroughfare or bridge, including any roadways commonly used for vehicular traffic, whether public or private, within the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.02(7)) 
State Law reference— Stopping prohibited in certain specified places, Wis. Stats. § 346.52.  
Sec. 70-65. - Moving buildings regulated. 
No person shall: 
(1)  Move any building along or upon the public streets and highways in the city without first having received a permit from the building inspector. 
(2)  Violate any of the conditions to be complied with or designated routes as set forth in such permit. 
(3)  Allow any such building to remain overnight upon any street or highway within the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.02(8))  
Sec. 70-66. - Throwing missiles. 
No person shall throw any stone, or other missile at or in the vicinity of any person, automobile, or other property within the city; provided that this subsection shall not apply if the person at whom the missile is directed or the owner of the property consents thereto. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.02(9)) 
State Law reference— Throwing missile, circular or pamphlet in or on any vehicle prohibited, Wis. Stats. § 346.94.  
Secs. 70-67—70-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LITTERING 
 
Sec. 70-91. - Prohibited. 
No person shall throw or deposit any glass, can, plastic or metal container, paper, refuse, waste, filth or other litter upon the streets, alleys, highways, public parks, or other public or private property within the city other than in proper receptacles intended therefor. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.05(2))  
Sec. 70-92. - Placing refuse and recyclables for pickup regulated. 
No person shall place refuse or recycling carts, cans, bags, or other containers along any street, alley, highway, or other roadway within the city and not in the front yard or side yard setback; provided that this section shall not apply to the placement of such receptacles within 24 hours of a regularly scheduled time for refuse or recyclables removal. Every day during which such containers are permitted to remain shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.05(3))  
Sec. 70-93. - Storing junk. 
No person shall store junk or discarded property, including automobiles, automobile parts, trucks, tractors, refrigerators, furnaces, washing machines, stoves, machinery or machinery parts, wood, bricks, cement blocks, or other unsightly debris, except in an enclosure which houses such property from public view or upon permit issued by the common council. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.05(4))  
Sec. 70-94. - Storing automobiles in public view. 
No person which owns, controls, or occupies any real estate within the city shall permit disassembled, inoperable, unlicensed or junked vehicles to be stored or allowed to remain open to view, upon public or private property within the city, for a period in excess of five days, unless it is in connection with an automobile sales or repair business operated within a properly zoned area. Each day during which the provisions of this section are violated shall constitute a separate offense. For purposes of this section, racing cars and equipment shall be deemed unlicensed vehicles. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.05(5))  
Sec. 70-95. - Property must be free from debris. 
All exterior property areas shall be properly maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, free from debris, rubbish, garbage, refuse, recyclables, physical hazards, rodent harborage and infestation, and animal feces. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.05(6))  
Sec. 70-96. - Enforcement. 
For the purpose of enforcing compliance with the provisions of this division, the zoning administrator, building inspector, director of public works or their designees may either issue citations to the property owner immediately or send notice to the property owner or tenant giving them a deadline to comply with the provisions of this division. If the property owner or tenant does not comply within the deadline specified, the city may coordinate the necessary cleanup and invoice the property owner or tenant for the cost of cleanup including administrative costs. If the invoices are not paid when due, the city may place the costs for the associated cleanup and administrative actions as a special charge on the property tax roll for the respective property, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 74.01(4). The amount of the charges shall be as specified in the city fee schedule. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.05(7))  
Secs. 70-97—70-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALITY 
 
Sec. 70-121. - Prostitution and solicitation of prostitution. 
(a)  No person shall, for anything of value, intentionally have or offer to have non-marital sexual intercourse or commit or offer to commit an act of sexual perversion with another person. 
(b)  No person shall intentionally give or offer to give anything of value to another in return for a person engaging in an act of nonmarital sexual intercourse or an act of sexual perversion. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.03(1), (2)) 
State Law reference— Prostitution, Wis. Stats. § 944.30.  
Sec. 70-122. - Possession of marijuana. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this subsection, the following definitions shall apply: 
Marijuana means all parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa L. , whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. The term "marijuana" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. 
Practitioner means a physician, dentist, veterinarian, podiatrist, scientific investigator or other person licensed, registered or otherwise permitted to distribute, dispense, conduct research with respect to or administer a controlled substance in the course of professional practice or research in the city and a pharmacy, hospital or other institution licensed, registered or otherwise permitted to distribute, dispense, conduct research with respect to or administer a controlled substance in the course of professional practice or research in the city. 
(b)  No person shall possess and/or use marijuana unless the marijuana was obtained directly from, or pursuant to, a valid prescription or order of a practitioner while acting in the course of his/her professional practice, or except as otherwise authorized by state statutes. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.03(3)) 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to prohibit possession of 25 grams or less of marijuana, Wis. Stats. § 66.0107.  
Secs. 70-123—70-142. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 70-143. - Graffiti or injury to property of another. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply. 
Graffiti means any writing, printing, marks, signs, symbols, figures, designs, inscriptions or other drawings which are scratched, scrawled, painted, drawn or otherwise placed on any surface of a building, wall, fence, sidewalk, curb or other structure on public or private property which have the effect of defacing the property. 
Intentionally means that the actor either has a purpose to do the thing or cause the result specified, or is aware that his/her conduct is practically certain to cause that result. In addition, the actor must have knowledge of those facts which are necessary to make his/her conduct unlawful and which are set forth after the word intentionally. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally cause damage to any physical property of another without the person's consent. 
(c)  If more than one item of property is damaged under a single intent and design, the damage to all of the property may be prosecuted as a single offense. 
(d)  In any case of unlawful damage involving more than one act of unlawful damage, but prosecuted as a single offense, it is sufficient to allege generally that unlawful damage to property was committed between certain dates. At the trial, evidence may be given of such unlawful damage that was committed on or between the dates alleged. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally place graffiti on any surface located on public or private property. 
(f)  This section does not prohibit any person from using water soluble chalk to mark words or figures, otherwise lawful, upon city pavement and sidewalks. 
(g)  Any person who shall violate this section shall pay the costs of repairing the property to its original state. 
(h)  See section 70-309 for penalties for any person violating any provision of this chapter where a penalty has not already been provided. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.04(1)) 
State Law reference— Graffiti, Wis. Stats. § 943.017.  
Sec. 70-144. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-O-12, § 2, adopted August 28, 2012, amended the Code by repealing former § 70-144. Former § 70-144 pertained to trespass on private property, and derived from the Compiled Ordinances of 2009, § 14.04(2).  
Sec. 70-145. - Backing or driving over curbs without blocking. 
No person shall back or drive any truck or other motorized machinery or equipment over 10,000 pounds gross weight over any curb in the city without blocking the curb. Blocking shall consist of wooden blocks a minimum of four inches high by four inches wide by two feet long, plus tire or tread width (four inches by four inches by two feet plus tire or tread width). Blocking shall be placed under each wheel or tread. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.04(5)) 
State Law reference— Damage to property, Wis. Stats. § 943.01.  
Sec. 70-146. - Driving motor vehicles on public lands. 
No person shall drive, operate or park any unauthorized motorized vehicle in or on any portion of public land including, but not limited to, parks, median strips parkways, school grounds or open space easements, unless designated as a park drive, roadway, parking area or temporary parking area within such public land. The term "motorized vehicle" means any self-propelled device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.04(6)) 
State Law reference— Damage to property, Wis. Stats. § 943.01.  
Sec. 70-147. - Fraud on hotel or restaurant keeper. 
No person shall: 
(1)  Having obtained any food, lodging or other service or accommodation at any hotel, motel, boardinghouse or lodginghouse, or restaurant, intentionally abscond without paying for it. 
(2)  While a guest at any hotel, motel, boardinghouse or lodginghouse, or restaurant, intentionally defraud the keeper thereof in any transaction arising out of such relationship as a guest. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.04(3)) 
State Law reference— Fraud on hotel or restaurant keeper, recreational attraction, taxicab operator or gas station, Wis. Stats. § 943.21.  
Sec. 70-148. - Fraud on taxicab or bus driver. 
No person who has obtained any transportation or other service from any taxicab or bus driver shall intentionally abscond without paying for such transportation or other service. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.02(10)) 
State Law reference— Fraud on hotel or restaurant keeper, recreational attraction, taxicab operator or gas station, Wis. Stats. § 943.21.  
Sec. 70-149. - Fraud on fuel distributor. 
No person having obtained fuel, oil, products, or service from any distributor of fuel shall intentionally leave the premises of such distributor without paying for it absent the consent of the distributor. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.04(7)) 
State Law reference— Fraud on hotel or restaurant keeper, recreational attraction, taxicab operator or gas station, Wis. Stats. § 943.21.  
Sec. 70-150. - Worthless checks. 
No person shall issue any check or other draft which will not be honored upon presentment because the drawer does not have an account with the drawee or because the drawer does not have sufficient funds in the account or sufficient credit with the drawee. This section shall not apply to a postdated check issued with the consent of the payee provided that the check is honored if presented on or after the date it bears. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.04(8)) 
State Law reference— Issuance of worthless check, Wis. Stats. § 943.24.  
Sec. 70-151. - Shoplifting. 
No person shall intentionally alter the indicia of price or value of merchandise or take or carry away, transfer, conceal or retain possession of merchandise held for resale by a merchant without the merchant's consent. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.04(4)) 
State Law reference— Retail theft, Wis. Stats. § 943.50.  
Sec. 70-152. - Firearms in public buildings. 
(a)  Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 943.13(1m)(c)4., no person shall enter or remain in any part of a building owned, occupied or controlled by the state or local governmental unit if the state or local governmental unit has notified the person not to enter or remain in the building while carrying a firearm or a specific type of firearm. 
(b)  The city administrator shall cause signs to be erected at all entrances to all buildings owned, occupied or under the control of the city providing notice that no person is to enter or remain in any such building while carrying a firearm or other weapons. Such signs shall be five inches by seven inches or larger. 
(c)  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to apply to prohibit a peace officer or armed forces or military personnel armed in the line of duty or any person duly authorized by the chief of police to possess a firearm in any public building. Notwithstanding Wis. Stats. § 939.22(22), for purposes of this paragraph, peace officer does not include a commission warden who is not a State certified commission warden. 
(d)  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to authorize the carrying of any firearm or dangerous weapon contrary to Wis. Stats. §§ 941.23 or 941.235. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-19, § 1, 10-25-2011)  
Secs. 70-153—70-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 70-171. - Obstructing justice; giving false information. 
No person shall knowingly give false information to any officer of any court with the intent to influence said officer in the performance of his/her functions. The term "officer of any court" includes the judge, clerk, reporter, bailiff and city attorney. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.08(1)) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Wis. Stats. § 946.65.  
Sec. 70-172. - False swearing. 
No person, while under oath or affirmation, shall make or subscribe a false statement which he/she does not believe is true. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.08(2)) 
State Law reference— Perjury, Wis. Stats. § 946.31; false swearing, Wis. Stats. § 946.32.  
Sec. 70-173. - Interference with witnesses. 
No person shall: 
(1)  With intent to induce another to refrain from giving evidence or testifying in any matter before any court, board, or agency, transfer to him/her or on his/her behalf, any property or pecuniary advantage; 
(2)  Accept any property or any pecuniary advantage, knowing that such property or pecuniary advantage was transferred to him/her or on his/her behalf, with the intent to induce him/her to refrain from giving evidence or testifying before any court, board or agency. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.08(3)) 
State Law reference— Solicitation, Wis. Stats. § 939.30; bribery of witnesses, Wis. Stats. § 946.61; communicating with jurors, Wis. Stats. § 946.64;  
Secs. 70-174—70-199. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - INTERFERENCE WITH LAW ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 70-200. - Resisting or obstructing officer. 
(a)  For purposes of this section: 
Obstructs includes, without limitation, knowingly giving false information to an officer with the intent to mislead him/her in the performance of his/her duty including the service of any civil process. 
Officer means a police officer, firefighter, animal control officer, building inspector, and includes any other public officer or public employee having the authority, by virtue of his/her office or employment, to issue citations for the violation of city ordinances. 
(b)  No person shall resist, obstruct or in any way interfere with a city officer while such officer is doing any act in his/her official capacity and with lawful authority. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.07(1)) 
State Law reference— Wis. Stats. § 946.41.  
Sec. 70-201. - False fire or police reports. 
No person shall intentionally falsely report, in any manner, directly or indirectly, to any police officer, city officer, or officer or member of the city fire department, that a crime or a violation of this Code has been or is being committed or that there is any fire in the city or in any territory protected by said fire department. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.07(2)) 
State Law reference— Bomb scares, Wis. Stats. § 947.015; false fire alarms, Wis. Stats. § 941.13.  
Sec. 70-202. - Impersonating police officers. 
No person shall impersonate a police officer with the intent to mislead others into believing that he/she is actually a police officer. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.07(3)) 
State Law reference— Impersonating peace officers, Wis. Stats. § 946.70.  
Sec. 70-203. - Falsely assuming to act as public officer or employee. 
No person shall: 
(1)  Assume to act in an official capacity or to perform an official function, knowing that he/she is not the public officer or public employee he/she assumes to be; or 
(2)  Exercise any function of a public office knowing that he/she is not qualified so to act or his/her right to act has ceased. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.07(4)) 
State Law reference— Falsely assuming to act as a public officer or employee or a utility employee, Wis. Stats. § 946.69.  
Secs. 70-204—70-229. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES RELATED TO MINORS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 70-230. - Unlawful sheltering. 
No person unless licensed under the state statutes or without having first obtained the permission of the parents or legal guardian of any minor or without first notifying the city police department of the presence of a minor on the premises owned or operated by or under the control of such person, shall: 
(1)  By any means conceal or shelter, or assist in concealing or sheltering any minor under the age of 18 years while the minor is under the legal custody of the minor's parent or legal guardian and while the minor is on report with any law enforcement agency as a missing person or runaway or a wanted person. 
(2)  Supply false information to or obstruct any police officer in the performance of his/her duty to locate or to take into custody any minor under the age of 18 years. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.01(9)) 
State Law reference— Interference with custody by parents or others, Wis. Stats. § 948.31.  
Secs. 70-231—70-253. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TRUANCY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal ordinances regarding truancy and school dropouts, Wis. Stats. § 118.163; emergency powers of local governments, Wis. Stats. § 166.23. 
 
Sec. 70-254. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the following definitions shall apply: 
Habitual truant means a pupil who is absent from school without an acceptable excuse under Wis. Stats. §§ 118.15 and 118.16(4) for part or all of five or more days on which school is held during a school semester. 
Pupil means a child who is at least six years of age and less than 18 years of age, who is required to attend school regularly under the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 118.15. 
Truant means a pupil who is absent from school without an acceptable excuse under Wis. Stats. §§ 118.15 and 118.16(4) for part or all of any day on which school is held during a school semester. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.95(1)) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, Wis. Stats. § 118.163.  
Sec. 70-255. - Prohibited. 
No pupil subject to the state school attendance laws shall be a truant as defined in section 70-254. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.95(2))  
Sec. 70-256. - Penalty. 
(a)  A pupil found by a court of competent jurisdiction to have violated section 70-255 shall be subject to one or more of the following dispositional orders pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 48.345 and 118.163: 
(1)  An order for the person to attend school. 
(2)  A forfeiture in the amount provided in section 70-309. 
(b)  The dispositional orders in subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section are in addition to and do not limit the court's authority under Wis. Stats. ch. 800. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.95(3))  
Sec. 70-257. - Habitual truancy—Prohibited. 
No pupil subject to the state school attendance laws shall be an habitual truant as defined in section 70-254. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.95(4))  
Sec. 70-258. - Same—Penalty. 
(a)  A pupil found by a court of competent jurisdiction to have violated the provisions of section 70-257 shall be subject to one or more of the following dispositional orders pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 48.345 and 118.163: 
(1)  Suspension of the person's operating privilege for not less than 30 days or more than one year. The court shall immediately take possession of any suspended license and forward it to the department of transportation together with a notice stating the reason for and the duration of the suspension. 
(2)  An order for the person to participate in counseling or a supervised work program or other community service work as described in Wis. Stats. § 938.34(5g). The costs of any such counseling, supervised work program or other community service work may be assessed against the person, the parents or guardian of the person, or both. Any county department of human services or social services, community agency, public agency or nonprofit charitable organization administering a supervised work program or other community service work to which a person is assigned pursuant to an order under this paragraph acting in good faith has immunity from any civil liability in excess of $25,000.00 for any act or omission by or impacting on that person. 
(3)  An order for the person to remain at home except during hours in which the person is attending religious worship or a school program, including travel time required to get to and from the school program or place of worship. The order may permit a person to leave his/her home if the person is accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(4)  An order for the person to attend an educational program as described in Wis. Stats. § 938.34(7d). 
(5)  An order for the department of workforce development to revoke, under Wis. Stats. § 103.72, a permit under Wis. Stats. § 103.70 authorizing the employment of the person. 
(6)  An order for the person to be placed in a teen court program as described in Wis. Stats. § 938.342(1g), (f). 
(7)  An order for the person to attend school. 
(8)  All or part of the forfeiture plus costs may be assessed against the person, the parents or guardian of the person, or both. 
(9)  Any other reasonable conditions consistent with this section, including a curfew, restrictions as to going to or remaining on specified premises and restrictions on associating with other children or adults. 
(10)  An order placing the person under formal or informal supervision, as described in Wis. Stats. § 938.34(2), for up to one year. 
(11)  An order for the person's parent, guardian or legal custodian to participate in counseling at the parent's, guardian's or legal custodian's own expense or to attend school with the person, or both. 
(b)  The dispositional orders contained in subsections (a)(1) through (11) of this section are in addition to and do not limit the court's authority under Wis. Stats. ch. 800. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.95(5))  
Secs. 70-259—70-279. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CURFEW 
 
Sec. 70-280. - For persons at least 12 years of age but under the age of 17 years. 
It shall be unlawful for any person at least age 12 years but under the age of 17 years to be upon the streets or alleys or other public places in the city during the following times: 
(1)  From 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday until 4:00 a.m. of the following day; 
(2)  From 12:00 midnight until 5:00 a.m. on Friday or Saturday, unless accompanied by his/her parent, legal guardian, or an adult with permission of a parent or legal guardian, except when: 
a.  There is an emergency involving serious bodily injury; 
b.  Involved in interstate travel; 
c.  Attending or traveling to or from church, school, a civic event, or work; or 
d.  Otherwise exercising First Amendment rights, protected by the United States Constitution, including free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for a parent or legal guardian, or an adult with the permission of a parent or legal guardian, to permit any person under his/her control to be in violation of this division; and 
(4)  A citation may only be issued, and an arrest may only be made, under this section if the issuing or arresting officer asks the minor's age, inquires into the minor's reasons for being upon the streets, alleys or other public place during curfew hours and the issuing or arresting officer reasonably believes this section has been violated and no exception applies. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.09(1); Ord. No. 2004-O-49, §§ 1, 2, 12-14-2004)  
Secs. 70-281—70-308. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PENALTIES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Citations for violations of certain ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.0113; bond or cash disposition under municipal ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.0111. 
 
Sec. 70-309. - Forfeitures schedule. 
Below is the base range for forfeitures, excluding court costs and other miscellaneous fees, for penalties for any person violating any provision of this Code where a penalty has not already been provided: 
Forfeiture 
Chapter 10—Finance, Taxation and Public Contracts 
10-281 	Short-term rental license violations 
Second offense within 1 year 
Third offense within 1 year 
Fourth and subsequent offenses within 1 year 	$0—100.00 
$0—200.00 
$0—300.00 
$0—400.00 
Chapter 22-Zoning 
Chapter 26—Sign Code 
Chapter 27—Streets and Public Ways 
27-82 	Keeping city streets clean—Garbage 	$0—150.00 
27-83 	Same—Mud 	$0—150.00 
27-84 	Same—Materials in rights-of-way 	$0—150.00 
27-85 	Same—Damage caused by deposit 	$0—150.00 
27-206 	Unlawful excavations in or obstructions of occupancy of public ways 	$0—100.00 
	Snow and ice to be removed from sidewalks 	$0—100.00 
Chapter 30—Environment 
Chapter 35—Buildings and Building Regulations 
Chapter 37—Housing Code 
37-46 	Violations of housing code 	$0—100.00 
Chapter 41—Solid Waste and Recycling 
41-22 	Mandatory recycling 	$0—50.00 
41-131 	Illegal dumping first offense within two years 	$0—100.00 
	Second offense within two years 	$0—200.00 
	Third and subsequent offenses within two years 	$0—300.00 
Chapter 44—Fire Prevention and Protection 
44-461 	Blocking fire hydrant 	$0—50.00 
44-407(b) 	Parked in fire lane 	$0—50.00 
44-695 	Sale and use of fireworks 	$0—200.00 
Chapter 48—Health and Sanitation 
48-45, 48-46 	Smoking prohibited in certain public areas 	$0—40.00 
Chapter 54-Parks, Recreation and Forestry 
54-22 	Closing hours of public swimming pools 	$0—40.00 
Chapter 56—Animal Control 
56-27 	Annual tax on dogs 	$0—50.00 
56-30 	Kennels 	$0—100.00 
56-49 	Impounding animals 	$0—100.00 
56-74(1) 	Run at large 
Second and subsequent offenses within a two-year period 	$0—50.00 
$0—500.00 
56-74(2) 	Attack pedestrians 
Second and subsequent offenses within a two-year period 	$0—200.00 
$0—500.00 
56-74(3) 	Attack other animals 
Second and subsequent offenses within a two-year period 	$0—200.00 
$0—500.00 
56-74(4)—(7) 	Other prohibited animal conduct 	$0—50.00 
56-75 	Owner's duty to remove refuse 	$0—50.00 
56-94 	Rabies vaccination of dogs and cats 	$0—100.00 
56-103 	Observation of suspected rabid animals 	$0—100.00 
Chapter 60—Alcohol Beverages 
60-4(a) 	Peddling 	$0—30.00 
60-4(b) 	Sales on streets 	$0—30.00 
60-27—60-29, 
60-328 	Failure to be licensed 	$0—100.00 
60-38 	Altering premises without permission 	$0—50.00 
	Transfer of license without permission 	$0—50.00 
60-70, 60-157, 
60-566 	False statement on application 	$0—50.00 
60-2 	Wholesalers restrictions 	$0—50.00 
60-602 	Failure to maintain Class A, B 	$0—50.00 
60-603(b)(2)—(6), 60-736 	Corporation and agency responsibility violation 	$0—30.00 
60-628 	On premises consumption - Class A 	$0—50.00 
60-631 	Gambling 	$0—30.00 
60-632 	Discrimination against patrons 	$0—100.00 
60-633 	Open after hours 	$0—50.00 
60-634 	Failure to frame and post license - license to be displayed 	$0—30.00 
60-635 	No licensed bartender 	$0—30.00 
60-636 	Inadequate parking provided 	$0—30.00 
60-637 	Leaving with open container 	$0—30.00 
60-638 	Intoxicated employee 	$0—50.00 
60-639 	Traffic to intoxicated person 	$0—50.00 
60-640 	Sell or serve off licensed premises 	$0—30.00 
	Sell or dispense after hours 	$0—50.00 
60-643 	Brand disclosure on tap 	$0—30.00 
60-644 	Unlawful sale device 	$0—50.00 
60-662 	After hours consumption - Class B 	$0—50.00 
60-663(a) 	No carryout after hours 	$0—30.00 
60-664 	Regulation of closed retail space 	$0—30.00 
60-666, 60-668 	Open after hours 	$0—50.00 
60-697 	Licensed premises sanitary—Water and sewerage 	$0—30.00 
60-698 	Same—Toilet facilities 	$0—30.00 
60-701 	Inadequate lighting 	$0—30.00 
60-703 	Licensed premises sanitary—Compliance 	$0—30.00 
60-735 	Search of licensed premises 	$0—100.00 
Chapter 62—Massage Parlors and Adult Entertainment 
Chapter 64—Telecommunications 
64-20 	Hazardous or interfering with cable 	$0—50.00 
Chapter 68—Traffic 
68-2 	Parking in handicap stall 	$150.00—300.00 
	PAT parked against traffic 	$0—30.00 
	WOC parked without owner's consent 	$0—30.00 
	DA parked within four feet of driveway or alley 	$0—30.00 
	FH parked within ten feet of fire hydrant 	$0—30.00 
	BZ parking in bus zone 	$0—30.00 
68-135 	Traffic and Pedestrian Safety first offense within one year 	$0—$25.00 
	Second offense within one year 	$0—100.00 
	Third offense within one year 	$0—200.00 
	Fourth and subsequent offenses within one year 	$0—300.00 
68-208 	Vehicle abandonment 	$0—50.00 
	Removal of vehicles 	$0—80.00 
68-209, 62-210 	Temporary regulations 	$0—30.00 
	Emergency regulations 	$0—30.00 
68-211 	Parking on street limited to 24 hours 	$0—30.00 
68-212 	Alternate side parking regulations 	$0—30.00 
68-213 	Limited no parking zones 	$0—30.00 
68-214 	Parking prohibited during certain periods 	$0—30.00 
68-216 	Restricted parking 	$0—30.00 
68-218 	Parking prohibited at all times 	$0—30.00 
Ch. 68 	Late fee added to parking tickets not paid within five days 	$0—10.00 
Chapter 70—Offenses Generally 
70-1 	Use/possession cigarettes or tobacco by children 	$0—30.00 
	Restrictions on sale or gift of cigarettes/tobacco to children 	$0—50.00 
	Cigarette vending machines prohibited in public places open to children under 18 years 	$0—200.00 
	Cigarette vending machines prohibited near schools 	$0—200.00 
	Gifts of cigarettes or tobacco to persons under 18 years prohibited 	$0—50.00 
	Battery 	$250.00—500.00 
	Sexual assault 	$0—10,000.00 
	Reckless use of weapons 	$0—1,000.00 
	Possession of pistol by minor 	$0—500.00 
	Carrying firearm in a public building 	$500.00—1,000.00 
	Carrying handgun where alcohol beverages may be sold 	$250.00—500.00 
	Possession of switchblade 	$0—500.00 
	Possession of short-barreled shotgun or rifle 	$250.00—500.00 
	Possession of a firearm 	$500.00—1,000.00 
	Possession of body armor 	$250.00—500.00 
	Possession of electric weapon 	$250.00—500.00 
	Restrictions on use of laser pointers 	$0—250.00 
	Placing foreign objects in edibles 	$250.00—500.00 
	Emergency telephone call 	$0—100.00 
	Throwing or discharging bodily fluids at public safety workers 	$500.00—1,000.00 
	Entry into locked vehicle 	$250.00—500.00 
	Possession of burglary tools 	$0—500.00 
	Theft from coin box 	$0—500.00 
	Entry to construction site 	$0—250.00 
	Theft (less than $500.00) 	$0—500.00 
	Operate vehicle without owner's consent 	$250.00—500.00 
	Receiving stolen property (less than $500.00) 	$0—500.00 
	Alteration of property identification marks 	$0—200.00 
	Lewd and lascivious behavior 	$500.00—1,000.00 
	Refusing to aid officer 	$0—1,000.00 
	Failure to comply with officer's attempt to take into custody 	$250.00—500.00 
	Unlawful use of telephone 	$0—500.00 
	Harassment 	$0—500.00 
	Contributing to delinquency of children 	$250.00—2,000.00 
	Escape 	$250.00—1,000.00 
	Possession of drug paraphernalia (adult) 	$0—200.00 
	Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia 	$0—200.00 
	Delivery of drug paraphernalia to a minor 	$0—200.00 
	Advertisement of drug paraphernalia 	$0—200.00 
	Privileges in streets 	$0—100.00 
	Materials left in highways 	$0—100.00 
	Highways, cultivation of; injury by farm equipment 	$0—100.00 
	Obstructing highway with embankment or ditch 	$0—100.00 
	Camping on highways 	$0—100.00 
	Trees on and adjacent to highway 	$0—100.00 
	Highway encroachments 	$0—100.00 
	Highway closed to travel; penalties 	$0—100.00 
	Digging in highways or using bridges for advertising 	$0—100.00 
70-21 	Disorderly conduct 	$0—200.00 
70-22 	Indecent conduct or language 	$0—200.00 
70-23 	Loitering 	$0—100.00 
70-24 	Obstructing public buildings 	$0—100.00 
70-25 	Picketing or mass demonstrations 	$0—50.00 
70-26 	Intoxicants on the property of another 	$0—$100.00 
70-39 	Restriction of use of firearms 	$0—500.00 
	Carrying concealed weapons 	$250.00—1,000.00 
70-40 	Blocking fire hydrants 	$0—50.00 
70-57 	Fires and trash burning regulated 	$0—50.00 
70-63 	Open excavations prohibited 	$0—50.00 
70-64 	Obstructing or interfering with traffic 	$0—50.00 
70-65 	Moving buildings regulated 	$0—50.00 
70-66 	Throwing missiles prohibited 	$0—150.00 
70-91 	Littering prohibited 	$0—100.00 
70-92 	Placing trash for pickup regulated 	$0—100.00 
70-93 	Storage of junk, etc. prohibited 	$0—50.00 
70-94 	Storage of automobiles in public view 	$0—50.00 
70-95 	Property must be free from debris 	$0—50.00 
70-121 	Prostitution prohibited 	$500.00—1,000.00 
	Solicitation of prostitution 	$500.00—1,000.00 
70-122 	Possession of marijuana for 21 years and over 	$1.00 
	Possession of marijuana under 21 years 	$200.00 
70-143 	Injury to property of another 	$0—200.00 
70-144 	Trespass on private property 	$0—200.00 
70-145 	Backing or driving over curbs 	$0—50.00 
70-146 	Driving of motor vehicles on public lands 	$0—50.00 
70-148 	Fraud on hotel or restaurant keeper 	$0—200.00 
70-148 	Fraud on taxicab 	$0—200.00 
70-149 	Fraud on fuel distributors 	$0—300.00 
70-150 	Worthless checks 	$0—200.00 
70-151 	Shoplifting 	$0—300.00 
70-152 	Firearms in public buildings 	$500.00 
70-171 	Obstructing justice 	$0—500.00 
70-172 	False swearing 	$0—500.00 
70-173 	Interference with witnesses 	$250.00—500.00 
70-200 	Resisting or obstructing officer 	$250.00—500.00 
70-201 	False fire or police reports 	$0—500.00 
70-202 	Impersonating police officers 	$0—500.00 
70-203 	Falsely assuming to act as public officer or employee 	$0—500.00 
70-230 	Unlawful sheltering of minors 	$0—500.00 
70-257 	Habitual truancy 	$500.00 plus cost 
70-280 	Curfew for minors under 17 years 	$0—40.00 
Ch. 70 	Noises disturbing the public prohibited 	$0—100.00 
	Distribution of commercial handbills and advertising matter prohibited 	$0-50.00 
	Permit required for outdoor use of loudspeakers, public address systems and similar sound amplifying devices 	$0—50.00 
Chapter 72—Landlord and Tenant 
72-220 	Eviction or retaliation for complaining of violation 	$150.00—900.00 
72-221 	Unlawful acquisition of rent abatement 	$150.00—900.00 
72-222 	Use of rent abatement article to harass landlord 	$150.00—900.00 
72-223 	Rent abatement violations 	$150.00—900.00 
Chapter 74—Nuisances 
74-24 	Accumulation of stagnant water prohibited in urban service area 	$0—50.00 
74-111 	Failure to cease noise disturbing activities 	$1,000.00—25,000.00 
	Noises disturbing the public prohibited 	$0—100.00 
 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.001; Ord. No. 2012-O-12, § 1, 8-28-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-02, § 1, 2-12-2013; Ord. No. 2020-O-04 , 1, 1-28-2020)  
Chapter 72 - LANDLORD AND TENANT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Landlord and tenant generally, Wis. Stats. § 704.01 et seq.; untenantability, Wis. Stats. § 704.07; municipal rent control prohibited, Wis. Stats. § 66.1015. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 72-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Affected applicant. In rent abatement categories where the percentage of rent abatement is expressed as a certain percentage or a certain dollar amount "per affected applicant," the abatement applies only to those dwelling units/lodging rooms affected by the violation and only if a tenant therein has applied for rent abatement. 
Affected dwelling unit or lodging room means a dwelling unit or lodging room in which a rent impairing violation exists or a dwelling unit or lodging room in a residential building where a common area violation exists. 
Applicant encompasses the total number of eligible tenants residing in a dwelling unit or lodging room where an eligible tenant has applied for rent abatement and not an individual eligible tenant within the unit or room. 
Authorized agent means a person empowered by landlords, tenants, or tenant unions to represent them. The agent need not be a member of the authorizing group. 
Common area violation means a condition constituting a rent impairing violation which exists in any part of a residential building or lot not contained within a dwelling unit or lodging room. 
Earnest money deposit means the total of any payments or deposits, however denominated or described, given by a prospective tenant to a landlord in return for the option of entering into a rental agreement in the future, or for having a rental application considered by the landlord. 
Eligible tenant means any current or former tenant of a landlord of residential premises where the landlord fails to comply with an order of the building department to correct a rent impairing violation by the original due date in the orders unless that date is found unreasonable by the rent abatement committee, provided that the tenant has lived in an affected dwelling unit for some portion of the time period from the date of the initial inspection by the building inspector to the close of the 15-day period during which a request for abatement hearing may be filed. 
Form provision means a written rule, regulation, or rental or contract provision that has not been specifically and separately negotiated and agreed to by the tenant in writing. Any provision appearing as part of a preprinted form is rebuttably presumed to be a form provision. 
Grievance means any dispute between tenant and landlord over rents or other conditions of tenancy. 
Guest means any person present on the leased premises, with the consent of the current tenant, who is not listed in the lease. 
Landlord means a person or authorized agent, who has the right to exclusive possession of the premises and who, for consideration under a rental agreement, agrees to relinquish that right to another temporarily, retaining a right of reversion in the premises upon the termination of such agreement. 
Only facility means the only appliance of its kind in the dwelling unit or lodging room. 
Owner means one or more persons, jointly or severally vested with all or part of the beneficial ownership and right to present use and enjoyment of the premises. The term "owner" includes a mortgagee in possession. 
Per fixture means per affected appliance regardless of how many separate rent impairing violations may affect that appliance. 
Provider agency means any governmental agency or private social services agency which by contract provides rental assistance on behalf of low-income tenants where such assistance payments are paid directly to the landlord. 
Rent impairing violation means a condition in a dwelling unit, lodging room or other area of a residential building or lot which constitutes or, if not promptly corrected, will constitute a fire hazard or a threat to the health or safety of occupants thereof. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, those which involve deficiencies in security, heating, electricity and/or plumbing. 
Rental agreement means a written or oral agreement embodying and fixing the terms and conditions for the transfer of possession and the use and occupancy of premises whether or not for a definite period of time. 
Residential property means any premises which is used for any residential purpose under the terms of a rental agreement. 
Security deposit means the total of all payments given by a tenant to the landlord as rent in excess of one month's prepaid rent unless the tenant voluntarily prepays the rent. 
Successor tenant means any individual who becomes a tenant in a dwelling unit or lodging room where a prior tenant was authorized or is in the process of being authorized to abate rent pursuant to article III of this chapter and where, at the time the tenancy of the successor tenant commences, there exists an uncorrected rent impairing violation which was determined or is in the process of being determined by a hearing examiner to be abatable. Anyone who succeeds a successor tenant is also a successor tenant, provided that at the time his/her tenancy commences there exists an uncorrected rent impairing violation for which abatement was authorized. 
Tenant means a person, excluding any authorized agent of landlord, entitled to exclusive possession and occupancy of either a mobile home or a dwelling unit and the right to the use of the appropriate appurtenances as provided in a rental agreement, and any other person 18 years of age or over who shares such a unit with the knowledge and consent of the landlord. The term "tenant" applies to persons holding over after termination of tenancy until removed by sheriff's execution of a judicial writ of restitution issued under Wis. Stats. § 799.44. The term "tenant" also applies to person entitled to the return of a security deposit or an accounting for the security deposit. 
Voluntary prepaid rent means rent paid at the tenant's option in advance of the date required by the rental agreement. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.02) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, Wis. Stats. § 704.01.  
Sec. 72-2. - Statement of purpose. 
The city has a significant tenant population and the promotion of equitable landlord-tenant relations is in the interest of citizens of the city. It shall be the policy of the city to encourage equitable landlord-tenant relations and resolution of differences between landlords and tenants. To accomplish these goals, this landlord and tenant code is adopted to establish rights and obligations of landlords and tenants. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.01)  
Sec. 72-3. - Retaliation prohibited: penalty. 
No person shall willfully and maliciously use or attempt to use this Code to harass a landlord or tenant. Harass shall include, but not be limited to, eviction or threats of eviction, inconsistent rent payment increases, failure to perform promised repairs or other harassment. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.14)  
Sec. 72-4. - Tenants rights not waivable. 
Tenant rights established under this chapter shall not be waivable by contract or otherwise.  
Sec. 72-5. - Penalties. 
Penalties for violation of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided herein, shall be as provided in section 1-21.  
Secs. 72-6—72-28. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 72-29. - Tenants rights to privacy and exclusive possession. 
No person within the city shall commit or permit any of the following acts: 
(1)  Removing or altering, without the consent of the tenants therein and the landlord, except as is necessary to preserve or protect the premises in the event of damage or destruction in the tenant's absence locks furnished with the premises or locks affixed to the premises at any time during the tenancy. 
(2)  Removing doors or windows unless for a temporary repair without the consent of the tenant therein and the landlord, except as is reasonably necessary to preserve or protect the premises. 
(3)  Confiscating personal property belonging to tenants or the landlord, in lieu of rent or any other alleged claim. 
(4)  Entering on a tenant's leased property without at least 24 hours' notice unless the tenant approves a shorter period of notice, except when the landlord reasonably believes that entry is necessary to preserve or protect the premises from damage or destruction which is not intentionally caused by the landlord. 
(5)  Unreasonably denying a landlord entry to a dwelling unit if notice has been properly given in accordance with subsection (4) of this section. 
(6)  No landlord may enter a dwelling unit during tenancy without first announcing his/her presence to persons who may be present in the dwelling unit, and identifying himself or herself upon request. 
(7)  A landlord may regulate guests, but may not prohibit a tenant from having all guests. Guest regulations, if any, shall be included in the rental agreement. Guest regulations shall not permit the violation of zoning regulations, including capacity standards, provided in chapter 22. Nothing in these ordinances shall prohibit a landlord from commencing an eviction action against a tenant for permitting person to reside in the tenant's rental unit in violation of this Code or state law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.05)  
Sec. 72-30. - Prohibited rental agreement provisions. 
No rental agreement may: 
(1)  Authorize the eviction or expulsion of a tenant from the premises, other than by judicial eviction procedures as provided under Wis. Stats. ch. 799. 
(2)  Provide for the acceleration of rent payments in the event of tenant default or breach of obligations under the rental agreement or otherwise purport or waive the landlord's obligation to mitigate damages as provided under Wis. Stats. § 704.29. 
(3)  Require payment, by the tenant, of attorney's fees or costs incurred by the landlord in any legal action or dispute arising under the rental agreement. This does not prevent the recovery of costs or attorney's fees pursuant to a court order under Wis. Stats. ch. 799 or 814. 
(4)  Authorize the landlord or any agent of the landlord to confess judgment against the tenant in any action arising under the rental agreement. 
(5)  Relieve, or purport to relieve, the landlord from liability for property damage or personal injury caused by negligent acts or omissions of the landlord. This does not affect ordinary maintenance obligations assumed by the tenant under a rental agreement, in accordance with this article and Wis. Stats. § 704.07. 
(6)  Impose, or purport to impose liability on a tenant for: 
a.  Personal injury arising from causes clearly beyond the tenant's control. 
b.  Property damage caused by natural disasters, or by persons other than the tenant or the tenant's guests or invitees. This does not affect ordinary maintenance obligations assumed by a tenant under a rental agreement, in accordance with this article and Wis. Stats. § 704.07. 
(7)  Provide, by means of a form provision, for the waiver of any statutory or other legal obligation on the part of the landlord to deliver the premises in a fit or habitable condition, or maintain the premises during tenancy except in the event a written agreement is made in which the tenant is contracted to do planned repairs or rehabilitations which are to be completed by a given date. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.10)  
Secs. 72-31—72-48. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - EARNEST MONEY DEPOSITS 
 
Sec. 72-49. - Refund or credit. 
If a rental application is rejected by the landlord, the entire amount of any earnest money deposit shall be immediately refunded to the prospective tenant. If a rental agreement is entered into, the entire amount of any earnest money deposit shall be applied toward the payment of rent or a security deposit, or returned to the tenant. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.09(1))  
Sec. 72-50. - Limitations on withholding. 
(a)  No portion of an earnest money deposit may be permanently withheld by a landlord in excess of actual costs and damages incurred because of the failure of a prospective tenant to enter into a rental agreement. Deposits may not be permanently withheld as compensation for lost rents unless the landlord has made reasonable efforts to mitigate the rental loss in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 704.29. 
(b)  Upon request by any person giving an earnest money deposit, the landlord shall provide that person with a written statement accounting for all amounts permanently withheld from the deposit. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.09(2))  
Secs. 72-51—72-73. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SECURITY DEPOSITS 
 
Sec. 72-74. - Purposes. 
The landlord may require as a condition of a rental agreement a security deposit for the purposes provided in this division and for no other purpose. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.06(1))  
Sec. 72-75. - Limited exemption. 
The amount of the security deposit shall not exceed one month's rent. Landlords who charge an amount less than or equal to 50 percent of one month's rent as a security deposit shall be exempt from the provisions of this division that require the payment of a rent credit. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.06(2))  
Sec. 72-76. - Rent credit. 
The landlord shall provide a rent credit equivalent to the yearly annual interest rate as published by the public service commission for interest rates on consumer deposits. No rent credit shall be payable, however, for any month or months that rent was paid after the date agreed upon in the rental agreement. The landlord has the burden of proving that the rent was not timely paid for any month for which he/she asserts that no rent credit should be given. Rent credit shall be paid at least annually or within calendar 21 days after termination of the tenancy, whichever occurs sooner. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.06(3))  
Sec. 72-77. - Receipt. 
Immediately upon accepting any earnest money or security deposit, the landlord shall provide the tenant or prospective tenant with a written receipt for the deposit, stating the nature of the deposit and its amount. A receipt is not required where payment is made by check, money order or bank draft bearing a notation describing the purpose for which it was given, unless requested by the tenant. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.06(4))  
Sec. 72-78. - Tenant responsibility. 
The tenant shall place the dwelling unit in as overall clean condition as when the tenancy commenced, excepting ordinary wear and tear. Except in cases which there is an agreement to the contrary, charges against the security deposit can only be made if full disclosure was made by the landlord prior to commencement of the lease. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.06(5))  
Sec. 72-79. - Repairs or cleaning during tenancy. 
If a landlord makes repairs or does cleaning after the beginning of a tenancy, or contracts with tenants or others to do such work, the tenant shall return the premises to the landlord in as good and clean a condition as it was in after such work was done, excepting ordinary wear and tear. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.06(6))  
Sec. 72-80. - Written check-in and check-out procedure. 
(a)  The landlord and tenant shall use a written check-in and check-out procedure. Upon acceptance of the deposit, the landlord shall inform the tenant that the tenant may inspect the dwelling unit and notify the landlord of any damages or defects which existed before the beginning of the tenancy. The tenancy shall be deemed to start on the first day of the least term or any other date agreed to in writing by both parties. 
(b)  The landlord shall be responsible for the distribution of the blank check-in form and shall retain documented evidence of this. The tenant shall be responsible for the return of the check-in form within seven calendar days after the receipt of the form. 
(c)  The landlord shall furnish the tenant with a written itemized description of any physical damages or defects for which deductions from the previous tenant's security deposit were made. The description shall be furnished to the new tenant before a security deposit is accepted, or at the same time the previous tenant is notified of security deposit deductions. If damages or defects have been repaired by the landlord, this may be noted in connection with the damage description. Disclosure of the previous tenant's identity, or the amounts withheld from the previous tenant's security deposit is not required. 
(d)  All check-out forms shall be comparable to the check-in forms. All check-out forms shall provide an obvious place for the tenant's forwarding address. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.06(7))  
Sec. 72-81. - Effect of failure to provide or complete form. 
Failure by the landlord to offer either the check-in or check-out forms shall forfeit the landlord's right to withhold any amount from a security deposit for alleged cleaning costs or damages. Failure by the tenant to return the completed check-in form within seven calendar days after beginning of tenancy shall forfeit the tenant's right to claim any preexisting damages. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.06(8))  
Sec. 72-82. - Return of security deposit. 
Every landlord who accepts a security deposit shall, within 21 calendar days of surrender of the premises to the landlord, return, in person or by mail, to the tenant at the tenant's last known address if a forwarding address is not provided to the landlord, either the full security deposit or a written, itemized statement showing the specific reason for the withholding of the deposit or any portion of the deposit, applicable receipts and estimates including the necessary hours and the wage rate for the work done or to be done. The landlord shall not be held responsible for the inability of the post office to complete delivery of a first class letter. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.06(9))  
Sec. 72-83. - Forfeiture of deposit. 
If the landlord fails to provide a written statement within the prescribed period in accordance with section 72-82 or fails to comply with the rent credit provisions of section 72-76, the landlord forfeits all rights to any portion of the deposit. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.06(10))  
Sec. 72-84. - Recovery of damages by tenant. 
If the landlord fails to provide the written statement required under section 72-82 or fails to comply with the rent credit provisions of section 72-76, the tenant may recover damages in an amount up to twice the amount wrongly withheld plus reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.06(11))  
Sec. 72-85. - Recovery of damages by landlord. 
If the deposit held by the landlord does not cover all the damages done, and/or other amounts owed, by a tenant, and the tenant does not pay to the landlord the amount not covered within 21 calendar days of the landlord's notice, the landlord may recover damages up to twice the money due plus reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.06(12))  
Sec. 72-86. - Landlord at termination responsible. 
The holder of the landlord's interest in the premises at the time of the termination of the tenancy is bound by this section. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.06(13))  
Sec. 72-87. - No effect on recovery under other laws. 
This section does not preclude the landlord or tenant from recovering other damages to which the landlord or tenant is entitled by other laws. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.06(14))  
Sec. 72-88. - Reasons for withholding security deposit restricted. 
(a)  Except for reasons clearly agreed in writing at the time the rental agreement is entered into, other than in a form provision, security deposits may be withheld only for tenant damage, waste or neglect of the premises, or the nonpayment of: 
(1)  Rent for which the tenant is legally responsible, subject to Wis. Stats. § 704.29. 
(2)  Actual amounts owed by the tenant for utility service to the extent that the landlord becomes liable for the tenant's nonpayment. 
(3)  Mobile home parking permit fees assessed against the tenant by the city under Wis. Stats. § 66.0435 to the extent that the landlord becomes liable for the tenant's nonpayment. 
(b)  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as authorizing any withholding for normal wear and tear or other damages or losses for which the tenant is not otherwise responsible under applicable law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.06(15))  
Sec. 72-89. - False claims against security deposit prohibited. 
No person may intentionally misrepresent or falsify any claim against a security deposit, including the cost of repairs, or withhold or claim the right to any portion of a security deposit pursuant to an intentionally falsified claim. Any person who intentionally misrepresents or falsifies any claim against a security deposit, including the cost of repairs, or withhold or claim the right to any portion of a security deposit, may be subject to paying the money due, together with damages in the amount of up to twice the amount owed and reasonable attorney fees. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.06(16))  
Secs. 72-90—72-106. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - INFORMATION DISCLOSURES 
 
Sec. 72-107. - Disclosure of manager and owner. 
(a)  The landlord or any person authorized to enter into a rental agreement on the landlord's behalf shall disclose to the tenant in writing, at or before the execution of a rental agreement whether oral or written, the name and address of: 
(1)  The person authorized to collect or receive rent and manage and maintain the premises, and who can readily be contacted by the tenant; and 
(2)  An owner of the premises or a person authorized to act for and on behalf of the owner for the purpose of service of process and for the purpose of receiving and receipting for notices and demands. The address disclosed shall be an address within the state at which service of process can be made in person. 
(b)  This section does not apply to an owner-occupied structure containing no more than four dwelling units. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.07(1))  
Sec. 72-108. - Code violations and conditions affecting habitability. 
Before entering into a rental agreement or accepting any earnest money or security deposit from the prospective tenant, the landlord or any person authorized to enter into a rental agreement with a prospective tenant shall disclose the following information to the prospective tenant: 
(1)  Rental agreements and rules and regulations established by the landlord, if in writing, shall be furnished to prospective tenants for their inspection before a rental agreement is entered into, and before any earnest money or security deposit is accepted from the prospective tenant. Copies shall be given to the tenant at the time of agreement. 
(2)  The following conditions affecting habitability, the existence of which the landlord knows or reasonable inspection, whether or not notice has been received from code enforcement authorities: 
a.  The dwelling unit lacks hot and cold running water, plumbing or sewage disposal facilities in good operating condition. 
b.  Heating facilities serving the dwelling unit are not in safe operating condition, and are not available to maintain a temperature in the dwelling unit of at least 67 degrees Fahrenheit (19 degrees Celsius) for a 24-hour period during all seasons of the year in which the dwelling unit may be occupied. In circumstances where the tenant is responsible for heating of a dwelling unit, the tenant shall not permit the temperature in the dwelling unit to drop below 55 degrees during any 24-hour period. 
c.  The dwelling unit is not served by electricity, or the electrical wiring, outlets, fixtures or other components of the electrical system are not in safe operating condition. 
d.  Any structural or other conditions in the dwelling unit or premises which constitute a substantial hazard to the health or safety of the tenant, or create an unreasonable risk of personal injury as a result of any reasonably foreseeable use of the premises other than negligent use or abuse of the premises by the tenant. 
(3)  The fact, if true, that charges for water, heat or electricity are not included in the rent and, if individual dwelling units and common areas are not separately metered, and if the charges are not included in the rent, the landlord shall disclose the basis on which charges for utility services will be allocated among individual dwelling units. 
(4)  A copy of any notice of outstanding violation of chapter 37, article III (property maintenance), chapter 22 (zoning), or chapter 35 (buildings and building regulations)as from time to time amended, of which the said landlord or person has actual notice and which affects the subject rental building regardless of the location of the violations or defects therein. Any tenant required to vacate leased premises because of a violation of any of the sections of this Code herein specified is relieved of any further obligation under the lease, if he/she has not received written notification. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.07(2))  
Sec. 72-109. - Notice of change in ownership. 
The information required to be furnished by this section shall be kept current by notification and disclosure of change in ownership within ten calendar days of any such change. This section extends to and is enforceable against any successor landlord, owner or manager. The term "owner," as used in this section, means one or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is vested: 
(1)  All or part of the legal title to property fee title holders; or 
(2)  All or part of the beneficial ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of the premises (land contract vendee or mortgagee in possession); and 
(3)  Who may, for consideration under a rental agreement, agree to relinquish rights to exclusive possession to another lessee temporarily, retaining a right of reversion in the premises upon termination of such lease agreement. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.07(3))  
Sec. 72-110. - Agent to receive process, perform obligations. 
Any person authorized to enter into a rental agreement on the landlord's behalf and who fails to comply with sections 72-108 and 72-109, becomes an agent of each person who is a landlord for the purpose of: 
(1)  Service of process and receiving and receipting for notices and demands; and 
(2)  Performing the obligations of the landlord under this section and under the rental agreement and expending or making available for such purpose all rent collected from the premises. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.07(5))  
Sec. 72-111. - Disclosure of automatic renewal clause. 
A provision in a lease of residential property that the lease shall be automatically renewed or extended for a specified period unless the tenant or either party gives notice to the contrary prior to the end of the lease is not enforceable against the tenant unless the lessor, at least 15 calendar days but not more than 30 days prior to the time specified for the giving of such notice to him/her, gives to the tenant written notice in the same manner as specified in Wis. Stats. § 704.21 calling the attention of the tenant to the existence of the provision in the lease for automatic renewal or extension. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.07(7))  
Secs. 72-112—72-135. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - PROMISES TO REPAIR 
 
Sec. 72-136. - Date of completion. 
Every promise or representation made by a landlord to a tenant or prospective tenant to the effect that the dwelling unit or any other portion of the premises, including furnishings or facilities, will be cleaned, repaired or otherwise improved by the landlord shall specify the date or time period on or within which the cleaning, repairs or improvements are to be completed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.08(1))  
Sec. 72-137. - Initial promises to be in writing. 
All promises made before the initial rental agreement shall be in writing with a copy furnished to the tenant. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.08(2))  
Sec. 72-138. - Performance; unavoidable delays. 
No landlord shall fail to complete the promised cleaning, repairs or improvements on the date or within the time period represented under section 72-136, unless the delay is for reason of labor stoppage, unavailability of supplies or materials, unavoidable casualties, or other causes beyond the landlord's control. The landlord shall give timely notice to the tenant of reasons beyond the landlord's control for any delay in performance, and stating when the cleaning, repairs or improvements will be completed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.08(3))  
Sec. 72-139. - Private right to recovery. 
Nothing in the provision of this article shall be construed so as to deprive any tenant or prospective tenant from maintaining and prosecuting a private action against a landlord for damages caused by said landlord's failure to comply with any provision of this section. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.08(4))  
Secs. 72-140—72-161. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - REPAIRS AND UNTENANTABILITY 
 
Sec. 72-162. - Applicability. 
This section applies to any tenancy if there is no contrary provision in writing signed by both parties. Nothing in this section is intended to affect rights and duties arising under other provisions of the state statutes. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.12(1))  
Sec. 72-163. - Duty of landlord. 
(a)  Unless the repair was made necessary by the negligence or improper use of the premises by the tenant or the tenant's guests or invitees, the landlord is under a duty to: 
(1)  Keep in reasonable state of repair portions of the premises over which he/she maintains control; 
(2)  Keep in a reasonable state of repair equipment under his/her control necessary to supply services which he/she has expressly or impliedly agreed to furnish the tenant, such as heat, water, elevator or air conditioning; 
(3)  Make necessary structural repairs; 
(4)  Except as provided in section 72-164(b) repair or replace plumbing, electrical wiring, machinery or equipment furnished with the premises and no longer in reasonable working condition. 
(b)  If the premises are part of a building, other parts of which are occupied by one or more other tenants, negligence or improper use by one tenant does not relieve the landlord from his/her duty as to the other tenants to make repairs as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  If the premises are damaged by fire, water or other casualty, not the result of the negligence or intentional act of the landlord, this subsection is inapplicable and either section 72-164 or 72-165, governs. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.12(2))  
Sec. 72-164. - Duty of tenant. 
(a)  If the premises are damaged by the negligence or improper use of the premises by the tenant, the tenant must repair the damages and restore the appearance of the premises by redecorating. However, the landlord may elect to undertake the repair or redecoration, and in such case the tenant must reimburse the landlord for the reasonable cost thereof or challenge the costs in writing; the cost to the landlord is presumed reasonable unless proved otherwise by the tenant. 
(b)  The tenant is also under a duty to keep plumbing, electrical wiring, machinery and equipment furnished with the premises in reasonable working order if repair can be made at cost which is minor in relation to the rent. 
(c)  The tenant is under a duty to provide written notice of maintenance problems to the landlord. 
(d)  The tenant shall comply with all obligations upon tenant by applicable minimum standards of building and housing codes. 
(e)  The tenant shall upon termination of the tenancy, place the dwelling unit in as clean condition, excepting normal wear and tear, as when the tenancy commenced. 
(f)  The tenant and/or landlord shall recycle or otherwise dispose of all ashes, rubbish, garbage and other waste from his/her dwelling unit in a safe and clean manner that complies with all local ordinances. 
(g)  The tenant shall use in a reasonable manner all electrical, plumbing, sanitary, heating, ventilating, air conditioning and other facilities and appliances, including elevators, in the premises. Reasonable manner includes complying with all applicable codes, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(h)  The tenant shall not deliberately or negligently destroy, deface, damage, impair or remove any part of the premises or knowingly permit any guest to do so. 
(i)  The tenant shall conduct himself/herself and require other persons on the premises with his/her consent to conduct themselves in a manner that will not disturb his/her neighbor's peaceful enjoyment of the premises. 
(j)  If a tenant by his/her actions causes a code violation resulting in the issuance of a citation for building or zoning or fire code violations, the tenant shall be responsible for the cost of the citation and correcting the violation. 
(k)  The landlord shall conduct himself/herself and require persons on the premises with the consent of the landlord to conduct themselves in a manner that will not disturb the tenants' peaceful enjoyment thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.12(3))  
Sec. 72-165. - Untenantability because of damage of fire, water or other casualty, or hazard to health. 
(a)  If the premises becomes untenantable because of damage by fire, water or other casualty or because of any condition hazardous to health, the tenant may remove from the premises unless the landlord proceeds promptly to repair or rebuild or eliminate the health hazard; or the tenant may remove if the inconvenience to the tenant by reason of the nature and period of repair, rebuilding or elimination would impose undue hardship on him/her. 
(b)  If the tenant justifiably moves out under this subsection, the tenant is not liable for rent after the premises become untenantable or the date the tenant removes from the premises, whichever is later, and the landlord must repay any rent paid in advance apportioned to the period after the premises become untenantable or the date the tenant removes from the premises, whichever is later. 
(c)  This subsection is inapplicable if the damage or condition is caused by negligence or improper use by the tenant or the tenant's guests or invitees. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.12(4))  
Secs. 72-166—72-183. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - PROHIBITED PRACTICES 
 
Sec. 72-184. - Advertising or rental of condemned premises. 
No landlord may rent or advertise for rent any premises which have been placarded and condemned for human habitation, or on which a notice of intent to placard or condemn, or an order to raze, or to rehabilitate or raze, or any similar order has been received under state or local laws or ordinances, until and unless all repairs required to bring the property into compliance with the laws or ordinances have been completed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.11(1))  
Sec. 72-185. - Automatic lease renewal without notice. 
No landlord shall enforce, or attempt to enforce, an automatic renewal or extension provision in any lease unless, as provided under Wis. Stats. § 704.15, the tenant was given separate written notice in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 704.21 of the pending automatic renewal or extension at least 15 days, but not more than 30 days prior to the time specified for giving of notice to the landlord. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.11(2))  
Sec. 72-186. - Confiscation of personal property. 
No landlord shall seize or hold a tenant's personal property, or otherwise prevent the tenant from having access to or removing the tenant's personal property, except as authorized under Wis. Stats. §§ 704.05(5) and 779.43, or a lien agreement entered into in writing other than in a form provision. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.11(3))  
Sec. 72-187. - Retaliatory eviction. 
No landlord shall terminate a tenancy or give notice preventing the automatic renewal of a lease, or constructively evict a tenant by means of the termination or substantial reduction of heat, water or electricity to the dwelling unit, in retaliation against a tenant because the tenant has: 
(1)  Reported a violation of this chapter or a building or housing code to any governmental authority, or filed suit alleging such violation; 
(2)  Joined or attempted to organize a tenant's union or association; or 
(3)  Asserted, or attempted to assert any right specifically accorded to tenants under state or local law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.11(4))  
Sec. 72-188. - Failure to deliver possession. 
No landlord shall fail to deliver possession of the dwelling unit to the tenant at the time agreed upon in the rental agreement, except where the landlord is unable to deliver possession because of circumstances beyond the landlord's control, nor shall a tenant fail to deliver possession of the dwelling unit to the landlord at the time agreed upon in the rental agreement. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.11(5))  
Sec. 72-189. - Rent absconding. 
No tenant of residential property which the tenant is entitled to occupy shall intentionally abscond without paying all current and past rent due unless the tenant has provided the landlord with a security deposit equal to or exceeding the amount owed for rent and damage to property or pays all current and past rent due within five days after vacating the rental premises or within said five days provides the landlord in writing a complete and accurate forwarding address. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.11(6))  
Secs. 72-190—72-216. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RENT ABATEMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 72-217. - Statement of intent. 
The common council hereby finds that in order to ensure the proper repair and maintenance of residential buildings within the city, to prevent the deterioration and neglect of such structures to the protection of the health and safety of the people of the city and to further enforcement of and compliance with the building and property maintenance codes of the city, it is necessary, in the case of uncorrected rent impairing violations, that tenants residing in the city be authorized to abate an appropriate portion of their rental payments under the provisions of this section. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.04(1))  
Sec. 72-218. - Other remedies of tenant. 
The right of a tenant to abate a portion of the rent as provided in this article shall not preclude or affect in any way the tenant's right to abate under Wis. Stats. ch. 704; nor shall it preclude or affect in any way the tenant's or landlord's right to any of the remedies provided by the laws of the state and this Code pertaining to the relationship of landlord and tenant. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.04(3)(b))  
Sec. 72-219. - Other remedies of city. 
It is the intent of this section that any use of abatement will not prohibit the building inspection department from prosecuting violations of this Code relating to said property. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.04(8))  
Sec. 72-220. - Eviction or retaliation prohibited. 
(a)  No person or tenant who complains to the building inspection department of violations of chapters 22, 35, 37 or this chapter or complies with this section shall be evicted for nonpayment of rent or because said person or tenant has elected to act under said section, so long as rent is being abated in accordance with the provisions of this article or Wis. Stats. ch. 704. 
(b)  In addition, no tenant shall be evicted for nonpayment of rent where the tenant continues to abate rent pursuant to a lawful order of a hearing examiner pending judicial review of the order after a stay of the hearing examiner's decision has been ordered by the reviewing court, if written notice of the request for judicial review was not given to the tenant in accordance with section 72-373. 
(c)  Furthermore, no tenant who has been authorized to abate a portion of his/her rental payment shall be evicted for failure to pay rent as a result of underpayment of rent due to a computation error, so long as the tenant remedies the underpayment within five days after notice thereof by the landlord. 
(d)  No person or tenant shall be evicted or retaliated against for complaining of violations of chapters 22, 35, 37 or this chapter or for complying with this section, and it shall be presumed that any attempt to terminate the tenancy of such tenant or to evict such tenant or to raise such tenant's rental payments or to otherwise harass or retaliate against such tenant during the period from the first complaint to the building inspection department to six months after the certification by the building inspection department of the city that all violations have been corrected is done in retaliation for the tenant's complaint to the building inspection department of a violation of chapters 22, 35, 37 or this chapter or for his/her compliance with this section. Said attempt is hereby declared null and void and subject to a forfeiture for each such attempt. It is further provided that in order to overcome such presumption, the landlord must show by a preponderance of the evidence that such acts by him/her were based upon good cause. 
(e)  The term "good cause," as used in this section, means that the landlord must show a good reason for his/her action, other than one related to or caused by the operation of this chapter, including but not limited to normal uniform rental increases due to utility increases or other increased costs to landlord, or for other bonafide, nondiscriminatory business reason. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.04(7))  
Sec. 72-221. - Penalties—Unlawful acquisition of rent abatement. 
Any person who accepts, as a result of misrepresentation, harassment or coercion, rental payments for premises subject to abatement under this article may be subject to a forfeiture whether said rental payments are tendered by or on behalf of the tenant occupying the premises at the time abatement is authorized or by, or on behalf of, any subsequent or other tenant who occupies the premises during the existence of such abatement authorization. Each such payment accepted shall constitute a separate violation.  
Sec. 72-222. - Same—Use of this article to harass landlord. 
Any tenant who willfully and maliciously uses or attempts to use this article to harass a landlord shall be fined. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.04(9))  
Sec. 72-223. - Same—All other violations. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall upon conviction be subject to a forfeiture unless a different penalty is specifically provided, with each separate day of violation to be considered a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person who shall fail or neglect to comply with any lawful order of the rent abatement hearing examiner issued pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section, and every day or fraction thereof on which such person shall fail or neglect to comply with such order, shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.04(10))  
Secs. 72-224—72-254. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 72-255. - Composition. 
The city has established a committee of the city called the rent abatement oversight committee. The rent abatement oversight committee consists of the three members of the public safety committee who shall be appointed by the president of the common council and subject to confirmation by the common council. The city clerk or his/her designee shall serve, without voting privileges, as secretary to the committee and shall keep a detailed record of all proceedings. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.03(1))  
Sec. 72-256. - Duties. 
The rent abatement oversight committee shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To adopt such rules and regulations, subject to approval by the common council, as may be necessary to carry out the purpose and provisions of the rent abatement process in this article. 
(2)  To recommend to the common council additions to, deletions from, and changes in the schedule of rent impairing violations in section 72-345 as well as other provisions in this chapter. 
(3)  To approve forms for the use of tenants, landlords, the building inspection department and rent abatement hearing examiners to facilitate the rent abatement process in this article. 
(4)  To institute procedures for the selection of rent abatement hearing examiners, for the setting of a time and place for rent abatement hearings and for the giving of notice thereof to interested landlords and tenants within ten days of the filing of a request for a hearing concerning authorization for rent abatement with the building inspection department. 
(5)  To establish criteria and procedures for waiving the filing fee in cases of economic hardship. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.03(2))  
Sec. 72-257. - Staff. 
The building inspection department shall provide staff support for the rent abatement hearing examiners and shall receive and retain all documents, reports and records relating thereto. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.03(3))  
Sec. 72-258. - Designation of rent impairing violations. 
The common council shall adopt a list of violations of the provisions of chapters 22, 35, 37 and this chapter to be classified as "rent impairing," as the term is defined in section 72-1. Said list shall contain a brief description of the condition constituting the violation, the section of the ordinances violated and the percentage range of possible rent abatement. The rent abatement committee may at any time recommend a change in the number of violations, their descriptions or the percentage of possible rent abatement for a particular violation but no such change shall be made except in the manner set forth above. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.04(3)(c))  
Secs. 72-259—72-279. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - NOTICES AND DISCLOSURES 
 
Sec. 72-280. - Notice to tenant of code violations and right to abate rent. 
The landlord or any person authorized to enter into a rental agreement shall exhibit to the prospective tenant, prior to the time a rental agreement is entered into, the following: 
(1)  A copy of any official notice of outstanding violation of this Code that the landlord or person has actual notice and which affects the subject rental building regardless of the location of the violations or defects therein and a copy of any hearing examiner decision and order which affects the subject rental unit or any common areas of the subject rental building. The failure by a landlord to comply with the provisions of this subsection regarding written notice of a successor tenant's right to abate rent shall not be subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-21. 
(2)  In addition, prior to the time a rental agreement is entered into, the landlord shall advise the prospective tenant in writing of a successor tenant's right to abate rent pursuant to the order aforementioned until authorization to abate ceases as provided in section 72-346. In cases where the rent abatement request is pending at the time the rental agreement is entered into, the landlord shall provide the successor tenant written notification of a successor tenant's rights when the case has been decided and shall exhibit a copy of the decision and order to the successor tenant upon receipt thereof. 
(3)  At the time occupancy commences the landlord shall exhibit to the tenant (formerly, a prospective tenant) a copy of all additional official notices referred to in subsection (1) of this section and a copy of all decisions and orders referred to in subsection (2) of this section, if any have been issued since the signing of the rental agreement. Similarly, at the time of occupancy the landlord shall provide the required written notice of a successor tenant's rights with respect to all such additional official notices and decisions. 
(4)  The written notice of successor tenant's rights shall specifically state in underlined or otherwise emphasized print the following: 
"If you wish to become a successor tenant and to abate rent in accordance with chapter 72 of the Fitchburg Code of Ordinances you must provide your landlord and the building inspection department of the city with written notice of that intent within fifteen calendar (15) days of receiving written notification from your landlord of your right as a successor tenant to abate rent. Failure to provide your landlord with timely written notice forfeits your right to be a "successor tenant" and to abate rent as a successor tenant under chapter 72 of the Fitchburg Code of Ordinances." 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.04(6))  
Sec. 72-281. - Weekly publication and service of notice of uncorrected rent-impairing violations. 
(a)  A list of addresses of rental properties with uncorrected rent-impairing violations shall be published each week in the official city paper within ten calendar days of the reinspection which reveals noncompliance. Such notice shall indicate that the tenants may be eligible for rent abatement and shall state that any such tenant must request authorization to abate rent within 30 calendar days of publication of the notice of eligibility by the building inspection department of the city. 
(b)  A copy of the notice shall also be sent by first class mail, addressed to the occupant at each rental unit with uncorrected rent impairing violations, on or before the date of publication of the notice. Together with the copy of the notice, there shall be mailed a cover letter including, but not limited to, the following information: Notice of eligibility to apply for rent abatement, the owner of your apartment has not followed an order from the city building inspection department to correct housing code violations. Because the owner has not complied, you may be able to get a portion of your rent back pursuant to this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.04(2))  
Secs. 72-282—72-310. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ELIGIBILITY 
 
Sec. 72-311. - Uncorrected rent impairment. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law or any agreement, whether oral or written, tenants and provider agencies shall be eligible to abate a portion of the total rental payments, in accordance with this section and pursuant to the order of a rent abatement hearing examiner or by written agreement of the parties, if the landlord of the residential premises fails to comply with an order of the building inspection department to correct by the original due date, unless such due date is found to be unreasonable upon appeal to the rent abatement committee, a violation which is rent impairing, as that term is defined in section 72-1. 
(b)  Any such order of the building inspection department shall specifically state that uncorrected violations may be eligible for abatement in addition to any other penalties provided by law. A tenant's eligibility to abate rent shall apply only to the eligible tenant or successor tenant upon whose rented premises the uncorrected rent impairing violation exists or to any eligible tenant or successor tenant in a building with an uncorrected rent impairing violation in a common area. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.04(3)(a))  
Sec. 72-312. - Provider agent; joint payment to provider agency and tenant. 
(a)  A provider agency's ability to abate rent shall apply only to provider agencies which pay or have paid a portion of an eligible tenant's rent while an uncorrected rent impairing violation exists on the premises or common area of the eligible tenant's building. 
(b)  Where an award is made and rent has been paid by both a tenant and a provider agency, the tenant's portion of the award shall be up to but not greater than the amount of rent the tenant has paid. Where the award amount is less than or equal to the amount of rent the tenant paid, the tenant shall receive all of the award. 
(c)  No rent may be abated pursuant to this article until abatement is ordered by the rent abatement hearing examiner or authorized by written agreement between the parties. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.04(3)(a))  
Sec. 72-313. - Successor tenant. 
(a)  A successor tenant is entitled to abate rent pursuant to the order of a rent abatement hearing examiner issued in accordance with this chapter, provided that at the time the tenancy commences there exists an uncorrected rent impairing violation which was determined or is in the process of being determined by the hearing examiner to be abatable. 
(b)  In order to be deemed a successor tenant under this article an otherwise eligible individual must advise the landlord in writing with a copy to the building inspection department of his/her intent no later than 15 calendar days after receipt of written notification by the landlord which conforms to the requirements of section 72-280 regardless of whether said written notification is given within the times prescribed therein. If said written notification is given at or prior to the time the rental agreement is entered into, the successor tenant's notice of intent must be given no later than 15 calendar days after the commencement of the successor tenancy. 
(c)  Failure to provide the landlord with a timely written notice of intent to become a successor tenant forfeits a tenant's right to proceed to abate rent as a successor tenant under this chapter, except where the landlord has failed to provide the written notification of the tenant's right to abate rent pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. In cases where the landlord fails to provide written notice as required, an otherwise eligible tenant may assert the rights of a successor tenant at any time during the tenancy or in any action relating to or arising out of the tenancy. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.04(4))  
Secs. 72-314—72-344. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - AMOUNT AND DURATION OF ABATEMENT 
 
Sec. 72-345. - Schedule of rent impairing violations. 
A tenant authorized to abate rent shall do so in accordance with the following schedule with the precise amount to be set by the rent abatement hearing examiner after notice and hearing pursuant to sections 72-366 through 72-369. The maximum total abatement authorized pursuant to this article shall not exceed 95 percent of the periodic rental payment, except where the premises have been vacated pursuant to an order of the director of the building inspection department or pursuant to any other tenant right to remove from residential rental premises secured under state law. 
Sec. 	Section 
Violated 	Description of Violation 	Percentage of Rent 
Abatement 
1 	37-141(b) 
7-141(c) 
7-141(d) 	a. Kitchen sink or lavatory basin 	
			i. Not provided or missing 	10-25% 
(24-48 hours) 25% 
(more than 48 hours) 50-99% 
		b.Flush water closet 	
			i. Not provided or missing 	(Not only facility) 5-10% 
(Only facility) 25-50% 
		c. Bathtub or shower 	
			i. Not provided or missing 	(Not only facility) 5-10% 
(24-48 hours) 25% 
		d. Water pressure/volume 	
			i. None 	(More than 48 hours) 50-99% 
			ii. Inadequate 	10-25% 
2 	37-141 
7-141(f)(e) 	a. Hot water tank 	
			i. Not provided or totally not functional 	25—50% 
			ii. In need of repair to the extent that supply is inadequate or water is consistently below 100;deg;F 	10—25% 
			iii. Consistently does not provide 120;deg;F water but above 100;deg;F 	5—10% 
			iv. Tank leak—See basement water and moisture problems 	1—5% 
3 	37-139(4) 	a. Garbage and refuse storage facilities 	
			i. Adequate storage not provided 	1—5% 
4 	37-138(10) 
37-138(11) 
37-138(12) 
37-138(13) 	a. Required exit 	
			i. Not provided or totally unusable 	10—25% per exit 
			ii. Partially unusable 	5—10% per exit 
			iii. Blocked by accumulation of stored items, junk, trash or debris 	
				A. Totally 	10—25% per exit 
				B. Partially 	5—10% per exit 
			iv. Other impairments of exit use, i.e., double cylinder locks, skeleton keys lock, movable furniture obstructing exit path 	1—5% per exit 
		Note: Repairs to components of an exit system (e.g., doors, stairs, porches, handrails, guardrails) where the exit remains in use should abate under repair categories. 
5 	37-140(a) 	a. Natural light or ventilation 	
			i Not provided in one or more rooms 	10—25% per room 
			ii. Inadequate light or ventilation 	5—10% 
6 	37-138(7) 
37-140(a) 	a. Screens 	
			i. No screens provided or all screens in need of repair 	10—25% 
			ii. Not all screens provided and/or some screens in need of repair 	5—10% 
7 	37-138(14) 
37-107(9) 37-141(k) 
37-138(14) 
37-107(9) 	a. Electrical service and wiring 	
			i. No electricity 	(24—48 hours) 25% 
(More than 48 hours) 50—95% 
			ii. Inadequate electrical service (that part of he/she wiring system that starts where utility wires end and ends with and includes the main fuses) (substantially limits usage or presents potential hazards) 	10—25% 
			iii. Inadequate branch circuits 	5—10% 
			iv. Unfused circuits (the use of unfused circuits must be disconnected) 	10—25% 
			v. Over fused circuits 	5—10% 
			vi. Exposed wires, damage or bare, presenting shock hazard 	5—10% 
			vii. Convenience outlets not provided, not functional, not proper number, not proper installation (one or more outlets) 	5—10% 
		b. Lighting 	
			i. Required light switches not functioning or not provided 	1—5% 
			ii. Public halls and/or stairs not lit 	1—5% per affected applicant 
			iii. Outside entrance doors and/or required parking areas unlit 	1—5% per affected applicant 
9 	37-141(k) 	a. Heat 	
			i. No heat or consistently below 55CF 	(24—48 hours) 25% 
(More than 48 hours) 50—95% 
			ii. Inadequate (55;deg;F-66;deg;F) or occasionally inadequate 	(24—48 hours) 25% 
(More than 48 hours) 50—95% 
10 	37-138(16) 	a. Required exit signs 	
			i. Missing or not lit 	1—5% per sign 
11 	37-77 	a. Improper grading and/or no eaves troughs and/or downspouts 	
			i. Not causing basement or ground floor water or moisture problems 	No abatement 
			ii. Resulting in basement water or moisture problems 	See basement water and moisture problems 
12 	37-138(2) 	a. Interior floors, walls, or ceilings 	
			i. Unsafe so that an area or room is ordered vacated by building inspection department 	(Not a kitchen, bath or bedroom) 25—50% 
(Kitchen, bath or bedroom) 50—95% 
			ii. Is damaged or in such disrepair that it interferes with tenant's full use of all or part of the premises (including but not limited to holes in floors, walls and/or ceilings) 	(Kitchen, bath, bedroom, (including closets) or other living areas) 10—25% 
(Other) 5—10% 
			iii. Incapable of affording privacy 	10—25% 
			iv. Reasonably waterproof or hard surface not provided in areas subject to moisture 	5—10% per room 
			v. Appropriate floor surfacing not provided, or damaged so that it does not function to provided ease of maintenance 	5—10% per room 
			vi. Unsealed gaps allowing collection of dirt and other matter severe enough to create a cleaning or sanitation problem in bathing, toilet or food preparation areas 	1—5% 
13 	37-138(3) 	a. Exterior foundation, wall, floor and/or roof condition 	
			i. Unsafe so that an area or room is ordered vacated by building inspection department 	(Not a kitchen, bath or bedroom) 25—50% 
(Kitchen, bath or bedroom) 50—95% 
			ii. Is damaged or in such disrepair that it interferes with tenant's full use of all or part of the premises (including but not limited to roof leaks, holes in floors, walls, and ceilings) 	(Kitchen, bath, bedroom (including closets) or other having areas) 10—25% 
(Other) 5—10% 
			iii. Incapable of affording privacy 	10—25% 
			iv. Resulting in wet basement 	See basement water and moisture problems 
14 	37-138(3) 	a. Chimney 	
			i. Not properly removing the products of combustion (discontinue use of appliances vented into chimney) 	Abatement based on lost appliance/facility 
(No hot water) section 1 
(No heat) section 9 
			ii. In danger of collapse 	10—25% 
15 	37-141(g), 37-141(i) 	a. Unsealed gaps in bathing, toilet or food preparation areas allowing collection of dirt and other matter 	
			i. Severe enough to create a cleaning or sanitation problem 	1—5% 
16 	37-107(5) 	a. Exterior doors, interior doors, basement hatchway doors (one or more doors) 	
			i. Mission, therefore negating dwelling unit or lodging unit security 	25—50% 
			ii. Missing and affecting privacy, health or safety 	10—25% 
			iii. In a state of disrepair which threaten security (one or more doors) 	See violations section 20 (a)(i), (ii), and (iii) 
			iv. Hazardous e.g., unhinged, requiring excessive force to open, door or hardware interfering with egress 	5—10% 
			v. Missing or nonfunctional latch assembly on a bedroom, bathroom or dwelling unit entrance door 	1—5% 
17 	37-107(5) 
37-107(6), 37-138(6), 37-138(7), 37-138(11), 37-138(12) 	a. Windows (one or more windows) 	
			i. Missing from first floor, basement or other window openings accessible by balconies, fire escapes, trees, etc., and negating dwelling unit or lodging room security 	25—50% 
			ii. Missing and affecting privacy, health or safety 	10—25% 
			iii. In a state of disrepair which threatens security 	See violations section 20(a)(i), (ii), and (iii) 
			iv. Ventilating locks not functional 	5—10% 
			v. Hazardous, e.g., windows which must be propped open, broken windows with glass shards in the frame 	5—10% 
18 	37-107(2) 	a. Door viewer, front entry door dwelling unit or lodging room, not provided or not functional 	5% 
19 	37-107(5) 	a. Exterior hinge pins not protected dwelling unit or lodging room 	5% per door 
20 	37-107(4) 	a. Deadbolt lock (one or more locks) 	
			i. No lock or totally not functional 	25—50% 
			ii. Existing lock provides some security but is not a deadbolt (e.g., A slide bolt lock, live bolt lock, guarded latch lock on doors accessible from grade, lock with strike plate) 	10—25% 
			iii. Lock conditions which have minimal effect on security (e.g., Screws in strike plate not 2½ inches long, difficult but not impossible to lock and unlock, live, guarded or slide bolt locks on doors not accessible from grade) 	1—5% 
		b. Secondary locking device 	
			i. Door does not lock and no secondary locking device or totally not functional 	25—50% 
			ii. Door locks but no secondary locking device or totally not functional 	10—25% 
21 	37-107(5) 	a. Required window sash fasteners not provided or nor functional (one or more fasteners) 	
			i. First floor, basement, and all other windows accessible by balconies, fire escapes, trees, or other existing means 	10—25% 
			ii. All other windows where required 	1—5% 
22 	37-107(6) 	a. Required window ventilating sash fasteners not provided or not functional (one or more fasteners) 	5—10% 
23 	37-138(17) 	a. Common area doors 	
			i. No lock or totally not functional 	5—10% 
			ii. Lock conditions which have a minimal effect on security, e.g., no strike plate, screws in strike plate not 2½ inches long 	1—5% 
			iii. Required door closer missing or not functional 	1—5% 
24 	37-138(3) 
37-138(13) 	a. Inside and outside stair and/or porch 	
			i. Hazardous to use 	10—25% per affected applicant 
		b. Required appurtenances to any porch, or stair such as handrails and guardrails 	
			i. Protecting an elevation less than 4 feet 	
				A. Missing 	5—10% per affected applicant 
				B. Inadequate 	5—10% per affected applicant 
			ii. Protecting an elevation of more than 4 feet 	
				A. Missing 	10—25% per affected applicant 
				B. Inadequate 	5—10% per affected applicant 
25 	37-138(9), 37-141(b) 
37-141(c), 37-141(d) 	a. Kitchen sink, lavatory* 	*Also see basement water and moisture problem 
			i. Totally not functional 	10—25% 
			ii. In need of repair to the extent that use is limited (e.g., including but not limited to extremely slow drain, missing or not functional faucet handle.) 	5—10% per fixture 
		b. Flush water closet * 	*Also see basement water and moisture problem 
			i. Totally not functional 	(24—48 hours) 25% 
(More than 48 hours) 50—90% 
(Not only facility) 5—10% 
			ii. In need of repair to extent that use is limited 	5—10% per fixture 
		c. Bathtub or shower 	
			i Totally not functional 	(Only facility) 25—50% (Not only facility) 5—10% 
			ii. In need of repair to extent that use is limited (e.g., including but not limited to extremely slow drain, missing or not functional faucet handle.) 	5—10% per fixture 
		d. Water pressure/volume 	
			i. Inadequate or fluctuating hot and cold 	10—25% 
			ii. Consistently leaking hot water faucet 	1—5% 
26 	37-138(9), 37-141(b) through (f) 	a. Leaking water supply or drain piping, not containing sewage 	
			i. Leaking to extent and in such a place that it interferes with tenant's full use of all or part of premises 	
				A. Kitchen, bathroom, bedroom (including closets) or other living areas 	10—25% 
				B. Other 	5—10% 
			ii. Leaking pipes in basement 	See basement water and moisture problems 
		b. Leaking or obstructed drain piping containing sewage 	
			i. If leaks or obstruction cause backup of sewage into fixtures, onto floors, or through ceilings or walls (including basement) 	50—90% per affected applicant 
27 	37-141(g) 	a. Bathroom floor surfacing 	See violations section 15 
28 	37-139(10) 	a. Supplied facility, equipment or utility 	
			i. Contracted stove or refrigerator 	
				A. Not functional 	10—25% 
				B. Partially functional 	5—20% 
		b. Non-required screens 	No abatement 
29 	37-141(n) 	a. Owner-caused discontinuation of utilities 	
			i. No electricity 	See violations section 7 
			ii. No heat 	See violations section 9 
			iii. No water service 	See violations sections 1 and 2 
30 	Wis. Admin. Code § COMM 2603.4 	a. Properly installed covering for foam plastic insulation 	5—10% 
31 	37-139(2), 37-139(6) 	a. Failure to clean and disinfect common area after sewage backup 	10—25% per affected applicant 
		b. Owner not maintaining common areas in sanitary condition 	5—10% per affected applicant 
32 	37-139(1) 	a. Screens 	See section 7-140(b) use section 5 for percentages 
33 	37-139(7) 	a. Extermination of pests 	
			i. Severe infestation, whether occasional or chronic 	10—25% per affected applicant 
			ii. Non-severe but chronic 	1—5% per affected applicant 
34 	37-138(1) 	a. Apartment clean prior to occupancy 	25—50% 
		b. Failure to clean and disinfect basement after sewage backup 	10—25% 
35 	37-139(9) 	a. Smoke or heat detectors not installed where required in storage areas 	5—10% per affected applicant 
36 	Wis. Admin. Code § COMM 902.2(10) 
Wis. Admin. Code § COMM 2.0907 37-139(9) 	a. Smoke detectors not installed where required 	
			i. Common basement, halls or stairs 	5—10% per affected applicant 
			ii. Sleeping areas 	10—25% 
			iii. Each floor level including basement in a 1 or 2 family dwelling 	10—25% 
37 	All code sections which result in water problems may use these percentages 	a. Basement Water and Moisture Problems 	
			i. Basement water violations use the percentages regardless of cause of leak 	
				A. Basement not used for habitation: accumulated water 	1—5% per affected applicant 
				B. Basement used for habitation: damp and mold or mildew accumulated 	1—5% per affected applicant 
				C. Basement used for habitation 	
					aa. Accumulated water 	(Not a kitchen, bath or bedroom) 25—50% 
(Kitchen, bath or bedroom) 50—95% 
					bb. Continually wet but no standing water 	5—10% 
				D. Basement laundry presents potential electrical hazard when appliances are in use 	5—10% per affected applicant 
38 	Ch. 40 	Plumbing Code which adopts by reference Wis. Admin. Code Ind. 25, Wis. Stats. ch. 145. 
If violation is cited on an occupied rental property referencing sections from the above plumbing codes and the violations described could appropriately be listed as violations of sections 37-141(b) through (f), then the rent abatement list shall equally apply to those violations. 
Note: Any violation cited under the state plumbing codes would in an existing rental property also be a violation of section 37-141(f) which uses the phrase '"properly installed"). 
39 	Wis. Admin. Code ch. NEC 40, Wis. Admin. Code chs. COMM 16, 52 	Electrical code, adopts Wisconsin State Electrical Code Volume II, Wis. Admin. Code ch. 24 and by reference the 2000 National Electrical Code. 
If a violation is cited in an occupied residential rental property referencing sections from the above electrical codes and the violations could appropriately be listed as violations of sections 37-138(14), then the rent abatement list shall equally apply those violations. 
(NOTE: Any violation cited under the state codes or the National Electrical Code (NEC) would in an existing rental property also be a violation this chapter. 
 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.04(3)(d))  
Sec. 72-346. - Duration of abatement. 
(a)  Authorization to abate a portion of the rent pursuant to this article for failure of a landlord to correct a rent impairing violation ceases upon certification by the building inspection department that said violation has been satisfactorily corrected, except that a tenant, a provider agency or successor tenant shall not be required to reimburse any appropriately abated portion of the rent to a landlord where correction of the rent impairing violation was made after payment of the balance of the rental payment had been tendered to the landlord. Where more than one rent impairing violation has been authorized for rent abatement and partial correction has been certified, authorization to abate continues for the uncorrected rent impairing violations, until such time as their satisfactory correction has been verified. 
(b)  If abatement is authorized, the landlord must promptly repay any rent previously paid by the tenant, provider agency or successor tenant and apportioned to rent impairing violations from the date of the original inspection by the building inspection department at which said violations were discovered. 
(c)  If the landlord fails to promptly reimburse the tenant, provider agency or successor tenant as required in subsection (b) of this section, the tenant, provider agency or successor tenant may enforce the order requiring reimbursement as follows: 
(1)  The tenant, provider agency or successor tenant may deduct the amount previously paid and subsequently determined to be apportioned to rent impairing violations from future rental payments. 
(2)  If the total of future rental payments payable for the balance of the tenancy is less than the reimbursement required in subsection (b) of this section or if the tenant or successor tenant no longer resides at the premises in question, the tenant, provider agency or successor tenant shall recover from the landlord double the amount not reimbursed in accordance with the order of the hearing examiner plus costs of collection including reasonable attorney fees. 
(d)  The failure of a landlord to promptly reimburse the tenant, provider agency or successor tenant as required in subsection (b) of this section and the failure of either a landlord, a tenant or a provider agency after a decision by the reviewing court on judicial review, to return monies wrongfully not reimbursed or wrongfully abated shall be deemed a violation of this article and shall be punishable pursuant to section 72-223. 
(e)  Rent abatement awarded in a decision and order of a rent abatement hearing examiner shall accrue during the period when either a tenant or a successor tenant is entitled to the exclusive possession and occupancy of an affected dwelling unit. Under no circumstances shall there be recovery by both a tenant and a successor tenant for the same period of time. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.04(5))  
Secs. 72-347—72-365. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 72-366. - Application for authorization for rent abatement; request for hearing; fees. 
(a)  An eligible tenant who may be entitled to abate a portion of his/her rental payment under this article shall have 30 calendar days from publication of the notice of possible eligibility by the building inspection department of the city to file a request for a hearing on authorization for rent abatement. The request shall be in writing on a form approved by the rent abatement oversight committee, shall state with specificity the name and address of the landlord and the alleged rent impairing violation and shall be filed with the building inspection department. 
(b)  The application shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule made payable to the city treasurer, which fee shall be recovered from the landlord if abatement is ordered. If the applicant qualifies for waiver of the filing fees, however, the application shall be accompanied by an affidavit of economic hardship signed by the applicant. 
(c)  Within ten calendar days of the filing of the request, the building inspection department staff shall select a hearing examiner from the rent abatement hearing examiner panel, set a time and place for the hearing and give the landlord and the tenant written notice thereof. The hearing shall be held as soon as possible, but not prior to the end of the 30-calendar-day filing period. 
(d)  Notice of the hearing including a statement of the time, place and nature of the hearing shall be mailed to the landlord and tenant at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.04(3)(e)(1))  
Sec. 72-367. - Hearing examiner authority. 
(a)  The rent abatement hearing examiner shall have the authority to conduct hearings on requests for authorization for rent abatement and to determine the exact amount of rent, if any, which may be abated pursuant to this article. 
(b)  The rent abatement hearing examiner shall have the authority to administer oaths and to issue subpoenas pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 885.01 at the request of the parties and shall be responsible for the fair, orderly and impartial conduct of the rent abatement hearing and the preservation of the exhibits and the record therein. 
(c)  In any matter set for hearing the rent abatement hearing examiner may hold a conference between the parties to attempt to clarify or simplify the issues. In addition, prior to the hearing, upon request of the parties the hearing examiner may function as a mediator to encourage voluntary settlement. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.04(3)(e)(2))  
Sec. 72-368. - Conduct of hearing. 
(a)  The rent abatement hearing examiner shall conduct the hearing on the request for authorization for rent abatement, shall administer oaths to all witnesses and may issue subpoenas upon request of the parties. The landlord and the tenant may be represented by counsel or other representatives, may call and examine witnesses and cross examine witnesses of the other party. 
(b)  All proceedings and testimony shall be recorded on tape. If a review is sought of the hearing examiner's decision, a written transcript shall be prepared at a cost to the requesting parties determined by the hourly staff rate plus a reasonable fee for copies. For all purposes, a copy of the tape recordings shall be supplied to anyone requesting the same at the requester's expense. If either party requests a stenographic recording and transcription, the building inspection department shall make the necessary arrangements, but the expense shall be borne by the requesting party. 
(c)  In the hearing, the tenant shall have the burden of proving to a reasonable certainty by the greater weight of the credible evidence, (i.e., by the preponderance of the evidence,) that the landlord failed to correct rent impairing violations by the due date in an order of the building inspection department. 
(d)  It is the landlord's burden to show by the preponderance of the evidence that any rent impairing violations were negligently or willfully caused by the tenant or the tenant's guests or that the tenant's refusal to allow entry prevented the landlord from making the corrections in a timely manner. Thereafter, the tenant has the burden to show that any such refusal was reasonable under the circumstances. 
(e)  Either party may present additional evidence on the nature, extent and seriousness of violations, the length of time conditions existed and the extent to which the tenant was deprived of the full use of the rented premises, to assist in determining the percent of abatement which should be allowed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.04(3)(e)(3))  
Sec. 72-369. - Decision. 
(a)  In favor of tenant. 
(1)  If, on the evidence at the hearing, the rent abatement hearing examiner finds that the landlord failed to comply with an order of the building inspection department to correct by the original due date a rent impairing violation as that term is defined in section 72-1, the hearing examiner shall order that rent be abated retroactive to the date of the initial inspection in order to effectuate the purpose of this article and to provide fair and equitable compensation to the tenant for the diminished value of the rented premises due to the landlord's continued violation of the city's building/housing codes. 
(2)  Any such abatement shall be established in accordance with the schedule of rent impairing violations in section 72-345. In setting the exact percentage of abatement the hearing examiner shall consider the nature, extent and seriousness of the particular conditions, the total number of rent impairing violations at issue, the length of time the conditions existed and the extent to which the conditions deprive the tenant of full use of the rented premises. 
(3)  If the hearing examiner finds that the landlord's failure to comply with the order of the building inspection department by the due date was caused by factors wholly outside the landlord's control and if the hearing examiner further finds that the landlord has taken affirmative steps to minimize the impact of the uncorrected rent-impairing conditions on the tenant, any sums reasonably expended by the landlord in that regard should be considered in setting the percentage of abatement and may operate to reduce the final abatement percentage below the minimum percentage listed for the items in the schedule of rent impairing violations in section 72-345. 
(4)  The hearing examiner shall not authorize rent abatement for any conditions found to be caused either negligently or willfully by the tenant or his/her guests, nor shall abatement be ordered for any period of time after the tenant has unreasonably refused entry to the landlord for the purpose of correcting the conditions giving rise to the violations. 
(b)  In favor of landlord. 
(1)  If, after hearing, the hearing examiner finds that the landlord did not fail to comply with an order of the building inspection department to correct a rent impairing violation by the due date or that the rent impairing violations were caused by the tenant or the tenant's guests or that the tenant unreasonably refused entry for the purpose of correcting a rent impairing violation, the hearing examiner shall enter an order denying the request for authorization to abate rent for any items negligently or willfully caused by the tenant or guests of the tenant or for any items which remained uncorrected due to the tenant's unreasonable refusal to allow entry for repair purposes. 
(2)  Where the landlord has received a list of code violations requiring correction within 72 hours or less, a refusal by the tenant to allow entry after reasonable notice of less than 24 hours may be deemed an unreasonable refusal solely for the purpose of determining whether rent abatement shall be awarded for the violation which was the subject of the official notice. 
(c)  Time for service of written findings; effect of failure to comply. The decision and order of the hearing examiner shall contain written findings and shall be mailed to the parties within seven calendar days of completion of the hearing or as soon thereafter as possible. The failure to issue and mail a decision within seven calendar days shall neither deprive the hearing examiner of jurisdiction to render a final decision in the matter nor affect the validity thereof. 
(d)  Persons upon whom decision is binding. Except as provided in section 72-313 relating to the rights of successor tenants, the holder of the landlord's interest in the premises at the time the decision and order of the hearing examiner is issued and the holder of the landlord's interest during the period of time that the right to continuing abatement remains in effect are bound by the order and by the applicable provisions of this chapter relating to rent abatement. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.04(3)(e)(4))  
Sec. 72-370. - Petition for reconsideration. 
(a)  Within ten calendar days after service by mail of the decision of the hearing examiner, either party may file with the building inspection department a written petition for reconsideration specifying in detail the grounds for the relief sought. In addition, a hearing examiner may, on his/her own motion, reconsider the decision or order a hearing on reconsideration. Reconsideration will be granted only on the basis of: 
(1)  A material error of fact or law or an error in the calculation of an award amount; or 
(2)  Where the landlord's or tenant's failure to appear at the hearing was due solely to extraordinary, justifiable and unforeseeable circumstances beyond his/her control, which circumstances prevented attendance at the hearing. Petitions for reconsideration based on a tenant's or landlord's failure to appear must contain a sworn, notarized statement describing factually and in detail those extraordinary circumstances which caused the petitioner's non-appearance. In addition, said petition must be received by the building inspection department by 4:30 p.m. on the first business day following the hearing date or be deemed untimely. 
(b)  Copies of the petition shall be served by first class mail by the petitioner on all parties, who may file replies within seven calendar days after service by mail of the petition. 
(c)  Within 21 calendar days of the filing of the petition, the hearing examiner shall enter an order denying reconsideration or an order granting reconsideration disposing of the petition without a hearing or shall order a rehearing, which shall be held within 20 calendar days. The failure to issue a decision within the specified time period shall not deprive the hearing examiner of jurisdiction to render a decision on reconsideration or affect the validity thereof. If no order is entered within 21 calendar days of the filing of the petition, the petition shall be deemed denied. 
(d)  Upon rehearing, if any, proceedings shall conform as nearly as may be to sections 72-366 through 72-369, relating to an original hearing. 
(e)  The filing of a petition for rehearing shall not suspend or delay the effective date of the original decision and order, and the order shall take effect on the date fixed by the hearing examiner and shall continue in effect unless the petition is granted or until the order is superseded, modified, or set aside as provided by law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.04(3)(f))  
Sec. 72-371. - Request for modification. 
If, subsequent to a decision by a hearing examiner ordering rent abatement, substantial further deterioration or substantial improvement occurs in any rent impairing conditions which were the subject of the original order, the applicant, landlord or any successor tenant may request modification of the rent abatement amount. Only one such request for modification may be made by each eligible individual, which request shall follow the procedures in sections 72-366 through 72-369, relating to the original application. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.04(3)(g))  
Sec. 72-372. - Enforcement. 
Whenever, in the judgment of the rent abatement oversight committee, the judicial enforcement of this article is necessary, the committee shall in writing request the city attorney to enforce this article in the name of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.04(3)(h))  
Sec. 72-373. - Appeal. 
(a)  All orders of the rent abatement hearing examiner shall be final administrative determinations and shall be subject to review in court as by law may be provided. Any party to the proceeding may seek review thereof within 30 calendar days of service by mail of the final determination of the hearing examiner. In addition, written notice of any request for judicial review shall be given by the party seeking review to all parties who appeared at the proceeding before the hearing examiner, with said notice to be sent by first class mail to each party's last known address. 
(b)  The institution of the proceeding for judicial review shall not stay the decision and order of the hearing examiner; however, the reviewing court may order a stay upon such terms as it deems proper. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 28.04(3)(i))  
Chapter 74 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction over nuisances, Wis. Stats. § 823.01; collection of expenses for abatement of nuisances, Wis. Stats. § 823.06. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 74-1—74-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC NUISANCES 
 
Sec. 74-19. - Prohibited; defined. 
No person shall erect, contrive, continue, cause, maintain or permit to exist any public nuisance within the city. For purposes of this article, the term "public nuisance" is defined as a thing, act, occupation condition or use of property which shall continue for such a length of time as to: 
(1)  Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of the public; 
(2)  In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property; 
(3)  Greatly offend the public morals or decency; or 
(4)  Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable body of water, or other public way or the use of public property. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.13(1))  
Sec. 74-20. - Affecting health. 
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public health nuisances, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other health nuisances coming within the definition of section 74-19: 
(1)  All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink provided or offered for sale to the public. 
(2)  Carcasses or excrement of animals, birds, or fowl which are not buried or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours. 
(3)  Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash, rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, scrap metal, or any material whatsoever in which insects, rats, or other vermin may breed. 
(4)  All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies, or other insects can multiply. 
(5)  Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not flytight. 
(6)  All noxious weeds and other rank growth of vegetation. 
(7)  All animals running at large. 
(8)  The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, dust, fly ash, industrial dust, or other atmospheric pollutants within the city limits or within one mile therefrom in such quantities as to endanger the health of persons or to threaten or cause substantial injury to property in the city. 
(9)  Set any fire or blast on any land, burn in a dump or engage in open burning in, or within 100 feet of the boundary of, any residential subdivision, or commercial, or mixed use district. 
(10)  Any use of property, substances, or things within the city emitting or causing any toxic, foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious or disagreeable odors, gases, dust, effluvia, or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure, or inconvenience the health of any appreciable number of persons within the city. 
(11)  All abandoned wells not securely covered or secured from public use. 
(12)  Any use of property which shall cause any nauseous or unwholesome liquid or substance to flow into or upon any street, gutter, alley, sidewalk, or public place within the city or the pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal, or other body of water by sewage, creamery, or industrial wastes or other substances. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.13(2)) 
State Law reference— Adulterated food defined, Wis. Stats. § 97.02; sale of adulterated food prohibited, Wis. Stats. § 97.10; lodging and food protection, Wis. Stats. § 254.61 et seq.; municipal authority to prohibit emission of smoke, Wis. Stats. § 254.57; disposition of animal carcasses, Wis. Stats. § 95.50; municipal authority to regulate disposition of animal carcasses, Wis. Stats. § 254.58; municipal authority to abate human health hazards, Wis. Stats. § 254.59.  
Sec. 74-21. - Offending morals and decency. 
The following acts, omissions, places conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public nuisances offending public morals and decency, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances offending public morals and decency coming within the definition of section 74-19. 
(1)  All disorderly houses, gambling houses, and building or structures kept or resorted to for the purpose of prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse or gambling. 
(2)  All gambling devices and slot machines. 
(3)  All places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are sold, possessed, stored, brewed, bottled, manufactured, or rectified without a permit or license as provided for by the laws of the state and/or this Code. 
(4)  Any place or premises within the city where city ordinances or state laws relating to public health, safety, peace, morals, or welfare are openly, continuously, repeatedly, and intentionally violated. 
(5)  Any place or premises resorted to for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages in violation of the laws of the state or city. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.13(3)) 
State Law reference— Gambling, Wis. Stats. § 945.01 et seq.; gambling place as public nuisance, Wis. Stats. § 823.20; keeping a place of prostitution, Wis. Stats. § 944.34; bawdyhouses as nuisance, Wis. Stats. § 823.09; disorderly house, Wis. Stats. § 823.10; drug or criminal gang house as public nuisance, Wis. Stats. § 823.113.  
Sec. 74-22. - Affecting peace and safety. 
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions, and things are hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances affecting peace or safety coming within the provisions of section 74-19: 
(1)  All signs and billboards, awnings, or other similar structures over or near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places frequented by the public, so situated or constructed as to endanger the public safety. 
(2)  All buildings erected, repaired, or altered within the fire limits of the city in violation of the provisions of this Code, relating to materials and manner of construction of buildings and structures within said district. 
(3)  All unauthorized signs, signals, markings, or devices placed or maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway crossing, which purport to be or may be mistaken as an official traffic control device, railroad sign or signal or which because of its color, location, brilliance, or manner of operation interferes with the effectiveness of any such device, sign, or signal. 
(4)  All trees, hedges, billboards, vehicles, or other obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys, or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an uncontrolled intersection or pedestrian crosswalk. 
(5)  All limbs of trees which project over and less than seven feet above the surface of a public sidewalk or street or less than 12 feet above any other public place. 
(6)  All use or display of fireworks except as provided by the laws of the state and this Code. 
(7)  All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated, or out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary, or otherwise unfit for human use. 
(8)  All wires over streets, alleys, or public grounds which are strung less than 15 feet above the surface thereof. 
(9)  All loud, discordant, and unnecessary noises or vibrations of any kind. 
(10)  The keeping or harboring of any animal or fowl, which habitually disturbs the peace and quiet of any person in the vicinity of the place where such animal is kept. 
(11)  All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks, or crosswalks and all excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by this Code of which, although made in accordance with such ordinances, are kept or maintained for an unreasonable or illegal length of time after the purpose thereof has been accomplished. 
(12)  All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations, or unused basements freely accessible from any public street, alley, or sidewalk. 
(13)  All abandoned refrigerators, or iceboxes from which the doors and other covers have not been removed. 
(14)  Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on a public street, alley, or sidewalk or of a public street, alley, or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather obstructing traffic and free use of the streets or sidewalks. 
(15)  Repeated or continuous violations of this Code or laws of the state relating to the storage of flammable liquids. 
(16)  All snow and ice not removed or sprinkled with, salt, sand or other suitable substance as provided in this subsection, and snow and ice moved from private property into or across the public right-of-way. 
(17)  Graffiti is prohibited. Graffiti shall be removed by the property owner or by the city at the property owner's expense. The term "graffiti," as used in this subsection, means any unauthorized drawing, figure, inscription, or painting appearing on sidewalks, streets, walls or other places in public view. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.13(4)) 
State Law reference— Dilapidated building as public nuisance, Wis. Stats. § 823.21; vegetation obstructing view of outdoor advertising signs, Wis. Stats. § 84.305; regulation of outdoor advertising, Wis. Stats. § 84.30; restrictions on placement of highway signs, Wis. Stats. § 86.19; regulation of trees on and adjacent to highways, Wis. Stats. § 86.03; utility lines on highways, Wis. Stats. § 86.16; display of unauthorized traffic signs and signals prohibited, Wis. Stats. § 346.41; regulation of fireworks, Wis. Stats. § 167.10; abandonment of refrigerators and iceboxes, Wis. Stats. § 167.25; sidewalk obstructions prohibited, Wis. Stats. § 66.0907(1); graffiti, Wis. Stats. § 943.017.  
Sec. 74-23. - Offending public welfare generally. 
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions, and things are hereby specifically declared to be public nuisances offending the public welfare, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances offending the public welfare coming within the definition of section 74-19. 
(1)  Except where otherwise expressly authorized by law, storage of junk or discarded property including automobiles, automobile parts, trucks, tractors, refrigerators, furnaces, washing machines, stoves, machinery or machinery parts, wood, bricks, cement blocks, or other unsightly debris which tend to depreciate property values in the immediate vicinity. 
(2)  As used in this section, the term "junked or discarded automobiles" includes any unlicensed or inoperable vehicle or any vehicle that may not otherwise be lawfully operated upon any public highway. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.13(5)) 
State Law reference— Abandonment of vehicles prohibited, municipal authority for regulation of abandoned vehicles and recovery of costs thereof, Wis. Stats. § 342.40.  
Sec. 74-24. - Accumulation of stagnant water in urban service area. 
All premises in the urban service area shall be graded and maintained so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located thereon. Stagnant water shall be determined as an accumulation of rainwater that has not dispersed within seven days of the last recorded rainfall with the exception of: 
(1)  Stormwater retention or detention facilities approved by the city engineer; 
(2)  Areas clearly intended for water storage or drainage; or 
(3)  Decorative landscape features such as ornamental ponds, wetlands or other bodies of water shown on the city's officially adopted wetlands map. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.02(11))  
Secs. 74-25—74-51. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CHRONIC NUISANCE PREMISES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 74-52. - Purpose. 
The common council finds that from time to time certain premises in the city require a disproportionate amount of city resources to be devoted to addressing various problems and incidents that occur thereon. Often this disproportionate devotion of city resources is due to property owners' own actions or the failure of property owners to accept and exercise sufficient responsibility for and over the actions of occupants, guests, agents, or employees that reside upon or frequent the premises. Such premises, as further described in section 74-53, are deemed chronic nuisance premises and are public nuisances. This article is enacted to encourage property owners to recognize their responsibility to ensure that activities occurring on their property conform to the law and do not unduly burden the city's resources and to provide a mechanism for the city to take action against property owners who fail to ensure premises they own do not require a disproportionate devotion of resources to such premises. This article is not intended to discourage crime victims or any person in legitimate need of police services from requesting them. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.14(1))  
Sec. 74-53. - Determination. 
(a)  Any premises to which a department responds to complaints of any nuisance activity, three or more separate times within any 30-day period is deemed to have received and required more than the general, acceptable level of city services, and places an undue burden upon the taxpayers of the city. For purposes of this section, the term "nuisance activity" means any offenses under any offense defined in this Code as a nuisance or their statutory or their statutory counterparts, or any offense under state law for which a penalty of forfeiture, fine, or imprisonment is provided. An offense shall not be considered a nuisance activity if it is committed by a person having no association with the premises by acquaintance with, relation to or expressed or implied invitation from the owner, occupant, operator, or agent of the premises. 
(b)  Whenever any such premises exists, the appropriate department head shall determine from the facts of each incident and considering the purpose of this subsection as set forth in section 74-52, whether the premises is a chronic nuisance premises. A chronic nuisance premises is a public nuisance. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.14(2))  
Sec. 74-54. - Notice. 
Whenever the department head finds a premises constitutes a chronic nuisance premises under section 74-53, the department head shall provide written notice of his/her determination to the owner of the premises as identified by the records of the city assessor. Such notice shall be delivered by registered mail, return receipt requested or by personal service. If the owner cannot be located, the notice shall be published as a Class 2 notice under Wis. Stats. ch. 985. The notice shall contain the following additional information: 
(1)  The street address and unit number, if applicable, otherwise the parcel number or legal description sufficient to identify the premises. 
(2)  A brief statement, including a description of the relevant activities, supporting the determination that the premises is a chronic nuisance premises. 
(3)  A statement that the owner shall, within ten days of receipt of the notice, or last day of publication if published, respond to the appropriate department head requesting a hearing before the common council or proposing in writing a course of action that will be taken to abate the nuisance activities. 
(4)  A statement that the owner shall immediately notify the appropriate department head of any change in address to ensure receipt of future notices. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.14(3))  
Sec. 74-55. - Owner abatement. 
If the owner responds to the notice in section 74-54 within ten days of receipt of the notice or last day of publication if published with a nuisance abatement proposal, the department head may accept, reject, or work with the owner to modify the proposal in his/her discretion. If the department head rejects the abatement proposal, determines that an agreement on an appropriate abatement proposal cannot be reached or determines that the owner abatement is for any reason unsuccessful, the matter shall be referred to the common council for hearing. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.14(4))  
Sec. 74-56. - Hearing. 
If a hearing is requested by the owner or if the department head determines that a satisfactory abatement plan cannot be agreed upon or if the department head determines that abatement actions taken by the owner are unsuccessful, a hearing shall be held before the common council. The owner shall receive ten days' written notice of the hearing sent by first class mail or, if the owner cannot be located, by publication of a Class 2 notice under Wis. Stats. ch. 985. The common council shall hear any and all evidence it deems relevant and shall affirm or reverse the determination of the department head. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.14(5))  
Sec. 74-57. - Penalties and remedies. 
If the department head's determination is affirmed, the common council may order the owner to pay the actual cost of city services to respond to any nuisance activities occurring after the three responses that led to the determination that the premises was a chronic nuisance premises. Such costs shall be presented to the common council and may include costs incurred prior to the common council's determination. The common council may order costs of all such calls to the chronic nuisance premises be paid until the public nuisance is abated under section 74-58. Such costs, plus a reasonable administrative charge, shall be billed to the owner by invoice sent by regular mail and if not paid within 30 days of the date on the invoice shall be charged to the property as a special charge pursuant to Wis. Stats. §66.0627. The common council may authorize any other penalty or remedy authorized by law. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.14(6))  
Sec. 74-58. - When nuisance deemed abated. 
The public nuisance created by a chronic nuisance premises shall be deemed abated when no city resources have responded to the premises to address nuisance activities occurs for a period of six consecutive months. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.14(7))  
Secs. 74-59—74-89. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - JUNK AND DEBRIS 
 
Sec. 74-90. - Open storage prohibited. 
No person shall store junk or discarded property, including automobiles, automobile parts, trucks, tractors, refrigerators, furnaces, washing machines, stoves, machinery, machinery parts, wood, bricks, cement blocks or unsightly debris, except in an enclosure which houses such property from public view or upon permit issued by the city council. The items listed in this section shall be deemed a hazard to life and property and shall be removed to a licensed landfill site. Each day during which the provisions of this section are violated shall constitute a separate offense. The owner of the property will be held responsible for any forfeitures or expenses incurred. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.11(1))  
Sec. 74-91. - Storage of inoperable vehicles in public view prohibited. 
(a)  No person that owns, controls or occupies any real estate within the city shall permit disassembled, inoperable, unlicensed or junked vehicles to be stored or allowed to remain open to view upon public or private property within the city for a period in excess of five days, except in connection with an automobile sales or repair business operated within a properly zoned area. Each day during which the provisions of this section are violated shall constitute a separate offense. For purposes of this section, racing cars and equipment shall be deemed unlicensed vehicles. 
(b)  Inoperable vehicles stored in violation of this section shall be deemed a hazard to life and property and shall be removed to a properly zoned auto salvage area. The owner of the property on which the vehicle is stored shall be responsible for the cost of removal of the vehicle. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 3.11(2))  
Sec. 74-92. - Additional limitations on outdoor storage in residential areas. 
On lots with a residential zoning classification outdoor storage shall be further limited as follows: 
(1)  Inoperative, and/or unlicensed vehicles are allowed only in fully enclosed buildings. 
(2)  Recreational vehicles and equipment customarily used off the parcel that are stored on the premises on a regular basis. 
If the size of the item is in excess of 16 feet in length, five feet in height and six feet in width, the object must be in rear yard or side yard and must be two feet or more from side and rear lot lines. 
If the item is under the size limits above, one such item may be located anywhere on the property. 
On lots occupied by single or two family structures, there can be not more than one such object stored per unit without having to be covered or screened. Additional items that are to be stored must be screened so that the appearance of the item from other properties will be softened. The adequacy of screening shall be a determination of the Building Inspector and the extent and character of general landscaping and the size of the lot shall be taken into consideration. 
(3)  Heavy trucks. Heavy equipment of vocational nature. Trucks larger than one ton or similar equipment having a gross capacity in excess of four tons may not be regularly parked on a residential parcel, other than in a garage. 
(Ord. No. 2016-O-21, § 1, 6-12-2016)  
Secs. 74-93—74-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - NOISE REGULATION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 74-111. - Noises disturbing the public prohibited. 
(a)  Making noise tending to unreasonably disturb person in the vicinity prohibited. No person shall make or assist in making any noise tending to unreasonably disturb the comfort, quiet or repose of persons in the vicinity thereof. This provision shall not apply if the making and continuing of the noise cannot be prevented and is necessary for the protection or preservation of property or of the health, safety, life or limb of some person. 
(b)  Loud operation of mechanical or electrical devices prohibited. No person occupying or having charge of any building or premises, or any part thereof, shall cause or allow any loud, excessive or unusual noise in the operation or use of any radio, phonograph, tape recorder, loudspeaker or other mechanical or electrical device, instrument or machine, which noise shall unreasonably disturb the comfort, quiet or repose of persons therein or in the vicinity. 
(c)  Noise between certain hours prohibited. Except when necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare, no person shall cause or allow any noise between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. or between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight on any day as a result of excavating, grading, building, constructing, or otherwise erecting any building. 
(d)  Order by officer. Any person violating this section shall upon the request of a law enforcement officer immediately cease any activities causing a violation of this section. Failure to cease such activities immediately upon the request of a law enforcement officer shall constitute an additional and separate violation. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.01(5))  
Secs. 74-112—74-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - OUTDOOR USE OF SOUND AMPLIFYING DEVICES 
 
Sec. 74-121. - Findings of fact. 
The common council finds that excess noise and excessive vibration can degrade the environment of the city to a degree which is harmful and detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare of its inhabitants and interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life, property and recreation therein and causes nuisances. The council further finds that no one has any right to interfere with comfortable enjoyment of life, property and recreation within the city by creating excess noise or excess vibration by the use of sound amplification devices which may unreasonably interfere with normal pursuits of life and recreation or the health and welfare of the city's inhabitants. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.01(8)(a))  
Sec. 74-122. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person within the city shall operate or permit operation, outside of a reasonably soundproof enclosure, any loudspeaker, public address system, or similar sound amplifying device without first obtaining a permit from the public safety and human services committee as provided in this section. 
(b)  The following uses are exempted from the permit required under subsection (a): 
(1)  Cases of clear emergency. 
(2)  Businesses which are on a fixed site and have drive-through services, auction services, and other similar businesses that use loudspeakers to service customers. 
(3)  A private event on a private property, provided that the use of sound amplifying device is not in violation of Sec. 74-111 and commences on or after 11:00 a.m. and ceases on or before 11:00 p.m. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.01(8)(b); Ord. No. 2016-O-26, § 1, 11-22-2016)  
Sec. 74-123. - Application. 
An application for an outdoor sound amplification permit shall be filed with the city clerk on forms provided by the clerk as approved by the public safety and human services committee and shall include at least the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The dates and times for which the applicant is applying and the type of equipment to be used. 
(3)  The premises or area of the city where the sound amplifying equipment will be used and the anticipated affected area. 
(4)  A sworn statement of the applicant that all information provided in the application is true and correct. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.01(8)(c); Ord. No. 2016-O-26, § 1, 11-22-2016)  
Sec. 74-124. - Time of filing. 
Each application for an outdoor sound amplification permit shall be filed with the city clerk at least 30 days prior to the date on which the permit is proposed to be used and at least 15 days prior to granting of the permit. If an application is not filed in a timely manner, but time allows for the clerk to perform the necessary public notice requirements, the clerk will use his/her discretion in accepting the permit for processing. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.01(8)(d); Ord. No. 2016-O-26, § 1, 11-22-2016)  
Sec. 74-125. - Public notice. 
The city clerk shall publish each application for a permit on the City website prior to its issuance. The publication shall include the name and address of the applicant, a description, by street address and area, of the location of the premises where the sound amplification equipment is to be used, and the proposed date and time of such use. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.01(8)(e); Ord. No. 2016-O-26, § 1, 11-22-2016)  
Sec. 74-126. - Fee. 
The nonrefundable fee for an outdoor sound amplification permit shall be as set forth in the city fee schedule and shall be paid at the time of filing the application for the permit. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.01(8)(f); Ord. No. 2016-O-26, § 1, 11-22-2016)  
Secs. 74-127, 74-128. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-O-26, § 1, adopted November 22, 2016, amended the Code by repealing former §§ 74-127 and 74-128. Former § 74-127 pertained to public hearing notice, and derived from the Comp. Ords. of 2009, § 14.01(8)(g). Former § 74-128 pertained to investigation, and derived from the Comp. Ords. of 2009, § 14.01(8)(h).  
Sec. 74-129. - Granting of permit. 
(a)  No permit may be granted until and unless the public safety and human services committee by a majority vote has authorized granting of the same. 
(b)  If the committee decides not to issue a permit it shall notify the applicant of its decision in writing and state the reasons therefore. 
(c)  Permits shall be numbered in the order in which they are granted and shall contain the date of issuance, the amount of fee paid and the name of the permittee. No permit shall be valid at times or dates other than as stated on the face thereof, nor for longer than six months. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.01(8)(i); Ord. No. 2016-O-26, § 1, 11-22-2016)  
Sec. 74-130. - Appeals. 
Any applicant aggrieved by the committee's denial of a permit may appeal the denial to the common council by filing a written appeal setting forth the reasons why the denial of the permit is unreasonable, arbitrary or contrary to law within ten days after the committee's action to deny the permit. The city clerk shall refer the appeal to the next regular council meeting to be held no sooner than four days after the appeal is filed. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.01(8)(j))  
Sec. 74-131. - Abatement orders. 
In lieu of or in addition to issuing a citation or complaint, any law enforcement officer may issue an order requiring the immediate abatement of any source of sound in violation of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.01(8)(l))  
Secs. 74-132—74-142. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ABATEMENT 
 
Sec. 74-143. - Inspection of premises. 
Whenever a complaint is made to any city official or employee that a public nuisance exists within the city, said complaint shall be directed to the appropriate department head who shall in his/her reasonable discretion inspect or cause to be inspected the premises complained of and shall make a written report of his/her findings to the city administrator. Whenever practicable, the inspecting officer shall cause photographs to be made of the premises. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.14(8))  
Sec. 74-144. - Summary abatement; notice to owner. 
If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists within the city, the department head may serve notice personally or by certified mail on the persons causing, permitting, or maintaining such nuisance or and upon the owner or occupant of the premises where such nuisance is caused, permitted, or maintained and to post a copy of said notice on the premises. Such notice shall direct the person causing, permitting, or maintaining such nuisance or the owner or occupant of the premises to abate or remove such nuisance within a specified, reasonable period of time after consideration or all relevant circumstances and shall state that unless the same is done will cause the nuisance to be abated and will charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant, or person causing, permitting, or maintaining the nuisance, as the case may be and that said costs may be collected as a special charge pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.14(9)(a))  
Sec. 74-145. - By city. 
If the nuisance is not abated within the time provided or if the owner, occupant, or person causing the nuisance cannot be found, the department head shall cause the abatement or removal of such public nuisance. Wherever possible, costs or abatement shall be billed to the owner, occupant, or person causing the nuisance. If said costs are not paid within 30 days of billing such costs, or if the owner, occupant or person causing the nuisance cannot be found, said costs may be collected pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.14(9)(b))  
Sec. 74-146. - Other methods not excluded. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the city or its officials in accordance with the laws of the state including, but not limited to, an action under Wis. Stats. ch. 823. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.14(9)(c))  
Sec. 74-147. - Cost. 
In addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter for the erection, contrivance, continuance, or maintenance of a public nuisance, the cost of abating a public nuisance by the city shall be collected as a debt from the owner, occupant, or person causing, permitting, or maintaining the nuisance, and if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner, such cost shall be assessed against the real estate as a special charge. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.14(10))  
Secs. 74-148—74-177. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 74-178. - What constitutes a separate offense. 
Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Code shall preclude the city from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any provision contained in this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.14(11)(d))  
Sec. 74-179. - Execution against defendant's property. 
Whenever any person fails to pay any forfeiture and costs of prosecution upon the order of the court for violation of any ordinance of the city, the court may, in lieu of ordering imprisonment of the defendant, or after the defendant has been released from custody, issue an execution against the property of the defendant for said forfeiture and costs. 
(Comp. Ords. 2009, § 14.14(11)(e)) 
