Title 1: General Provisions
Chapter 1.01
CODE ADOPTION
§ 1.01.010. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to § 66.0103, Wis. Stats., the ordinances of the Village of Grafton
of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Village Board of the
Village of Grafton, as revised, codified and consolidated by General Code,
and consisting of Titles 1 through 25, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Village of Grafton," hereinafter
referred to as the "Code."
§ 1.01.020. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1.01.030. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of the ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of the
Code by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances
and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall
date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinances.
§ 1.01.040. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code has been filed in the office of the Village Clerk and has
remained there for use and examination by the public for at least two weeks,
in accordance with § 66.0103, Wis. Stats., and until final action is taken on
this ordinance, and, if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be
certified to by the Village Clerk, and such certified copy shall remain on file
in the office of said Village Clerk to be made available to persons desiring
to examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1.01.050. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Village Board
to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such
Code so that reference to the "Code of the Village of Grafton" shall be
understood and intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments
or supplements. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or
1.01:1
supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be inserted
in the Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1.01.060. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Village of Grafton, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required by law, a notice of the adoption of this
ordinance. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be maintained in the office
of the Clerk for inspection by the public at all times during regular office
hours. The publication of notice of the enactment of this ordinance, coupled
with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the public,
shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1.01.070. Code to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk, or someone authorized and directed
by the Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the Code required
to be filed in the Clerk's office for use by the public. All changes in said
Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this
codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code shall,
when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes
or new ordinances are included as supplements to said Code.
§ 1.01.080. Sale of Code.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk or an authorized agent of the Clerk upon the payment of a fee to
be set by the Village Board. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures for
the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1.01.090. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Village
of Grafton to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a penalty as
provided in Chapter 1.08 of the Code.
§ 1.01.100. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be
deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or
parts thereof. If any provision of this Code or the application thereof to any
person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this Code and the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected thereby.
§ 1.01.050 GRAFTON CODE § 1.01.110
1.01:2
§ 1.01.110. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1.01.120. Repealer.
§ 1.01.130. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1.01.120 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Village of Grafton which is
not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to
remain in full force and effect.
B. The following chapters of the code are repealed, effective with the
adoption of the Code:
1. Chapter 2.16, Director of Public Works.
2. Chapter 5.08, Auction Sales.
3. Chapter 5.12, Coin-Operated and Automatic Dry-Cleaning
Equipment.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to December 18, 2017.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred, including former Ch. 5.44 Cable Television Franchise.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name,
§ 1.01.110 CODE ADOPTION § 1.01.130
1.01:3
§ 1.01.140. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the Village's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
J. The annexation or dedication of property or approval of preliminary or
final subdivision plats.
K. Ordinances providing for local improvements or assessing taxes or
special assessments therefor.
L. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
N. Any ordinances adopting or amending the Zoning Map or otherwise
rezoning property.
O. Any charter ordinances.
P. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing or amending a
specific fee amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the
Village.
Q. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing or amending a
deposit or bond schedule.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing or amending
rates or charges for water or sewer service.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for publication as the Code
of the Village of Grafton, no changes in the meaning or intent of such
ordinances have been made, except as provided for in Subsections B
and C hereof. Certain grammatical changes and other minor
nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said pieces of
legislation. It is the intention of the Village Board that all such changes
be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
B. The following changes are made throughout the Code:
§ 1.01.130 GRAFTON CODE § 1.01.140
1.01:4
§ 1.01.150. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as required
by law.
Chapter 1.04
1. References to specific chapters and sections of the Wisconsin
Statutes and Wisconsin Administrative Code are amended to reflect
the numbering of the statutes and Administrative Code as of the
publication of this Code. References to state departments have also
been updated.
2. Nomenclature. The following terms are updated:
a. "Chairman" or "Chairperson" to "Chair."
b. "Zoning Board of Appeals" to "Board of Appeals."
c. "Firemen" and "policemen" to "firefighters" and "police
officers."
d. "Finance Director" to "Director of Administrative Services."
e. "Treasurer" to "Director of Administrative Services."
f. "Clerk-Treasurer" or "Clerk" to "Village Clerk."
g. "Health Officer," "Health Department" or "Village Health
Authorities" to "Village Health Inspector."
h. "Village Tree Committee" to "Board of Public Works."
i. "Water and Wastewater Commission" to "Board of Public
Works."
j. "Street Department" to "Department of Public Works."
k. "Planning Commission" to "Plan Commission."
l. "Master Plan" of Village to "Comprehensive Plan."
m. "Planning Director" to "Director of Planning and
Development."
C. The amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A attached
hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become effective
upon the effective date of this ordinance.1
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1.01.140C, the chapters and sections which were
amended, added, deleted or adopted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Title 1, General Provisions, Chapter 1.01, Code Adoption. During
routine supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, adopted, repealed) 8-6-2018 by
Ord. No. 004-2018." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is
on file in the Village offices.
§ 1.01.140 CODE ADOPTION § 1.01.150
1.01:5
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1.04.010. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the
Village of Grafton, Wisconsin, shall be construed as defined in this section
unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different
meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of
such words or phrases:
COUNTY — The County of Ozaukee.
LAW — Denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of
the State of Wisconsin, the ordinances of the Village of Grafton and, when
appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated
thereunder.
MAY — Is permissive.
MONTH — A calendar month.
MUST AND SHALL — Are each mandatory.
OATH — Includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by
law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in such cases, the
words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and
"affirmed."
OWNER — Applied to a building or land includes any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety of the whole
or a part of such building or land.
PERSON — Includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company,
partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust,
organization or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of
any of them.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Includes money, goods, chattel, things in action
and evidences of debt.
PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING — Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY — Includes real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY — Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street between the curbline and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
STATE — The State of Wisconsin.
STREET — Includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts,
places, squares, curbs or other public ways in this Village which have been
or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use or such other public
property so designated in any law of this state.
§ 1.01.150 GRAFTON CODE § 1.04.010
1.01:6
TENANT and OCCUPANT — Applied to a building or land, includes any
person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether
alone or with others.
VILLAGE AND TOWN — Each means the Village of Grafton and Town of
Grafton, Wisconsin, or the area within the territorial limits of the Village of
Grafton, Wisconsin, and such territory outside of the Village over which the
Village has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory
provision.
VILLAGE BOARD — The Village Board of the Village of Grafton. "All its
members" or "all its trustees" means the total number of trustees holding
office.
WISCONSIN STATUTES — The Wisconsin Statutes as of the adoption of this
Code, as amended or renumbered from time to time.[Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
WRITTEN — Includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed or
otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form.
YEAR — A calendar year.
§ 1.04.020. Title of office.
Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission
means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the
Village.
§ 1.04.030. Interpretation of language.
All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and
approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such
others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the
law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and
appropriate meaning.
§ 1.04.040. Grammatical interpretation.
The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the Village
of Grafton, unless it is apparent from the context that a different
construction is intended:
A. Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter
genders.
B. Singular and plural. The singular number includes the plural, and the
plural includes the singular.
C. Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future
tenses, and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable.
§ 1.04.010 CODE ADOPTION § 1.04.050
1.01:7
§ 1.04.050. Acts by agents.
When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may
be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be
construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent.
§ 1.04.060. Prohibited acts include causing and permitting.
Whenever in the ordinances of the Village of Grafton any act or omission
is made unlawful, it shall include the causing, allowing, permitting, aiding,
abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission.
§ 1.04.070. Computation of time.
Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required
to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last day, unless the last day is a Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall
also be excluded.
§ 1.04.080. Construction.
The provisions of the ordinances of the Village of Grafton and all
proceedings under them are to be construed with a view to effect their
objects and to promote justice.
§ 1.04.090. Repeal shall not revive any ordinances.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an
ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby.
Chapter 1.08
GENERAL PENALTY
§ 1.08.010. Penalty where no penalty provided.
In any case where there is a violation of any ordinance for which no penalty
is provided, the defendant shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than
$25 nor more than $500 for each offense, plus all taxable costs, surcharges
and assessments required or permitted by state statute, plus additional
penalties as provided in this chapter.
§ 1.08.020. Continuing offenses.
Each day on which a violation of any ordinance continues, exists or occurs
shall be considered a separate offense for which a separate penalty may be
imposed.
§ 1.04.050 GRAFTON CODE § 1.08.030
1.01:8
§ 1.08.030. Suspension or revocation of driving privileges.
In any case where there is a violation of an ordinance enacted in conformity
with state statute and a state statute permits the court to suspend or revoke
the defendant's driving privileges as a penalty, the court may order such
a suspension or revocation, but only for a duration authorized by state
statute. In any case where there is a violation of an ordinance enacted
in conformity with state statute and a state statute requires the court
to suspend or revoke the defendant's driving privileges as a penalty, the
court shall order such a suspension or revocation, but only for a duration
authorized by state statute.
§ 1.08.040. Restitution.
The court may order the defendant to pay restitution pursuant to § 800.093,
Wis. Stats., or any equivalent version of that statute as later amended or
renumbered.
§ 1.08.050. Penalties for nonpayment of forfeitures.
Penalties and remedies for nonpayment of forfeitures shall be pursuant to
§ 800.095, Wis. Stats., or any equivalent version of that statute as later
amended or renumbered.
Chapter 1.12
ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS
§ 1.12.010. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to the authority of § 66.0113, Wis. Stats., the Village elects to use
the citation method of enforcement of ordinances, including those for which
a statutory counterpart exists.
§ 1.12.020. Contents required.
The citation shall contain the following:
A. The name and address of the alleged violator.
B. Factual allegations describing the alleged violation.
C. The time and place of the offense.
D. The section of the ordinance violated.
E. A designation of the offense in such manner as can readily be
understood by a person making a reasonable effort to do so.
F. The time at which the alleged violator may appear in court.
G. A statement which in essence informs the alleged violator:
§ 1.08.030 CODE ADOPTION § 1.12.020
1.01:9
§ 1.12.030. Schedule of deposits. [Last amended by Ord. No. 017,
Series 2009]
1. That a cash deposit based on the schedule established by this
chapter may be made, which shall be delivered or mailed to the
Chief of Police of the Village prior to the time of the scheduled
court appearance.
2. That, if a cash deposit is made, no appearance in court is necessary
unless subsequently summoned.
3. That, if the alleged violator makes a cash deposit and does not
appear in court, he or she either will be deemed to have tendered a
plea of no contest and submitted to a forfeiture, plus costs, fees and
surcharges imposed under Ch. 814, Wis. Stats., not to exceed the
amount of the deposit or will be summoned into court to answer the
complaint if the court does not accept the plea of no contest.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code
Adoption)]
4. That, if the alleged violator does not make a cash deposit and does
not appear in court at the time specified, the court may issue a
summons or a warrant for the defendant's arrest or consider the
nonappearance to be a plea of no contest and enter judgment under
§ 66.0113(3)(d), Wis. Stats., or the municipality may commence an
action against the alleged violator to collect the forfeiture, plus
costs, fees and surcharges imposed under Ch. 814, Wis. Stats.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code
Adoption)]
H. A direction that, if the alleged violator elects to make a cash deposit,
the statement which accompanies the citation shall be signed to
indicate that the statement required under Subsection G of this section
has been read. Such statement shall be sent or brought with the cash
deposit.
I. Such other information as the Village deems necessary.
The form of the citation is on file in the Village administrative offices
and is incorporated into this chapter by reference.
A. The following schedule of cash deposits is established for use with
citations issued under this chapter. The officer issuing any citation shall
add to the bond amount listed herein all applicable court costs, fees and
surcharges as required by the court and/or by state statute.
1. For the following offenses, $75 deposit for all instances:
Bicycle violations
2. For the following offenses, $75 deposit for the first offense; $125
deposit for the second offense; $175 for the third offense:
§ 1.12.020 GRAFTON CODE § 1.12.030
1.01:10
§ 1.12.040. Issuance.
Curfew violations
Fireworks violations
Library violations
Park violations
Skateboard/play vehicle violations
Snowmobile violations
Tobacco violations
3. For the following offenses, $300 deposit for the first offense; $400
deposit for the second offense; $500 deposit for the third offense:
Licensed premises open after hours
Battery
Disorderly conduct
Possession of drug paraphernalia
Graffiti violations
Lewd and lascivious behavior
Possession of marijuana
Obstructing or resisting an officer
Theft-related property crimes
Retail theft
Weapons violations
4. For any violation not otherwise listed in Subsection A.1 through 3
which is a violation of a municipal ordinance adopting by reference
a state statute classified in the statute as a misdemeanor or felony
offense, a deposit of $500 for the first and any subsequent offense.
5. For any violation not otherwise listed in Subsection A.1 through 4, a
deposit of $125 for the first offense, a deposit of $200 for the
second offense, and a deposit of $300 for the third offense.
6. For all violations, fourth and subsequent offenses shall issue with a
deposit of $500.
7. In determining the number of prior offenses for false alarm
citations, the issuing officer shall only consider prior violations
occurring in the calendar year of the violation in question.
A. Any law enforcement officer may issue citations for enforcement of any
ordinances authorized under this chapter.
§ 1.12.030 CODE ADOPTION § 1.12.040
1.01:11
B. The following officials of the Village are authorized to issue citations for
enforcement of those ordinances specified. Such officials may delegate
authority to their subordinates upon approval by the Village Board.
Portion of
Code Offense Enforcement Official
Ch. 2.26 Violation of park
regulations
Chief of Police
Ch. 2.50 Civilian defense Chief of Police, Civilian
Defense Director
Ch. 5.20 Registration of
amusement and music
devices
Chief of Police
Ch. 5.24 Peddlers, canvassers
and transient
merchants
Chief of Police
Ch. 5.32 Public amusements and
shows
Chief of Police, Village
Health Inspector, Building
Inspector
Ch. 6.04 Keeping of animals and
fowl
Chief of Police
Ch. 6.08 Regulation and
licensing of dogs and
cats
Chief of Police
§§ 8.20.010
through
8.20.130
Garbage and refuse
collection and disposal
Chief of Police, Director of
Public Works, Building
Inspector
§ 8.20.140 Village dump Chief of Police, Director of
Public Works
§ 8.24.010 Swimming prohibited in
Milwaukee River
Chief of Police
Ch. 8.25 Misuse of E911 Chief of Police
§ 8.40.010 Creating a nuisance Village Health Inspector
§§ 9.32.030 and
9.40.030
Nuisances Chief of Police
§§ 9.40.010 and
9.40.020
Public nuisances Chief of Police
Ch. 10.68 Milwaukee River
markers and navigation
aids
Chief of Police
Ch. 11.08 Street, alley and
sidewalk grades
Director of Public Works,
Building Inspector
§ 11.36.010 Snow and ice removal Chief of Police, Director of
Public Works
§ 1.12.040 GRAFTON CODE § 1.12.040
1.01:12
§ 1.12.045. Delegation of enforcement authority by Director of
Public Works. [Amended by Ord. No. A-528-1989, 1989]
Wherever in § 1.12.040 the Director of Public Works is named as the
enforcement official, the Director of Public Works is authorized to delegate
his citation enforcement authority to the Field Supervisor of Public Works.
§ 1.12.050. Default options and procedure; statutes adopted.
The provisions of § 66.0113(3), Wis. Stats., relating to violator's options
and procedure on default, are adopted and incorporated in this chapter by
reference.
Portion of
Code Offense Enforcement Official
§ 11.40.010 Streets, alleys and
sidewalks
Director of Public Works
§ 12.08.070 Sewer use Director of Public Works,
Water and Wastewater
Director, Building Inspector
Title 14 Trailers and trailer
coaches
Chief of Police, Village
Health Inspector, Chief of
Fire Department, Building
Inspector
Ch. 16.04 Wisconsin Uniform
Building Code adopted
by the Village
Building Inspector
§ 16.08.180 Electrical Code Electrical Inspector
§§ 16.12.090
through
16.12.140
Plumbing permits Plumbing Inspector
§ 16.12.190 Foundation drains and
sump pumps
Building Inspector
§ 16.12.220 Plumbing Code Plumbing Inspector
Ch. 16.20 Private alarm systems Chief of Police
Title 192 Zoning Code Building Inspector
Title 21 Floodplain Code Zoning Administrator
Title 22 Shoreland/Wetland
Zoning
Zoning Administrator
Title 23 Stormwater
management
Director of Public Works
2. Editor's Note: This reference is to the Village's Zoning Code, which is accessible on the
Village's website.
§ 1.12.040 CODE ADOPTION § 1.12.060
1.01:13
§ 1.12.060. Nonexclusivity.
Adoption of this chapter in no way precludes the adoption of any other
ordinance providing for the enforcement of any other law or ordinance
relating to the same or any other matter. The issuance of a citation under
this chapter in no way precludes the proceeding under any other law or
ordinance relating to the same or any other matter.
Chapter 1.16
POSTING OF LEGAL NOTICES
§ 1.16.010. Procedure; location.
Chapter 1.20
ADVISORY REFERENDUMS
§ 1.20.010. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish specific guidelines and
procedures for an advisory referendum in the Village of Grafton and to
authorize measures for matters of substantial public interest and discussion
while respecting the principles of representative democracy and the
decisionmaking responsibilities of the Village Board and other municipal
offices as provided by state law.
§ 1.20.020. Limitations. [Amended by Ord. No. 023, Series 2009]
Except where an advisory referendum procedure is otherwise established
by law, an advisory referendum shall be conducted only in accordance with
the procedures of this chapter. The provisions of the chapter shall not apply
to an advisory referendum presented by the Village Board of Trustees to the
electorate of the Village of Grafton. Any advisory referendum referred to the
electorate by the Village Board shall require a two-thirds' majority (5 of 7)
vote of the members-elect to proceed.
A. Pursuant to § 985.05(1), Wis. Stats., as amended by 2015 Senate Bill
137, the Village of Grafton directs that legal notices shall be posted
upon the official bulletin board and the Village of Grafton website,
whenever the same is not contrary to law.
B. The bulletin board located in the following location is declared to be the
official bulletin board of the Village: the bulletin board located in the
outer lobby of the Grafton Police Department, 1981 Washington Street.
C. The Village of Grafton website access address is hereby officially
identified as: www.QualityLifeGrafton.com.
§ 1.12.060 GRAFTON CODE § 1.20.030
1.01:14
§ 1.20.030. Notice of intent to circulate advisory referendum
petition.
An advisory referendum may be held upon the filing of a "Notice of Intent
to Circulate an Advisory Referendum Petition," signed by a committee of
electors of the Village of not less than 10 Village of Grafton registered
voters, with the Village Clerk prior to a legislative decision of the Village
Board on the matter to be submitted for advisory referendum.
§ 1.20.040. Review of referendum question; administrative or
legislative matter.
§ 1.20.050. Referendum petition requirements.
A. Prior to the submission of any question for advisory referendum
pursuant to this chapter, the question to be submitted for an advisory
referendum shall be submitted to the Village Clerk for forwarding to the
Village Attorney. The Village Attorney shall review the question and
determine if the question(s) involves an administrative or legislative
matter. The Village Attorney shall submit a report to the Village Board
which shall review said report and make a final determination as to
whether or not the question(s) involves an administrative or legislative
matter. If the question is found to be legislative, it shall be submitted to
the voters upon compliance with § 1.20.050 of this chapter. If the
question is found to be administrative, the question shall not be
submitted to the electors of the Village of Grafton.
B. Submission of the notice of intent to circulate an advisory referendum
petition for an advisory referendum shall proscribe a final legislative
decision on the proposed advisory question by the Village Board until:
1. The proposed advisory question is found to be an administrative not
legislative matter; or
2. The allotted time for filing a verified petition has elapsed without a
petition being filed; or
3. A petition is filed within the allotted time but is found to be
insufficient; or
4. A sufficient petition is filed and the advisory question has been
submitted to the voters.
A. A referendum petition signed by the number of electors equal to a
minimum of 30% of the votes cast for Governor at the last general
election in the Village of Grafton must be submitted within 20 calendar
days of the filing of the notice of intent to circulate a referendum
petition.
B. Each page of the petition to be circulated shall contain at its head, or
attached thereto, the names and addresses of the persons submitting
§ 1.20.030 CODE ADOPTION § 1.20.050
1.01:15
§ 1.20.060. Board to submit question to electors.
The Board of Trustees shall, without alteration, submit the question to the
electors at the next spring or general election, if the election is more than
six weeks after the date the order is given. If six weeks or less before
the election, the question shall be voted on at the next election thereafter.
The Board of Trustees, by a three-fourths' vote of the members-elect, may
order a special election for the purpose of submitting the question to the
electorate at any time prior to the next election.
§ 1.20.070. Publication of question.
Not more than three weeks or less than one week before the election, the
Village Clerk shall cause the question that is being submitted to a vote to be
published once in the official Village newspaper.
§ 1.20.080. Vote to be advisory in nature.
The vote on the question shall be used only as a guideline to the Board of
Trustees from their electors and shall be advisory only.
Title 2: Administration and Personnel
Chapter 2.02
ELECTED OFFICIALS
§ 2.02.010. Trustees.
There shall be six Trustees of the Village, three of whom shall be elected
annually at the spring election for terms of two years.
§ 2.02.020. Village President.
The Village President shall be elected at the spring election in oddnumbered
years for a term of two years.
the notice of intent to circulate petition and the exact text of the
advisory referendum question.
C. Each page of the petition shall include a certificate by the circulator,
verified by oath, that each signature subscribed in the petition was
made in his presence and that the circulator believes it to be the
genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be.
D. Within 15 working days, the Village Clerk shall examine the petition for
its sufficiency and issue a written report to the Village Board. If the
petition is found sufficient, the Village Board shall submit the advisory
referendum question to the voters pursuant to the requirements of
§ 1.20.060 of this chapter. If the petition is not sufficient, the advisory
referendum question shall not be submitted to the voters.
§ 1.20.050 GRAFTON CODE § 2.02.020
1.01:16
Chapter 2.04
APPOINTED OFFICIALS
§ 2.04.010. Appointment of Village officials.
Chapter 2.06
VACANCIES
A. Pursuant to §§ 61.195 and 66.0011, Wis. Stats., the Village elects not to
be governed by these portions of §§ 61.19 and 61.23, Wis. Stats., which
relate to the selection and tenure of the Village Clerk, Treasurer and
Assessor.
B. Appointments by Village Administrator.
1. The Village Administrator shall appoint, subject to the confirmation
of the Village Board, the following positions: [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
a. Director of Public Works;
b. Director of Administrative Services;
c. Village Clerk;
d. Building Inspector;
e. Director of Parks and Recreation;
f. Director of Planning and Development.
2. The incumbent in each position is subject to removal at any time by
the Village Administrator, subject to the confirmation of a majority
vote of the incumbent Village Board.
C. The Village officials set forth in this subsection shall be appointed at the
regular meeting of the Village Board on the third Monday in December.
The appointments shall be made by the Village President with the
approval of a majority of the members of the Village Board, unless
otherwise provided by ordinance. The Village President shall not vote
on such confirmation. The term of office of each such official shall be as
indicated, and all terms shall commence on the first day of January for
the following appointments:
1. Village Attorney, two years;
2. Emergency Management Director, two years. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
§ 2.02.020 CODE ADOPTION § 2.06.010
1.01:17
§ 2.06.010. Occurrence.
A vacancy in an office shall result from the happening of any event listed in
§ 17.24, Wis. Stats.
§ 2.06.020. Filling vacancies.
§ 2.06.030. Temporary vacancies.
Temporary vacancies resulting from incapacity or absence of any Village
official may be filled by appointment by the Village Board.
Chapter 2.08
VILLAGE BOARD
§ 2.08.010. Regular meetings. [Amended by Ord. No. A-008-91,
1991; Ord. No. 008-94, 1994; Ord. No. 011, 1995; Ord. No. 027,
Series 2003]
§ 2.08.020. Special meetings.
Special meetings of the Village Board may be called by any two Trustees
in writing, filed with the Village Clerk at least 24 hours prior to the time
specified for such meetings. The Village Clerk shall immediately notify each
Trustee of the time and purpose of such meeting by causing a written notice
thereof to be delivered to each Trustee personally if he can be found, and
if he cannot be found, then by leaving a copy of such notice at the home of
such Trustee. The Village Clerk shall cause an affidavit showing service of
A. Elected officials. A vacancy in any elective office may be filled by
appointment of a majority of the members of the Village Board for the
residue of the unexpired term or until a special election is held pursuant
to § 17.24(2), Wis. Stats. A Trustee may be appointed to fill an
unexpired term of a vacated Village President.
B. Appointed officials. A vacancy in an appointive office shall be filled in
the same manner as the original appointment.
A. Regular meetings of the Village Board shall be held on the first Monday
evening and on the third Monday evening of each calendar month at
6:00 p.m., except that in the month of April of each year the regular
meetings of the Village Board shall be held on the first Monday evening
and the third Tuesday evening at 6:00 p.m. [Amended by Ord. No.
006, Series 2008]
B. Any regular meeting falling on a legal holiday in which the Village
offices are closed shall be held on the next following day at the same
hour and place. All meetings of the Board and adjourned meetings,
except when otherwise directed by the Village Board, shall be held in
the Village Hall.
§ 2.06.010 GRAFTON CODE § 2.08.020
1.01:18
such notice as provided in this section to be filed in his office prior to the
time fixed for such special meeting. Special meetings may be held without
such notice when all members of the Village Board are present in person
or consent in writing to the holding of such meeting, such written consent
to be filed with the Village Clerk prior to the beginning of the meeting.
Public notice of such special meeting shall be given at least 24 hours prior
to the commencement of such meeting, unless for good cause such notice
is impossible or impractical; in which case shorter notice may be given, but
in no case may the notice be provided less than two hours in advance of the
meeting.
§ 2.08.030. Adjournment of meetings.
The Village Board may, by a majority of those present but not less than three
affirmative votes, adjourn from time to time to a specific date and hour.
§ 2.08.040. Order of business. [Amended by Ord. No. A-009-91,
1991; Ord. No. 027, Series 2003; 10-2-2017 by Ord. No. 009, Series
2017]
The business of the Village Board shall be conducted in the following order.
§ 2.08.050. Presiding officer; Village President.
The Village President at the stated hour shall call the meeting to order.
He shall preserve order and decorum, decide all questions of order, and
conduct the proceedings of the meeting in accordance with the
parliamentary rules contained in Robert's Rules of Order, unless otherwise
provided by statute or these rules. Any member shall have the right of
appeal from a decision of the presiding officer. No appeal shall be debatable,
A. Call to order/pledge of allegiance to the flag;
B. Roll call of trustees/department heads/officials;
C. Conduct public hearing(s), if applicable;
D. Approval/filing of minutes;
E. Persons requesting to be heard;
F. Business presented by President;
G. Resolutions/ordinances/action items;
H. License applications;
I. Report of bills;
J. Departments' and officers' reports;
K. Adjournment.
§ 2.08.020 CODE ADOPTION § 2.08.050
1.01:19
and the appeal may be sustained by a majority of the members present,
exclusive of the President.
§ 2.08.060. Presiding officer in absence of President.
If the President is absent at the designated time for any meeting, the Village
Clerk or, in his absence, the senior Trustee present based on date of original
election as Trustee shall call the meeting to order and preside until the
Village Board shall, by motion, select an acting President for that meeting.
§ 2.08.070. Presiding officer; vacating Chair.
Whenever the presiding officer shall desire to speak upon any question or
to make any motion he shall vacate the Chair and designate a Trustee to
preside temporarily.
§ 2.08.080. Committees; appointment. [Amended by Ord. No. 006,
1999; amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code
Adoption)]
The following committees shall be appointed by the Village President,
subject to the approval of the majority of the Village Board, at the second
regular meeting in April of each year:
§ 2.08.090. Committees; composition. [Amended by Ord. No. 017,
Series 2002; 1-21-2013 by Ord. No. 008-2013]]
§ 2.08.100. Ordinances and resolutions.
A. Finance Committee, includes claims, insurance, codes, personnel.
A. The composition of the Finance Committee shall be as follows: four
Village Board members. The Village President shall be the Chair. Each
member shall serve as appointed unless excused by a majority of the
members of the Village Board.
A. Form. No ordinance or resolution shall be considered by the Village
Board unless presented by a Trustee in writing.
B. Referral to committee. All ordinances, resolutions, communications and
other matters submitted to the Village Board shall be read by title and
author and referred to the appropriate committee by the President. The
Village Clerk shall read and record each such reference by title. Any
Trustee may require the reading in full of any matter at any time it is
before the Village Board. All bills and other financial claims against the
Village shall, upon receipt thereof, be immediately referred by the
Village Clerk to the Finance Committee for report thereon at the
ensuing meeting of the Village Board.
C. Committee report. Each committee shall, at the next regular meeting,
submit a written report on all matters referred to it, unless a longer
time be granted by vote of the Village Board, and such report shall be
§ 2.08.050 GRAFTON CODE § 2.08.100
1.01:20
§ 2.08.110. Deliberations of Board.
The deliberations of the Village Board shall be conducted in the following
manner:
entered in the proceedings. Such report shall recommend a definite
action by the Village Board on each item, shall be signed by a majority
of the committee, and shall be filed with the Village Clerk prior to
each meeting. Minority reports may be submitted. Previous notice of
each committee meeting shall be filed with the Village Clerk, and
each meeting shall be open to the public. Any committee may require
any Village officer to confer with it and supply information needed in
connection with any matter pending before the committee.
D. Vote on committee report. Any aye and nay vote shall be taken on each
committee report immediately following its submission, provided that
any Trustee may require a separate vote on any ordinance, resolution or
other matter in any report. Action upon a specific matter included in
any committee report shall be deferred until the next regular meeting
following the submission of the report upon the request of any two
Trustees. The approval of a committee report in which the adoption of
an ordinance or resolution is recommended shall comprise final action
on such ordinance or resolution, and likewise for other actions
recommended by the committee on any matter.
E. Appropriations. All ordinances or resolutions appropriating money or
creating any charge against the Village other than the payment of
claims for purchases or work previously authorized by the Village Board
shall only be acted upon by the Board at the next regular meeting,
provided that this provision may be suspended by affirmative action by
three-fourths of all members of the Village Board. A roll-call vote shall
be taken and recorded on all appropriations.
A. No Trustee shall address the Village Board until he has been recognized
by the presiding officer. He shall thereupon address himself to the
President and confine his remarks to the question under discussion and
avoid all personalities.
B. When two or more members simultaneously seek recognition, the
presiding officer shall name the member who is to speak first.
C. No person other than a member shall address the Village Board, except
by vote of a majority of the members present.
D. No motion shall be discussed or acted upon unless and until it has been
seconded, unless the rules permit one Trustee to initiate action. No
motion shall be withdrawn or amended without the consent of the
person making the same and the person seconding it.
E. When a question is under discussion, no action shall be in order, except:
1. To adjourn;
§ 2.08.100 CODE ADOPTION § 2.08.110
1.01:21
§ 2.08.120. Reconsideration of question. [Amended by Ord. No. 016,
Series 1998]
It shall be in order for any member who voted with the prevailing side to
move for a reconsideration of the vote on any question at that meeting or
at the succeeding regular meeting. A motion to reconsider being put and
lost shall not be renewed. A Trustee cannot change his vote on any question
after the result has been announced.
§ 2.08.130. Suspension of rules.
The rules enumerated in this chapter or any part thereof may be
temporarily suspended in connection with any matter under consideration
by a recorded vote of two-thirds of the members present.
Chapter 2.10
2. To lay on the table;
3. The previous question;
4. To postpone to a certain day;
5. To refer to a committee;
6. To amend;
7. To postpone indefinitely.
These motions shall have precedence in the order listed.
F. Any member desiring to terminate debate may move the previous
question, in which event the President shall announce the question as
"Shall the main question now be put?" If a majority of the members
present vote in the affirmative, the main question shall be taken without
further debate; its effect being to put an end to all debate and bring the
Village Board to a direct vote, first upon any pending amendments and
then upon the main question.
G. Any Trustee may demand any aye and nay vote on any matter, and such
vote shall be entered in the proceedings. Every member shall vote when
a question is put, unless the Village Board, by a majority vote of those
present, excuses him for special cause. A majority vote of all members
of the Village Board in favor of any proposed ordinance, resolution or
appointment shall be necessary for passage or approval, unless a larger
number is required by statute. Except as otherwise provided, a majority
vote of those present shall prevail in other cases.
H. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order, and a motion to adjourn, to
lay on the table, and a call for the previous question shall be decided
without debate.
§ 2.08.110 GRAFTON CODE § 2.08.130
1.01:22
PUBLIC SAFETY COMMITTEE
§ 2.10.010. Membership; organization.
The Public Safety Committee of the Village shall consist of five members,
three appointed by the Village of Grafton Board and two appointed by the
Town of Grafton Board.
§ 2.10.020. Appointment.
The Village Trustee members of the Public Safety Committee shall be
appointed by the Village President and confirmed by the Village Board
annually at the second Village Board meeting in April. A Village Trustee
member of the Public Safety Committee shall serve for one year unless his/
her office becomes vacant.
§ 2.10.030. Ex officio members.
The Village President, the Village Administrator, Police Chief, Fire Chief,
Emergency Management Director and Building Inspector shall be ex officio
members of the Public Safety Committee.
§ 2.10.040. Quorum.
A quorum of the Public Safety Committee for meetings in which non-Fire
Department-related items are listed on the meeting agenda shall be two
Village Trustee members. A quorum of the Public Safety Committee for
meetings on which Fire Department-related items are listed on the meeting
agenda shall be three members of the Public Safety Committee.
§ 2.10.050. Vacancies.
Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of members whose terms
become vacant in the same manner as originally appointed.
§ 2.10.060. Powers and duties.
The Public Safety Committee shall act in an advisory capacity to the Village
Board regarding matters related to the following:
A. To ensure overall public safety through review of police, fire and
inspection operations and recommendations to other pertinent
committees or boards;
B. To periodically review and update those ordinances concerned with
overall public safety and make recommendations to the Village Board;
C. To review the regulations of traffic;
D. To recommend to the Village Board the approval of certain purchases
relative to police and fire matters;
§ 2.08.130 CODE ADOPTION § 2.10.060
1.01:23
Chapter 2.14
CHIEF OF POLICE
§ 2.14.010. Offices of marshal and constable abolished.
Pursuant to §§ 61.195 and 61.197, Wis. Stats., the Village elects not to be
governed by those portions of §§ 61.19 and 61.23, Wis. Stats., relating to
the selection and tenure of constable and marshal and hereby abolishes the
offices of constable and marshal.
§ 2.14.020. Office of Chief of Police created.
There is created the office of Village Chief of Police, who shall be appointed
as the Village Board shall determine by ordinance.
§ 2.14.030. Statutory duties and power of Chief.
The Chief of Police shall have the powers, privileges and duties of village
marshal and village constable under §§ 61.28 and 61.29, Wis. Stats., and
shall perform such other duties as may be required by the Village Board.
§ 2.14.040. Enforcement of laws.
The Chief shall possess the powers, enjoy the privileges and be subject
to the liabilities conferred and imposed by law upon village marshals and
constables. He shall cause the public peace to be preserved and see that
all laws and ordinances of the Village and state are enforced, and whenever
any violation thereof shall come to his knowledge, he shall cause the
requisite complaint to be made and see that the evidence is procured for
the prosecution of the offender.
§ 2.14.050. Orders of Village Board.
The Chief shall obey all lawful written orders of the Village Board.
E. To recommend a forum for the public to review various permits and
inspection complaints, to include special use permits, and make
recommendations to the Village Board;
F. To review the Police, Fire and Inspection Departments' proposed
budgets annually and make recommendations to the Finance
Committee;
G. To recommend to the Village Board the adoption of such ordinances
that will promote safety to our citizens;
H. To review inspection procedures relating to fire and safety; and
I. To review parking, traffic or pedestrian complaints and make
recommendations to the Village Board.
§ 2.10.060 GRAFTON CODE § 2.14.060
1.01:24
§ 2.14.060. Supervision of Department.
§ 2.14.070. Care of equipment.
It shall be the sole responsibility of the Chief of Police to care for the
equipment of the Department.
§ 2.14.080. Records.
The Chief shall keep an accurate and complete record of all complaints,
arrests, traffic violations, convictions and dispositions of the Department.
Chapter 2.18
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
§ 2.18.010. Office of Village Administrator.
In order to provide the Village with a more efficient, effective and
responsible government under a system of part-time Village President and
part-time Village Trustees at a time when Village government is becoming
increasingly complex, there is created the office of the Village Administrator
for the Village (hereinafter referred to as "Administrator").
§ 2.18.020. Appointment, term of office and removal. [Amended by
Ord. No. 009, Series 1998; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1.01, Code Adoption)]
The Administrator shall be appointed on the basis of merit with due regard
to training, experience, administrative ability and general fitness for the
office, by a two-thirds vote of the Village Board of Trustees. The
Administrator shall hold office for an indefinite term subject to removal at
any time by a majority vote of the Village Board of Trustees. This section,
however, shall not preclude the Village Board of Trustees from establishing
other employment terms and conditions not inconsistent with the provisions
of this article or this code.
§ 2.18.030. (Reserved)3
A. The Chief of Police shall supervise all personnel of his Department and
shall formulate rules and regulations for the discipline, equipment and
uniforms of police officers, subject to the approval of the Village Board.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code
Adoption)]
B. He shall have the authority to suspend without pay for a period not
exceeding 30 days; to demote or remove from employment any police
officer for misconduct, incompetence, inefficiency, cowardice, failure to
perform duties or to observe rules and regulations of the Department,
subject to the right of the aggrieved party to appeal to the Village
Board.
§ 2.14.060 CODE ADOPTION § 2.18.040
1.01:25
§ 2.18.040. Functions and duties of Administrator.
The Administrator, subject to the limitations defined in resolutions and
ordinances of the Village and Wisconsin Statutes, shall be the chief
administrative officer of the Village, responsible only to the Village Board
of Trustees (consisting of the Village President and other Trustees) for the
proper administration of the business affairs of the Village pursuant to the
statutes of the State of Wisconsin, the ordinances of the Village of Grafton,
and the resolutions, board motions and directives of the Village Board of
Trustees, with power and duties as follows:
A. General duties.
1. Carry out directives of the Village Board of Trustees which require
administrative implementation, reporting promptly to the Village
Board of Trustees any difficulties encountered therein;
2. Be responsible for the administration of all day-to-day operations of
the Village government, including the monitoring of all Village
ordinances, resolutions, Board meeting minutes and state statutes;
3. Prepare a plan of administration, including an organization chart,
which defines authority and responsibility for all nonstatutory
positions of the Village and submit it to the Village Board of
Trustees for adoption as the official organization and
administrative procedure plan for the Village;
4. Establish, when necessary, administrative procedures to increase
the effectiveness and efficiency of Village government according to
current practices in local government not inconsistent with
Subsection A.3 of this section or directives of the Village Board of
Trustees;
5. Serve as ex officio nonvoting member of all boards, commissions
and committees of the Village, except as specified by the Village
Board of Trustees or Wisconsin Statutes;
6. Keep informed concerning current federal, state and county
legislation and administrative rules affecting the Village and
submit appropriate reports and recommendations thereon to the
Village Board of Trustees;
7. Keep informed concerning the availability of federal, state and
county funds for local programs. Assist department heads and the
Village Board of Trustees in obtaining these funds under the
direction of the Village Board of Trustees;
8. Represent the Village in matters involving legislative and
intergovernmental affairs as authorized and directed as to that
representation by the Village Board of Trustees;
3. Editor's Note: Former § 2.18.030, Residency, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption).
§ 2.18.040 GRAFTON CODE § 2.18.040
1.01:26
9. Act as public information officer for the Village with the
responsibility of assuring that the news media are kept informed
about the operations of the Village and that all open meeting rules
and regulations are followed;
10. Establish and maintain procedures to facilitate communications
between citizens and Village government to assure that complaints,
grievances, recommendations and other matters receive prompt
attention by responsible officials, and to assure that all such
matters are expeditiously resolved;
11. Promote the economic well-being and growth of the Village through
public and private sector cooperation.
B. Responsibilities to the Village Board.
1. Attend all meetings of the Village Board of Trustees (unless
excused by the Village President or majority vote of the Village
Board of Trustees), assisting the Village President and other Village
Trustees as required in the performance of their duties;
2. In coordination with the Village President, the Village Board of
Trustees and the Village Clerk, ensure that appropriate agendas
are prepared for all meetings of the Village Board of Trustees, all
Village Board committees, and all other appropriate committees
and commissions of the Village, together with such supporting
material as may be required; with nothing herein being construed
as to give the Administrator authority to limit or in any way prevent
matters from being considered by the Village Board of Trustees or
any of its committees or commissions;
3. Assist in the preparation of ordinances and resolutions as
requested by the Village President or Village Board of Trustees, or
as needed;
4. Keep the Village Board of Trustees regularly informed about the
activities of the Administrator's office by oral or written report at
regular and special meetings of the Board of Trustees;
5. In the event that action normally requiring Village Board approval
is required at a time when the Village Board cannot meet, the
Administrator shall receive directives from the Village President.
C. Personnel.
1. Be responsible for the administrative direction and coordination of
all employees of the Village according to the established
organizational procedures;
2. Recommend to the Village Board of Trustees the appointment,
promotion and, when necessary for the good of the Village, the
suspension or termination of department heads;
§ 2.18.040 CODE ADOPTION § 2.18.040
1.01:27
Chapter 2.22
JOINT LIBRARY BOARD
3. Be responsible for the appointment, promotion, suspension or
termination of all other employees under the direct operating
authority of the Village Board in consultation with the appropriate
department heads;
4. Serve as personnel officer for the Village with responsibilities to
see that complete and current records, including specific job
descriptions for all Village employees, are kept; evaluate in
conjunction with department heads the performance of all
employees on a regular basis; recommend salary and wage scales
for Village employees not covered by collective bargaining
agreements; develop and enforce high standards of performance by
Village employees; assure that the Village employees have proper
working conditions; work closely with department heads to
promptly resolve personnel problems or grievances;
5. Be responsible for labor contract negotiations and collective
bargaining issues;
6. Work closely with department heads to assure that employees
receive adequate opportunities for training to maintain and
improve their job-related knowledge and skills and act as the
approving authority for requests by employees to attend
conferences, meetings, training schools, etc., provided that funds
have been budgeted for these activities.
D. Budgeting and purchasing.
1. Be responsible for preparation, posting and publishing, and all
official notices required, of the annual Village budget and Village
budget proceedings, in accordance with guidelines as may be
provided by the Village Board of Trustees and in coordination with
department heads and pursuant to state statutes, for review and
approval by the Village Board of Trustees;
2. Administer the budget as adopted by the Village Board of Trustees;
3. Report regularly to the Village Board of Trustees on the current
fiscal position of the Village;
4. Supervise the accounting systems of the Village and ensure that
these systems employ methods in accordance with current
professional accounting practices;
5. Serve as purchasing agent for the Village, supervising all
purchasing and contracting for supplies and services, subject to the
purchasing procedures established by the Village Board and any
limitations contained in the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 2.18.040 GRAFTON CODE § 2.22.010
1.01:28
§ 2.22.010. Administration of Library. [Amended by Ord. No.
A-560-90, 1990]
The Library of the Village shall be administered by a joint library board
appointed by resolution adopted from time to time by the Village. The
trustee members of such joint library board shall be appointed at the second
regular meeting in April of each year.
§ 2.22.020. Powers and duties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
The Library Board shall have the duties and powers as prescribed in
§§ 43.52, 43.53, 43.54, 43.58, 43.60 and 43.72, Wis. Stats.
§ 2.22.030. Returning library materials. [Amended by Ord. No.
A-556-90, 1990]
A. Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter certain words and terms
are defined as follows:
LIBRARY — Any public library, library of an educational or historical
organization or society or museum, and specifically the public libraries
within the Village.
LIBRARY MATERIAL — Includes any book, plate, picture, photograph,
engraving, painting, drawing, map,, newspaper, magazine, pamphlet,
broadside, sound recording, audio-visual materials in any format,
magnetic or other tapes, electronic data processing records, or other
tapes, artifacts or other documentary, written or printed materials,
regardless of physical form or characteristic, belonging to, on loan to
or otherwise in the custody of a library.
B. Concealment. The concealment of library material beyond the last
station for borrowing library material in a library is evidence of intent
to deprive the library of possession of the material. The discovery of
library material which has not been borrowed in accordance with the
library's procedures or taken with the consent of a library official, agent
or employee and which is concealed upon the person or among the
belongings of another is evidence of intentional concealment on the
part of the person so concealing the material.
C. Detention based on probable cause. An official or adult employee or
agent of the library who has probable cause for believing that a person
has violated this section in his or her presence may detain the person in
a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time to deliver the
person to the library investigator appointed by the library board, or to
the person's parent or guardian in the case of a minor. The detained
person shall be promptly informed of the purpose of the detention and
be permitted to make telephone calls but shall not be searched against
his or her will before the arrival of the library investigator, who may
conduct a lawful interrogation of the accused person. Compliance with
this section entitles the official, agent or employee effecting the
§ 2.22.010 CODE ADOPTION § 2.22.030
1.01:29
Chapter 2.24
POLICE AND FIRE COMMISSION
§ 2.24.010. Composition.
Chapter 2.25
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 2.25.010. Establishment of Fire Department.
The Village of Grafton Fire Department consists of a Fire Chief and such
number of officers as shall from time to time be provided for and authorized
for hire by the Village Board and appointed by the Fire Chief. The
Department is organized under § 62.13, Wis. Stats., and it operates
pursuant to the laws of the State of Wisconsin and ordinances of the Village
Board under the direct supervision of the Fire Chief, who is responsible for
the program of fire defense and prevention and emergency medical services
detention to the same defense in any action as is available to a peace
officer making an arrest in the line of duty.
D. Failure to return materials. Any person who has charged out any books
or other materials from the U.S.S. Liberty Memorial Public Library in
accordance with the rules and regulations adopted by the Grafton Joint
Library Board of Trustees and who has failed to return said books or
materials on or before the date that said books or materials were to
have been returned to the U.S.S. Liberty Memorial Public Library and
who has received a written notice to return materials owned by or in
charge of the U.S.S. Liberty Memorial Public Library, or any person to
whom the library has attempted to send such a notice but is unable to
do so because said person failed to inform the library of a change of
address, and who fails to return said materials according to the rules
and regulations adopted by the Grafton Joint Library Board of Trustees,
shall be fined. [Amended by Ord. No. 019, Series 2009]
E. The failure to return any single book, periodical, pamphlet, picture,
recording or any other item belonging to or in the charge of the U.S.S.
Liberty Memorial Public Library shall constitute a separate offense.
A. The Police and Fire Commission shall consist of five citizens appointed
pursuant to § 61.65, Wis. Stats. The Village President shall annually,
between the last Monday of April and the first Monday of May, appoint
in writing, as necessary, members for a term of five years, subject to
confirmation by the Village Board.
B. Powers and duties. The Police and Fire Commissioners shall perform
such duties as are imposed by § 62.13, Wis. Stats., except subsection (6)
therein.
§ 2.22.030 GRAFTON CODE § 2.25.010
1.01:30
for the citizens and property within the Village and within any areas outside
the Village that are subject to fire service contracts.
§ 2.25.020. Composition of Fire Department.
§ 2.25.030. Fire Chief.
A. The Fire Department of the Village of Grafton shall be comprised of a
combination of paid and voluntary paid-on-call personnel with salaries,
benefits, expenses and payments to be determined from time to time by
the Village Board.
B. The Fire Department of the Village of Grafton shall consist of a Fire
Chief, who shall be the head of the Department and who shall be subject
to the general supervision of the Village Administrator.
C. The Chief shall appoint such deputies, assistant chiefs, captains and
lieutenants as determined to be in the best interests of the Department,
provided funding has been appropriated by the Village Board for such
positions. The appointments of any such subordinate officers are
subject to approval by the Police and Fire Commission.
D. The Chief shall appoint volunteer paid-on-call firefighters as
determined to be in the best interests of the Department, and such
appointees are subject to the approval of the Police and Fire
Commission.
A. Head of Department. The Fire Department shall be under the direction
of the Fire Chief, subject to the Village Administrator's general
supervision.
B. Appointment; removal. The Chief of the Village of Grafton Fire
Department shall be appointed by the Village of Grafton Police and Fire
Commission ("Commission") for an indefinite term, subject to
suspension, reduction in rank, or removal by the Commission for just
cause under § 62.13(5), Wis. Stats., and the rules and regulations of the
Commission. The Chief shall be selected on the basis of demonstrated
qualifications in fire prevention and control, emergency medical
services, and management.
C. Duties and responsibilities. The Chief shall have the following duties
and responsibilities:
1. To appoint, assign and promote individuals to deputy chief,
assistant chief, captain, lieutenant and paid-on-call volunteer
firefighter within the Department in accordance with § 62.13, Wis.
Stats., the appropriations necessary to fund such positions, the
rules and regulations of the Commission, and the written personnel
policies and procedures of the Village and the Department. All
appointments and promotions are subject to the approval of the
Commission.
§ 2.25.010 CODE ADOPTION § 2.25.030
1.01:31
Chapter 2.26
PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD
§ 2.26.010. Membership; organization.
The Parks and Recreation Board of the Village shall consist of seven
members. All seven members shall be Village residents. Insofar as possible,
memberships shall be as follows: two Village Board Trustees, one senior
citizen and four residents.
§ 2.26.020. Appointment.
§ 2.26.030. Ex officio members.
The Village President, the Village Administrator and the Director of Parks
and Recreation shall be ex officio members of the Parks and Recreation
Board.
2. To administer the Village of Grafton Fire Department pursuant to
the laws and applicable regulations of the State of Wisconsin and
the ordinances and resolutions of the Village of Grafton.
3. To administer and enforce, or cause to be enforced, all laws
relating to fire prevention and control and emergency medical
services, including the provisions of this chapter.
4. To develop organizational structure, written Department policies
and procedures to achieve the goals of the Department or as
required by the State of Wisconsin.
5. To develop written Department policies and standard operating
guidelines to provide for operation of the Department or as
required by the State of Wisconsin. The prevention of accidents,
injuries and occupational illnesses shall be primary considerations
at all times.
6. To administer the annual Department budget in accordance with
policies established by the Village Administrator.
A. Trustee members. The Village Trustee members of the Parks and
Recreation Board shall be appointed by the Village President and
confirmed by the Village Board annually at the second Village Board
meeting in April. The Village Trustee members of the Parks and
Recreation Board shall serve for one year unless their office becomes
vacant.
B. Citizen members. The five citizen members shall be appointed by the
Village President and confirmed by the Village Board at the first regular
meeting in May of each year. Each citizen term shall be staggered, and
each term shall be for a three-year period.
§ 2.25.030 GRAFTON CODE § 2.26.040
1.01:32
§ 2.26.040. Vacancies.
Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of members whose terms
become vacant in the same manner as originally appointed.
§ 2.26.050. Powers and duties.
The Parks and Recreation Board shall act in an advisory capacity to the
Village Board regarding matters related to the following:
§ 2.26.060. Parks and Recreation Director.
The Director of Parks and Recreation shall have the responsibility of
administering the operation and maintenance of all public parks, public
plazas, greenbelts and grounds, including public recreation buildings and
facilities such as playgrounds, multipurpose senior center, family aquatic
center, ice rinks, athletic fields, public centers and other similar public
property. The Director shall have the responsibility of administering
approved recreation programs, including the supervision of personnel hired
as necessary to operate these facilities and programs. The Director shall
have full power to hire and fire all seasonal personnel of the Department
under his/her supervision.
Chapter 2.28
PLAN COMMISSION
§ 2.28.010. Membership.
§ 2.28.020. Appointment.
A. Review planning, scheduling, supervision and staffing of family aquatic
center, youth, adult and senior recreation programs, and all other
activities as carried out by the Parks and Recreation Director.
B. Review planning, development and maintenance of all public parks,
public plazas, greenbelts and grounds, including public recreation
buildings and facilities such as public playgrounds, multipurpose senior
center, family aquatic center, ice rinks, athletic fields, public centers,
and other similar public property.
C. Review rules, regulations and policies to govern the Parks and
Recreation Department and its responsibilities.
A. The Village of Grafton Plan Commission shall consist of seven members,
as follows: the Village President, a Village Trustee, a citizen member of
the Architectural Review Board and four random citizens. Citizen
members shall be persons of recognized experience and qualifications.
A. Trustee members. The Village Trustee member of the Plan Commission
shall be appointed by the Village President and confirmed by the Village
§ 2.26.040 CODE ADOPTION § 2.28.020
1.01:33
§ 2.28.030. Village President to preside.
The presiding officer and Chair shall be the Village President.
§ 2.28.040. Official oaths. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
The official oaths shall be taken by all members according to § 19.01, Wis.
Stats., within five days after receiving notice of their appointments.
§ 2.28.050. Compensation.
The citizen members of the Plan Commission shall receive such
compensation as the Village Board shall from time to time designate.
§ 2.28.060. Organization.
The Plan Commission shall organize and adopt rules for its own government
according to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 2.28.070. Powers of Plan Commission.
The Plan Commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable
it to perform its functions and duties and promote municipal planning. Such
powers shall include, but are not to be limited to, the following:
Board annually at the second Village Board meeting in April. The
Village Trustee member of the Plan Commission shall serve for one year
unless his office becomes vacant.
B. Citizen members. The five citizen members shall be appointed by the
Village President and confirmed by the Village Board at the first regular
meeting in May of each year. Each citizen term shall be staggered, and
each term shall be for a three-year period.
A. Meetings. Meetings shall be held monthly (if necessary) and at the call
of the Village President or a majority of the full Plan Commission and
shall be open to the public.
B. Standing and special committees. Standing and special committees
may be appointed by the Chair.
C. Quorum. Quorum shall be four members, and all actions shall require
approval of a majority of the Commission members present.
D. Minutes. Minutes shall be kept showing all actions taken, resolutions,
findings, determinations, transactions and recommendations made. A
copy of the minutes shall be filed with the Village Clerk (or other Village
Board authorized agent) as a public record.
A. Employment of experts. To employ experts and a staff and to pay for
their services, supplies, equipment and such other expenses as may be
§ 2.28.020 GRAFTON CODE § 2.28.070
1.01:34
§ 2.28.080. Duties of Plan Commission. [Amended 7-5-2016 by Ord.
No. 011-2016]
The Plan Commission shall have the following functions and duties:
necessary and proper, not to exceed the appropriations and regulations
made by the Village Board.
B. Reports and recommendations. To make reports and recommendations
relating to the development of the municipality to public officials,
agencies, utilities, and other organizations and citizens. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
C. Request available information. To request available information from
any public official, to be furnished within a reasonable time.
D. Enter upon any land. The Plan Commission, its members and employees
may enter upon any land in the performance of its functions, make
examinations and surveys, and place and maintain necessary
monuments and marks thereon.
A. Make and adopt a Comprehensive Plan. To make and adopt a
Comprehensive Plan for the physical development of the municipality,
including any areas outside its boundaries, according to §§ 62.23 and
66.1001, Wis. Stats.
B. Make and recommend an Official Map. To make and recommend an
Official Map to the Village Board, according to § 62.23, Wis. Stats.
C. Prepare and recommend a zoning district plan and regulations. To
prepare and recommend a zoning district plan and regulations to the
Village Board, according to § 62.23, Wis. Stats.
D. Prepare and recommend land division regulations. To prepare and
recommend land division regulations to the Village Board, according to
§ 236.45, Wis. Stats.
E. Changes to the Comprehensive Plan. To make any changes to the
Comprehensive Plan it deems necessary or desirable and to recommend
any changes or amendments to the Village Board that it deems
necessary or desirable concerning the Official Map and Official Map
Ordinance, Zoning and Land Division Ordinances, and other ordinances
as deemed related.
F. Matters referred to the Plan Commission. To consider and report or
recommend on all matters referred to it, including but not limited to
conditional use permits.
G. Variances to the land division and platting provisions of Title 18,
Subdivisions, of the Village of Grafton Code. The granting of variances
to the land division and platting related aspects of Title 18,
Subdivisions, of the Village of Grafton Code shall be the sole charge of
§ 2.28.070 CODE ADOPTION § 2.28.080
1.01:35
§ 2.28.090. Referrals.
The Village Board or other public body or officer of the Village, having final
authority thereon, shall refer to the Plan Commission, for its consideration
and report before final action is taken, the following matters:
the Plan Commission [see State ex rel. Westbrook v. City of New Berlin,
120 Wis. 2d 256, 354 N.W.2d 206 Ct. App. (1984)].
H. Hear and grant applications for temporary uses. To hear and grant
applications for temporary uses in any district if such uses are of a
temporary nature, do not involve the erection of a substantial structure,
and are compatible with the neighboring uses. The permit shall be
temporary, revocable, subject to any conditions required by the Plan
Commission, and shall be issued for a period not to exceed 12 months.
Compliance with all other provisions of this chapter shall be required.
I. Hold public hearings and informational meetings. To hold public
hearings and informational meeting on matters referred to the Plan
Commission.
J. Recommendation of designation of historic structures and historic sites
and regulation thereof. The Plan Commission may recommend to the
Village Board the designation of historic structures and historic sites or
rescission of such designation according to the provisions of Title 19 of
the Code. The Plan Commission shall have approval authority to issue a
certificate of appropriateness, pursuant to § 19.07.0210 of the Village
Code,4 with regard to the reconstruction, alteration or demolition of a
historic structure, historic site or structure within a Historic
Preservation Overlay District.
A. Public buildings. Location and architectural design of any public
building.
B. Statues and memorials. Location of any statue or other memorial.
C. Streets, alleys or other public ways, parks, playgrounds, airport,
parking areas, or other memorial or public grounds. Location,
acceptance, extension, alteration, vacation, abandonment, change of
use, sale, acquisition or lease of land for any street, alley or other public
way, park, playground, airport, parking area, or other memorial or
public grounds.
D. Public utilities. Location, extension, abandonment or authorization for
any public utility, whether publicly or privately owned.
E. Public or semipublic housing, slum clearance, relief of congestion, or
vacation camps for children. Location, character and extent, or
acquisition, leasing or sale of lands for public or semipublic housing,
slum clearance, relief of congestion, or vacation camps for children.
4. Editor's Note: Title 19, Zoning, is available on the Village's website.
§ 2.28.080 GRAFTON CODE § 2.28.090
1.01:36
§ 2.28.100. Additional powers and duties.
The Plan Commission shall have all additional powers and duties granted or
assigned by the Village Board or by Village ordinances. All the powers and
duties granted or assigned by the Wisconsin Statutes to plan commissions,
and any amendments thereto, are hereby granted or assigned to the Plan
Commission, and such statutes are hereby adopted by reference.
§ 2.28.110. Fees for special Plan Commission meetings or hearings.
Whenever an applicant requests that there be a special meeting or a special
hearing of the Plan Commission, the applicant shall pay with such request,
the sum as set forth in the Village of Grafton's current fee schedule.
Chapter 2.30
BOARD OF REVIEW
§ 2.30.010. Composition.
The Board of Review of the Village shall be composed of five members.
The members shall be appointed by the Village President, subject to
confirmation of the Village Board, for staggered three-year terms. The year
of appointment to be as follows: one member for one year, two members
for two years and two members for three years. The Village President shall
designate one of the members Chair.
§ 2.30.020. Compensation.
The members of the Board shall receive such compensation as the Village
Board shall designate from time to time.
Chapter 2.32
ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD
§ 2.32.010. Establishment.
There is hereby established an Architectural Review Board for the Village
of Grafton for promoting compatible development, aesthetics, stability or
F. Annexations, incorporations or consolidations. All annexations,
incorporations or consolidations affecting the Village.
G. Division of land. All division of lands within the Village's extraterritorial
platting jurisdiction.
H. Changes and amendments. All proposed or requested changes and
amendments to the Village's Comprehensive Plan, Official Map, Zoning
Ordinance, Subdivision and Land Division Ordinances.
§ 2.28.090 CODE ADOPTION § 2.32.010
1.01:37
property values, and to prevent impairment or depreciation of existing
developments.
§ 2.32.020. Compliance.
No structure shall hereafter be erected, moved, reconstructed, extended,
enlarged or have its exterior altered or changed without the Architectural
Review Board's approval (or its recommendation in the case of structures
also requiring site plan review under § 19.06.0100 of the Code5). Small
accessory structures are exempt unless the Zoning Administrator requests
a determination by the Architectural Review Board.
§ 2.32.030. Membership.
A. The Architectural Review Board shall consist of five regular members.
The Village Building Inspector shall be an ex officio member. Members
shall be residents of the Village of Grafton appointed by the Village
President, subject to confirmation by the Village Board.
B. Composition. The Architectural Review Board shall consist of one
Village Trustee, one Plan Commissioner not also serving as a Trustee,
and three citizen members.
C. Appointment of members.
1. Village Trustee member. The Village Trustee member of the
Architectural Review Board shall be appointed by the Village
President and confirmed by the Village Board. Such member shall
be confirmed by the Village Board at the second Village Board
meeting in April of each year. The Village Trustee member shall
serve in one-year term increments, except when the office is or
becomes vacant.
2. Plan Commission member. There shall be one member of the Plan
Commission on the Architectural Review Board, who shall be
appointed by the Village President and confirmed by the Village
Board. Such member may be a Village Trustee or a citizen member
of the Plan Commission; such appointment shall occur no later than
the first meeting of the Village Board in May of a given year.
3. Citizen members. Three citizen members shall be appointed by the
Village President and confirmed by the Village Board. Such
members shall be confirmed by the Village Board at the first
regular meeting of the Village Board in May of each year. Citizen
members shall serve staggered three-year terms, except that the
initial three citizen appointees shall have one-, two- and three-year
terms, respectively, at the discretion of the Village President.
Citizen members shall be persons of recognized experience and
5. Editor's Note: This reference is to the Village's Zoning Code, Title 19/Chapter 19, which is
accessible on the Village's website.
§ 2.32.010 GRAFTON CODE § 2.32.030
1.01:38
§ 2.32.040. Organization.
The Architectural Review Board shall organize and adopt rules for its own
government according to the provisions of this section.
§ 2.32.050. Powers of Architectural Review Board.
The Architectural Review Board shall have the following powers:
qualifications and shall include a minimum of two design
professionals, if available.
D. Chair. The Architectural Review Board shall designate one of its
members as Chair.
E. Official oaths. The official oaths shall be taken by all members
according to § 19.01, Wis. Stats., within five days of receiving notice of
their appointments. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1.01, Code Adoption)]
F. Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same
manner as appointments for the full term.
A. Meetings. Meetings shall be held according to the adopted schedule
and shall be open to the public.
B. Minutes. Minutes shall be kept showing all actions taken and shall be a
public record. The grounds for every decision shall be stated.
C. Quorum. Quorum shall be three members, and all actions shall require
the concurring vote of a majority of the Board present.
A. Hear and decide applications. Hear and decide applications for
permission to erect, move, reconstruct, extend, alter or change the
exterior of all structures.
B. Approve, deny or conditionally approve the application. Approve, deny
or conditionally approve the application, or in the case of structures
also requiring site plan review, recommend approval, denial or
conditional approval to the Plan Commission. The Architectural Review
Board may request such modifications as it may deem necessary to
carry out the purpose of this chapter.
C. Assistance. The Architectural Review Board may request assistance
from other municipal officers, departments, boards and commissions.
D. Additional information. Request applicant to furnish additional
information.
§ 2.32.030 CODE ADOPTION § 2.32.060
1.01:39
§ 2.32.060. Application.
Applications for approval by the Architectural Review Board shall be made
to the Building Inspector and shall be accompanied by information and data
as required under § 19.06.0400 of the Village of Grafton Zoning Ordinance.6
§ 2.32.070. Findings.
The Architectural Review Board shall not approve or recommend approval
of any application unless it finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the
following facts and conditions exist:
§ 2.32.080. Decision.
The Architectural Review Board shall decide all applications within five
days after its review and shall transmit a signed copy of its decision to the
applicant and file a copy with the Building Inspector.
§ 2.32.090. Appeals. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1.01, Code Adoption)]
Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision of the Architectural
Review Board may appeal the decision to the Board of Appeals. Such appeal
shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator within 30 days after filing of the
decision.
§ 2.32.100. Compensation.
The members of the Architectural Review Board shall receive such
compensation as the Village Board shall from time to time designate.
Chapter 2.33
BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS
A. Conformance with architectural review principles and standards. The
exterior design proposed is in conformance with the principles and
standards set forth in § 19.06.0402 of the Village of Grafton Zoning
Ordinance.7
B. No substantial depreciation of property values. The exterior design is
not unsightly or obnoxious and is not disharmonious or so similar to
existing or proposed neighboring developments that substantial
depreciation of neighboring property or development will be caused by
the applicant's proposal.
6. Editor's Note: This reference is to the Village's Zoning Code, Title 19/Chapter 19, which is
accessible on the Village's website.
7. Editor's Note: This reference is to the Village's Zoning Code, which is accessible on the
Village's website.
§ 2.32.060 GRAFTON CODE § 2.33.010
1.01:40
§ 2.33.010. Creation of Board of Public Works.
Pursuant to § 66.0805(6), Wis. Stats., there is hereby created a Board of
Public Works of the Village of Grafton.
§ 2.33.020. Membership; organization.
§ 2.33.030. Ex officio members.
The Village President, the Village Administrator, Public Works Director/
Village Engineer and the Utility Director shall be ex officio members of the
Board of Public Works.
§ 2.33.040. Vacancies.
Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of members whose terms
become vacant in the same manner as originally appointed.
§ 2.33.050. Powers and duties.
The Board of Public Works shall have review authority over the following:
streets, sidewalks, stormwater management facilities, forestry, sanitation,
recycling, bridges, public buildings, municipal equipment and public sewer
and water services.
Chapter 2.34
BOARD OF APPEALS
§ 2.34.010. Membership.
The Board of Appeals shall consist of five members appointed by the Village
President, subject to confirmation of the Village Board, for terms of three
years; except that, of those first appointed one shall serve for one year,
two for two years and two for three years. The members of the Board shall
serve at such compensation to be fixed by ordinance and shall be removable
by the Village President for cause upon written charges and after public
hearing. The Village President shall designate one of the members Chair.
A. The Board of Public Works shall consist of five members. All members
shall be residents of the Village appointed by the Village President,
subject to the approval of the Village Board. The membership of the
Board of Public Works shall consist of three Village Board members and
two citizen members. The Village President shall designate a Chair of
the Board of Public Works.
B. The three Village Board members shall be appointed at the second
regular Village Board meeting in April, and the two citizen members
shall be appointed at the first regular meeting in May of each year. The
citizen members shall be appointed as follows: one shall serve for a twoyear
term, and one shall serve for a three-year term.
§ 2.33.010 CODE ADOPTION § 2.34.010
1.01:41
The Board may employ a secretary and other employees. Vacancies shall
be filled for the unexpired terms of members whose terms become vacant.
The Village President may appoint, for staggered terms of three years, two
alternate members of such Board, in addition to the five members provided
in this section. Annually, the Village President shall designate one of the
alternate members as first alternate and the other as second alternate. The
first alternate shall act with full power only when a member of the Board
refuses to vote because of interest or when a member is absent. The second
alternate shall so act only when the first alternate so refuses or is absent
or when more than one member of the Board so refuses or is absent. The
provisions of this section with regard to removal and the filling of vacancies
shall apply to such alternates.
§ 2.34.020. Appeal; fee. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
A petition to the Board of Appeals being submitted by a property owner
shall be accompanied by a fee as set from time to time by the Village Board
to defray the cost of giving notice, investigations and other administrative
processing.
Chapter 2.36
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 2.36.010. Personnel.
The Police Department of the Village shall consist of the Chief of Police and
three regular patrol officers, and such other police officers as the Village
Board may from time to time appoint.
§ 2.36.020. Compensation.
The Chief of Police and the police officers of the Village shall receive a
salary as fixed by the Village Board. All fees, bail deposits and other special
remuneration or funds collected or received by the Department or any
officer thereof shall be deposited with the Village Director of Administrative
Services not later than the succeeding business day.
§ 2.36.030. Appointment of officers. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
The members of the Police Department of the Village shall be selected by
the Police and Fire Commission, subject to the approval of a majority of the
members of the Village Board, and shall serve at the pleasure of the Village
Board.
§ 2.36.040. Police officers.
§ 2.34.010 GRAFTON CODE § 2.36.040
1.01:42
§ 2.36.050. Special police officers.
The Village President and Trustees shall have and exercise the powers
of peace officers and may summarily suppress any riotous or disorderly
conduct in the streets or public places of the Village.8
Chapter 2.38
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
§ 2.38.010. Administrative review.
The Village elects not to be governed by Chapter 68 of the Wisconsin
Statutes with respect to any administrative determination by the Village
Board or any commission, committee, agency, officer or employee of the
Village or any agent acting on behalf of the Village where, pursuant to
an existing ordinance or an ordinance adopted after the effective date of
the ordinance codified in this chapter, a procedure is provided by such
ordinance for administrative review of the determination.
§ 2.38.020. Impartial decision maker designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 68.11(2), Wis. Stats., the Board of Appeals of
the Village is designated and appointed an "impartial decision maker" to act
as such in all proceedings brought pursuant to Ch. 68, Wis. Stats.
Chapter 2.40
SALARIES
A. General duties and powers. Each officer of the Department shall
possess the powers conferred by law on village marshals and
constables, shall preserve the public peace and enforce the laws and
ordinances of the state and Village, and shall obey the orders, rules and
regulations of the Chief.
B. Power of arrest. The Chief of Police and every police officer shall have
full power and authority, and it shall be their duty, to arrest all persons
within the Village found in the act of violating any law of the state or
ordinance of the Village, or aiding or abetting in such violation, and to
arrest without warrant any person who they have reason to believe has
violated any law or ordinance and who will not be apprehended unless
immediately arrested, and shall take all arrested persons in charge and
confine them, and shall within a reasonable time bring such persons
before the court of competent jurisdiction.
8. Editor's Note: Former § 2.36.060, Retirement of police officers, as amended, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 11-17-2014 by Ord. No. 019-2014.
§ 2.36.040 CODE ADOPTION § 2.40.010
1.01:43
§ 2.40.010. Village President.
The salary for the Village President is fixed at the sum of $7,500 per year.
§ 2.40.020. Village Trustees.
The salary of each Village Trustee is fixed at the sum of $4,500 per year.
Chapter 2.44
RESIDENCY OF EMPLOYEES
§ 2.44.010. Emergency employee defined. [Amended 5-18-2015 by
Ord. No. 008-2015]
The term "emergency employee" means any administrative, public works
and parks and recreation employee who performs health- and-safety-related
work, which may be of an emergency nature.
§ 2.44.020. Residency requirements.
A listing of the residency requirements are identified in the Personnel
Handbook or in collective bargaining agreements.
§ 2.44.030. Employees included. [Amended 5-18-2015 by Ord. No.
008-2015]
Certain employees affected by this chapter are the Village Administrator,
Police Department, Fire Department, Public Works Department, and Parks
and Recreation Department personnel. A listing of the employees affected
is in the Personnel Handbook or in collective bargaining agreements.
§ 2.44.040. Waiver of residency requirement.
The Village Board may waive the residency requirement for employees upon
a finding that such waiver would serve the best interests of the Village.
When waiving the residency requirement, the Village Board shall base its
determination upon:
Chapter 2.46
ETHICAL STANDARDS
A. The nature of the work;
B. The location of the work; and
C. All other pertinent facts concerning employment.
§ 2.40.010 GRAFTON CODE § 2.46.010
1.01:44
§ 2.46.010. Ethical standards of public officials.
The proper operation of democratic government requires that public
officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the
people. The purpose of this chapter is to establish ethical standards of
conduct for all such officials and to direct disclosure by such officials of
private financial or other interests in matters affecting the Village. The
municipal officials and employees of the Village, whether elected or
appointed, are "public officials and employees" within the meaning and
intent of this chapter.
§ 2.46.020. Responsibilities of public office.
Public officials and employees are bound to observe in their official acts
the highest standards of morality and to discharge faithfully the duties
of their office regardless of personal considerations, recognizing that the
public interest must be their primary concern. Their conduct in both their
official and private affairs shall be above reproach. Public officials are
bound to uphold the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution
of the state and to carry out impartially the laws of the nation, state and
municipality.
§ 2.46.025. Confidential information. [Amended by Ord. No. 014,
Series 2005]
§ 2.46.030. Dedicated service.
Public officials and employees shall not exceed their authority or breach law
or ask others to do so, and they shall work in full cooperation with other
public officials and employees unless prohibited from doing so by law or by
officially recognized confidentiality of their work.
A. Confidential information is, at the time of proposed disclosure,
information where the Village of Grafton's interests in its confidentiality
or in the Village's effective functioning outweigh an interest in free
speech to disclose the information. Confidential information includes
but is not limited to information where the disclosure is prohibited by
common law or state or federal law or statute unless the release of
same is ordered pursuant to a lawful order of a court or the informed
consent of the subject, as applicable. Information that is subject to the
exemptions of a governmental body to meet in open session under
§ 19.85, Wis. Stats., unless release is authorized by the legal custodian
or other proper legal authorization is given is included. For the
purposes of this section, information shall include knowledge imparted
orally, recordings, and written documents or records.
B. No official or employee may use or disclose confidential information
concerning the property, government or affairs of the Village of Grafton
gained in the course of or by reason of his official position or activities,
nor shall such official or employee use such information to advance the
financial or private interest of such official or employee or others.
§ 2.46.010 CODE ADOPTION § 2.46.040
1.01:45
§ 2.46.040. Fair and equal treatment.
§ 2.46.050. Conflict of interest.
No Trustee or other public official or employee, whether paid or unpaid,
shall engage in any business or transaction or shall have a financial or other
personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper
discharge of his official duties in the public judgment or will tend to impair
his independence or judgment or action in the performance of his official
duties. Personal as distinguished from financial interest includes an interest
arising from blood or marriage relationships or close business or political
association.
§ 2.46.060. Specific conflicts of interest.
Specific conflicts of interest are enumerated below for the guidance of
officials. The following list is merely illustrative and not exclusive:
A. Unilateral communications. No public official or employee shall
encourage, make or accept any application or communication from any
party made out of the presence and without the knowledge of other
parties in a matter under consideration when such application or
communication is designed to influence official decision or the conduct
of the official himself or other officials, employees or agencies in order
to obtain favored treatment or special consideration to advance the
personal or private interests of himself or others. Any written unilateral
communication received by a public official or employee in matters
where all interested parties should have equal opportunity for a hearing
shall be made a part of the record by the recipient. Any oral unilateral
communication received under such conditions shall be written down in
substance by the recipient and also made part of the record.
B. Use of public property. No public official or employee shall request, use
or permit the use of Village-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or
property for personal convenience or profit, except when such services
are available to the public generally or are provided as municipal policy
for the use of such official or employee in the conduct of official
business.
C. Obligation of citizen. No public official or employee shall grant any
special consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen beyond
that which is available to every other citizen.
A. Incompatible employment. No Trustee or other public official or
employee shall engage in or accept private employment or render
services for private interests when such employment or service is
incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or tends to
impair his independence of judgment or action in the performance of
his official duties. In the event a Trustee, official or employee possesses
a financial or personal interest in any business or transaction, any
presumption of conflict of interest with his public duties shall be
§ 2.46.040 GRAFTON CODE § 2.46.060
1.01:46
§ 2.46.070. Sanctions. [Amended by Ord. No. 014, Series 2005]
removed by his disclosure of the nature and extent of such investment
to the Village Board for the records of that authority.
B. Gifts and favors. No Trustee or other public official or employee shall
accept anything of value, as defined in § 19.42, Wis. Stats., whether in
the form of service, loan, thing or promise, from any person who to his
knowledge is interested directly or indirectly in any manner whatsoever
in business dealings with the Village; nor shall any such official or
employee accept any gift, favor or thing of value that may tend to
influence him in the discharge of his duties, or grant in the discharge of
his duties any improper favor, service or thing of value. Any Trustee or
other public official or employee who accepts any gift, favor or thing of
value shall, in the case of a Trustee, disclose the matter in the minutes
of the next Board meeting, and in the case of other officials or
employees, report the matter to the Board for disclosure in the minutes
of the next meeting. [Amended by Ord. No. 014, Series 2005; at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
C. Representing private interests before Village agencies or courts. No
Trustee or other public official or employee whose salary is paid in
whole or in part by the Village shall appear in behalf of private interests
before any agency of the Village. He shall not represent private
interests in any action or proceeding against the interest of the Village
in any litigation to which the Village is a party. [Amended by Ord. No.
014, Series 2005]
D. Contracts with the Village. Any Trustee or other public official or
employee who has substantial financial interest in any business entity
entering into or proposing to enter into, any transaction or contract
with the Village for the sale of real estate, material supplies or services
to the Village shall disclose such interest to the Village Board to be
reported in the minutes of the appropriate Board meeting. And in the
case of a Trustee, he shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise
participating (except in the performance of a ministerial act) in the
transaction or the making of such contract or sale. [Amended by Ord.
No. 014, Series 2005]
E. Disclosure of interest in legislation. A Trustee who has a financial or
other private interest in any legislation shall disclose on the records of
the Board the nature and extent of such interest. This provision shall
not apply if the Trustee disqualified himself from voting. Any other
public official or employee who has a financial or other private interest
and who participates in discussion with or gives an official opinion to
the Board shall disclose on the record of the Board the nature and
extent of such interest. [Amended by Ord. No. 014, Series 2005]
A. Violation of any provision of this chapter should raise conscientious
questions for the Trustee or any other official or employee concerned as
§ 2.46.060 CODE ADOPTION § 2.46.070
1.01:47
§ 2.46.080. Violations and penalties. [Amended by Ord. No. 014,
Series 2005]
As an alternative or in addition to the sanctions imposed herein, any person
violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a forfeiture or not
less than $100 nor more than $1,000 for each violation.
Chapter 2.47
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES
§ 2.47.010. General policy.
It shall be the general policy of the Village to recruit and select the most
qualified persons for any and all positions within Village government. This
shall include full-time, part-time and limited term appointments.
Recruitment and selection shall be done in an affirmative manner to ensure
open competition, provide equal opportunity and prohibit discrimination
because of race, color, religion, creed, sex, sexual preference, national
origin, ancestry, political belief, physical or mental handicap or marital
status. The goal of this policy is that persons of disadvantaged groups
be fairly represented by the Village's work force and that promotional
opportunities are provided for all qualified employees.
to whether voluntary resignation or other action is indicated to promote
the best interest of the Village.
B. A determination that an elected official's actions constitute improper
conduct under the provisions of this chapter may constitute
sanctioning, censuring, removing the official, or other disciplinary
action by the Village Board, as permitted by law.
C. A determination that an employee's actions constitute improper
conduct under the provisions of this chapter may constitute a cause for
disciplining or discharging the employee or other disciplinary action by
the Village Board as permitted by law.
D. A determination that actions of an appointed member of a board,
committee or commission constitute improper conduct under the
provisions of this chapter may constitute a cause for the Village
President to recommend the removal of the member from the board,
committee or commission.
E. Removals, sanctions and censures may only be approved by an
affirmative vote of a majority of all members of the Village Board.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code
Adoption)]
§ 2.46.070 GRAFTON CODE § 2.47.020
1.01:48
§ 2.47.020. Discrimination prohibited.
The Village Board, as the duly elected legislative authority of the Village,
and the Village Administrator, as the duly appointed executive authority
of the Village, do reaffirm, endorse, support and are committed to the
concept of equal employment as defined and/or implied under Title VII of
the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Equal Employment Opportunity Act
of 1972. Equal employment opportunity will be assured in the municipal
personnel systems and affirmative action provided in their administration.
Discrimination against any person in recruitment, examination,
appointment, training, promotion, retention, separation, discipline, or any
other aspect of personnel administration because of race, color, religion,
creed, age, sex, sexual preference, national origin, ancestry, political belief,
physical or mental handicap, or marital status is prohibited.
§ 2.47.030. Equal employment opportunities.
It is the policy of the Village not to discriminate against any employee
or applicant for employment because of race, color, religion, creed, age,
sex, sexual preference, national origin, ancestry, political belief, physical
or mental handicap, or marital status. This policy not to discriminate in
employment includes, but is not limited to, the following:
A. The Village will employ those applicants who possess the best
qualifications, necessary skills, education and experience, without
regard to race, color, religion, creed, age, sex, sexual preference,
national origin, ancestry, political belief, physical or mental handicap,
or marital status.
B. The Village will promote, upgrade, transfer or demote, recruit,
advertise or solicit for employment without regard to race, color,
religion, creed, age, sex, sexual preference, national origin, ancestry,
political belief, physical or mental handicap, or marital status.
C. The Village will train during employment and select for training and
apprenticeship programs without regard to race, color, religion, creed,
age, sex, sexual preference, national origin, ancestry, political belief,
physical or mental handicap, or marital status.
D. No employee shall aid, abet, compel, coerce or conspire to discharge or
cause another employee to resign because of race, color, religion,
creed, age, sex, sexual preference, national origin, ancestry, political
belief, physical or mental handicap, or marital status.
E. The Village will establish rates of pay and terms, conditions or
privileges of employment without regard to race, color, religion, creed,
age, sex, sexual preference, national origin, ancestry, political belief,
physical or mental handicap, or marital status.
F. The Village will use for job referral purposes only those employment
agencies which do not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion,
§ 2.47.020 CODE ADOPTION § 2.47.030
1.01:49
§ 2.47.040. Gender-related word usage.
Use has been made of masculine pronouns in this chapter solely for the
sake of brevity. Unless specifically stated to the contrary, words in this
chapter referring to the masculine gender shall also be construed to apply
to females, and vice versa.
Chapter 2.50
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
§ 2.50.010. County All Hazards Mitigation Plan.
The Village Board of the Village of Grafton herby adopts the updated
Ozaukee County All Hazards Mitigation Plan as an official plan, and the
Ozaukee County Emergency Management Department will submit, on
behalf of the Village, the adopted All Hazards Mitigation Plan to Wisconsin
Emergency Management and Federal Emergency Management Agency
officials for final review and approval. Future minor changes made upon
advice from Wisconsin Emergency Management and Federal Emergency
Management Agency will not require readopting this resolution.
Chapter 2.52
VOTER REGISTRATION
§ 2.52.010. Statutory authorization.
The registration of electors for all elections to be hereafter held in the
Village is authorized and required in accordance with § 6.27, Wis. Stats.
§ 2.52.020. Authority of Village Clerk. [Amended by Ord. No. 017,
Series 1996]
The Village Clerk of the Village shall have full charge and control of the
registration of voters, and the Village Clerk and all employees in his or her
office are authorized to execute the affidavits required by §§ 6.33, 6.35 and
6.36, Wis. Stats.
Chapter 2.54
ELECTION REGULATIONS
§ 2.54.010. Election wards. [Amended by Ord. No. A-323-77; Ord.
No. 024, Series 1996; Ord. No. 023, Series 2001; Ord. No. 021,
Series 2009; 6-20-2011 by Ord. No. 015-2011]
creed, age, sex, sexual preference, national origin, ancestry, political
belief, physical or mental handicap, or marital status.
§ 2.47.030 GRAFTON CODE § 2.54.010
1.01:50
§ 2.54.020. Polling time and place. [Amended by Ord. No. 024,
Series 1996; Ord. No. 023, Series 2001; Ord. No. 026, Series 2008;
Ord. No. 014, Series 2009; 6-20-2011 by Ord. No. 015-2011;
11-18-2019 by Ord. No. 019-2019]
The polls in Election Wards 1 through 14, inclusive, shall all be held in
the Grace Lutheran Church ELCA, 715 Sixth Avenue, Grafton, Wisconsin,
effective with elections that occur after November 18, 2019. The polls shall
be opened at 7:00 a.m. and closed at 8:00 p.m. for all elections.
§ 2.54.030. Election officials. [Amended by Ord. No. 024, Series
1996]
A. The Village will hereinafter be divided into 14 election wards pursuant
to §§ 5.02(25) and 5.15(2)(b)3 and (2)(d), Wis. Stats.
B. A ward map, on file in the Village Clerk's office, showing the area
covered by each of the 14 official election wards, is hereby made a part
of this chapter. Said map may be amended, as necessary, to reflect the
annexation or detachment of property.
C. A detailed description of the boundaries of each of the official 14
election wards, on file in the Village Clerk's office, is hereby made a
part of this chapter.
A. Election inspectors. There shall be five election inspectors for each
ward or ward group, pursuant to § 7.30, Wis. Stats. Election inspectors
may be reduced by the Village Clerk to only three inspectors for each
ward or ward group when deemed sufficient to effectively handle the
vote.
B. Qualifications.
1. Each election inspector shall be a qualified elector in Ozaukee
County and meet all of the requirements of § 7.30(2), Wis. Stats.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code
Adoption)]
2. Inspectors shall represent the two dominant recognized political
parties.
C. Appointments. The Village Board, no later than the second Board
meeting in December of odd-numbered years, pursuant to the
requirements of § 7.30(4), Wis. Stats., shall officially appoint qualified
persons to serve as election inspectors for the Village of Grafton. Said
appointments shall be made from a listing provided by the Village Clerk
and shall be for a term of two years. [Amended 6-20-2011 by Ord.
No. 015-2011]
1. In the event of a need for additional inspectors or if a vacancy
occurs, the Village Clerk may appoint qualified persons to serve as
§ 2.54.010 CODE ADOPTION § 2.54.030
1.01:51
Chapter 2.56
MUNICIPAL COURT AND MUNICIPAL JUDGE
§ 2.56.010. Municipal Court created.
There is created and established a Municipal Court, to be designated as
the "Mid-Moraine Municipal Court," under the provisions of Ch. 755, Wis.
Stats., and pursuant to the "Agreement for the Operation of the Municipal
Court for Washington County," as amended ("agreement"), a copy of which
is on file with the Village Clerk.
§ 2.56.020. Municipal Court Judge. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
The Municipal Court shall be under the jurisdiction of and presided over
by a Municipal Judge, who shall be an attorney licensed to practice law in
Wisconsin and who resides in any of the member municipalities as defined
in the agreement. The Municipal Judge shall be elected at large in the
Spring election for a term of four years, commencing on May 1 of the year of
his or her election. The governing bodies of the member municipalities shall
provide for a primary election in the event that more than two candidates
file nomination papers for the position of Municipal Judge.
§ 2.56.030. Bond.
The amount of the bond required by § 755.03(1), Wis. Stats., shall be
$2,500.
§ 2.56.035. Service fees. [Added by Ord. No. 023, Series 2008]
election inspectors until such time as the Village Board officially
makes the biannual appointments.
D. Compensation. Compensation of election inspectors shall be
determined by the Village Board as part of the annual budget process.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of §§ 814.70, 814.705 and 814.71, Wis.
Stats., on behalf of the Village of Grafton the Mid-Moraine Municipal
Court, of which the Village of Grafton is a member, shall charge a fiftydollar
warrant and commitment order service fee for all warrants or
orders issued.
B. Upon the Municipal Court's receipt of payment, the Village of Grafton
shall receive $25 of the fee and the Mid-Moraine Municipal Court shall
receive $25 of the fee.
C. If there is more than one defendant or person to be served at a given
address, the warrant or commitment order service fee shall apply to
each person served. If the person has warrants or commitment orders
§ 2.54.030 GRAFTON CODE § 2.56.035
1.01:52
§ 2.56.040. Hours.
The Municipal Court shall be open at such times as the Municipal Judge
determines, subject to the agreement.
§ 2.56.050. Contempt.
The Municipal Judge may impose a forfeiture for contempt of court and a jail
sentence for nonpayment of the forfeiture and any applicable assessments
under § 800.12(2), Wis. Stats.
§ 2.56.060. Jurisdiction.
This chapter shall be construed to limit neither the jurisdiction of the
Municipal Court nor the authority of the Municipal Court to impose
penalties under the Wisconsin Statutes.
Chapter 2.58
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 2.58, Public Arts Board, adopted by Ord. No. 006, Series
2010 (Title 2, Ch. 2.58, of the 1979 Code), as amended, was repealed
by Ord. No. 010, Series 2018.]
Title 3: Revenue and Finance
Chapter 3.04
TREASURER'S BOND
§ 3.04.010. Statutory bond eliminated.
The Village elects not to give the bond on the Village Treasurer provided for
by § 70.67(1), Wis. Stats.
§ 3.04.020. Village liable for default of Treasurer.
Pursuant to § 70.67(2), Wis. Stats., the Village shall be obligated to pay, in
case the Village Treasurer fails to do so, all state and county taxes required
by law to be paid by the Treasurer to the County Treasurer.
Chapter 3.08
from multiple jurisdictions, the fee shall be assessed with regard to
each such warrant or commitment order.
D. All warrant or commitment order service fees that are forwarded by the
Municipal Court to the Village of Grafton shall be deposited in the
Village of Grafton General Fund.
§ 2.56.035 CODE ADOPTION § 3.04.020
1.01:53
RETENTION OF PUBLIC RECORDS
§ 3.08.010. General Records Schedule adopted.
The Village hereby adopts, by reference, the Wisconsin Municipal Records
Schedule ("Municipal Records Schedule"), approved by the State of
Wisconsin Public Records Board on August 27, 2018. A copy of the Records
Schedule will be kept on file in the Village Clerk's office located at 860
Badger Circle, Grafton, WI 53024 and made available for public viewing
during Village Hall hours. The Municipal Records Schedule will apply to the
retention of any Village record that falls under the scope of the Municipal
Records Schedule and which is not subject to either the Library Records
Schedule or the Water Utility Records Schedule.
§ 3.08.020. Library Records Schedule adopted.
The Village hereby adopts, by reference, the General Records Schedule
for Wisconsin's Public Libraries and Public Library Systems and Related
Records ("Library Records Schedule") approved by the State of Wisconsin
Public Records Board on June 12, 2017 for any record of the U.S.S. Liberty
Memorial Public Library that falls within the scope of the Library Records
Schedule.
§ 3.08.030. Water Utility Records Schedule adopted.
The Village hereby adopts, by reference, the records retention regulations
for electric, natural gas, and water utilities ordered by the Public Service
Commission in Docket No. 05-US-114, and the records retention
requirements set forth in Wis. Admin. Code § PSC 185.19 (collectively,
the "Water Utility Records Schedule") for any record of the water and
wastewater utility that falls within the scope of the Water Utility Records
Schedule.
§ 3.08.040. Other records.
In the event the Village creates a record not contemplated by any of
the records schedules adopted in this chapter, the Village may, subject
to the Records Board's prior approval, either adopt an applicable records
retention schedule set forth by the Records Board, if available, or create its
own retention schedule pertaining to the record.
§ 3.08.050. Retention period set by statute controls.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, if a specific retention
period of any record is governed by the Wisconsin Statutes, the statutory
time period shall control.
§ 3.08.060. Repeal.
All ordinances, or portions thereof, and resolutions, or portions thereof, in
conflict with any portion of this chapter are hereby repealed. Any approved
§ 3.04.020 GRAFTON CODE § 3.08.060
1.01:54
Village retention schedule, or portion thereof, for any record not
contemplated by any of the records schedules adopted by this chapter shall
remain in full force and effect.
Chapter 3.12
BUDGET PROCEDURE
§ 3.12.010. Budget procedure.
Departmental estimates. On or before October 15 of each year, each officer,
department or board shall file with the Village Clerk an itemized statement
detailing estimates of anticipated disbursements for the ensuing fiscal year
that are necessary to carry out the powers and duties of such officer,
department or board. Such statement shall be presented in the form
prescribed by the Village Clerk and shall be designated as "departmental
estimates" and shall be as near uniform as possible for the main divisions of
all departments.
§ 3.12.020. Village President and Administrator to consider
estimates.
The Village President and Administrator shall consider such departmental
estimates in consultation with the department head and shall then
determine the total amount to be recommended in the budget for each
department or activity.
§ 3.12.030. Contents of budget.
On or before the 1st of November of each year, the Village Administrator
shall prepare and submit to the Village Board a proposed budget presenting
a financial plan for conducting the affairs of the Village for the ensuing
calendar year, which will include the following information:
A. The actual expenditures of each department and activity for the expired
portion of the current year and last preceding fiscal year and the
estimated expense of conducting each department and activity of the
Village for the remainder of the current year and ensuing fiscal year,
with reasons for any proposed increases or decreases as compared with
actual and estimated expenditures for the current year;
B. An itemization of all anticipated income of the Village from sources
other than general property tax and bond issues, with a comparative
statement of the amounts received by the Village for each of the same
or similar sources for the last preceding and current fiscal year;
C. All existing indebtedness of the Village, including the amount of
interest payable and principal to be redeemed on any outstanding
general obligation bonds or notes of the Village and any estimated
deficiency in the sinking fund of any such bonds or notes during the
ensuing fiscal year;
§ 3.08.060 CODE ADOPTION § 3.12.030
1.01:55
§ 3.12.040. Appropriation ordinance; public hearing.
§ 3.12.050. Changes in final budget.
Upon written recommendation of the Village President or Administrator, the
Village Board may, at any time by two-thirds' vote of the entire membership,
transfer any portion of an unencumbered balance of an appropriation to any
other purpose or object. Notice of such transfer shall be given as required
by law.
§ 3.12.060. Expenditure limited to annual appropriation.
No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the Village nor shall any
obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred except in pursuance
of the annual appropriation ordinance and changes therein authorized in
accordance with § 3.12.040. At the close of each fiscal year, any
unencumbered balance of an appropriation shall revert to the general fund
and shall be subject to appropriation, but appropriations may be made
by the Village Board to be paid out of the income of the current year in
furtherance of improvements or other objects or works which shall not be
completed within such year, and any such appropriation shall continue in
force until the purpose for which it is made has been accomplished or
abandoned.
Chapter 3.16
PURCHASING RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 3.16.010. Scope of purchasing authority. [Added by Ord. No.
A-021-92, 1992]
As provided by § 2.18.040D.5 of this Code, the Village Administrator shall
supervise all purchasing and contracting for supplies and services, subject
D. An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from general property
tax which, with income from other sources, will be necessary to meet
the proposed expenditures;
E. Such other information as may be required by the Village Board and by
the state law. The Village Board shall provide a reasonable number of
copies of the budget thus prepared for distribution to citizens.
A. The Village Administrator shall submit to the Village Board at the time
the annual budget is submitted the draft of an appropriation ordinance
providing for the expenditures proposed for the ensuing fiscal year.
Upon the submission of the proposed appropriation ordinance to the
Village Board, it shall be deemed to have been regularly introduced
therein.
B. The Village Board shall hold the public hearing on the budget and the
proposed appropriation ordinance as required by law.
§ 3.12.030 GRAFTON CODE § 3.16.010
1.01:56
to any purchasing procedures established by the Village Board and any
limitations contained in the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 3.16.020. Rules and regulations.
The Village Administrator shall establish and from time to time amend all
rules and regulations authorized by this chapter and any others necessary
to its operations in the form of a purchasing manual; such rules and
regulations and amendments shall be subject to the approval of the Village
Board.
Chapter 3.20
BIDDING STATUTE ADOPTED
§ 3.20.010. Bidding statute adopted.
By virtue of § 61.54, Wis. Stats., the Village Board does provide that the
provisions of § 62.15, Wis. Stats., shall be applicable to Village contracts.
The authority vested in the Board of Public Works under § 62.15, Wis. Stats.,
shall be exercised by the Village Board.
Chapter 3.24
CLAIMS AGAINST VILLAGE
§ 3.24.010. Certification of claims against Village.
Prior to submission of any account, demand or claim to the Village Board for
approval of payment, the Village Clerk shall certify, or cause to be endorsed
thereon or on attached papers, that the following conditions have been
complied with:
§ 3.24.020. Auditing accounts.
A. That funds are available therefor pursuant to the budget;
B. That the item or service was duly authorized by the proper official or
agency and has been received or rendered in accordance with the
purchasing agreement;
C. That the claim is accurate in amount and a proper charge against the
treasury.
A. No account or demand against the Village, except as provided in
§ 3.24.030, shall be paid until it has been audited by the Village Board
and an order drawn on the Village treasury therefor. Every such
account shall be itemized and certified as provided in § 3.24.010.
B. After auditing, the Village Board shall cause to be endorsed by the
Village Clerk, on each account, the words "allowed" or "disallowed," as
§ 3.16.010 CODE ADOPTION § 3.24.020
1.01:57
§ 3.24.030. Payment of regular wages and salaries.
Regular wages or salaries of Village officers and employees shall be paid
by payroll, verified by the proper Village official, department head, board
or commission and filed with the Village Clerk in time for payment on the
regular payday.
§ 3.24.040. Appropriations by Village Board.
All actions of the Village Board appropriating money or creating a charge
against the Village, other than claims for purchases or work previously
authorized by the Board, shall only be acted upon at the next regular
meeting after introduction, provided that this rule may be suspended by
affirmative vote of 3/4 of all members of the Board. A roll call vote shall be
taken and recorded on all appropriations.
Chapter 3.28
TAX ROLL AND TAX RECEIPTS
§ 3.28.010. Aggregate tax stated on roll.
Pursuant to § 70.65(2), Wis. Stats., the Village Clerk shall, in computing
the tax roll, insert only the aggregate amount of state, county, school and
local taxes in a single column in the roll opposite the parcel or tract of land
against which the tax is levied or, in the case of personal property, in a single
column opposite the name of the person, firm or corporation against whom
the tax is levied.
§ 3.28.020. Tax receipts. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
The County Clerk, unless a different official is designated by the County
Board, shall procure and furnish tax receipts prescribed under § 70.09(3),
Wis. Stats., to each Taxation District Treasurer in the County. The Taxation
District Treasurer shall use the tax receipts so furnished. If requested under
§ 74.09(3)(g), Wis. Stats., the Taxation District Treasurer shall mail a copy
of the tax receipt to the requester.
Chapter 3.29
PAYMENT OF REAL PROPERTY TAXES IN INSTALLMENTS
the fact is, adding the amount allowed or specifying the items or parts
of items disallowed. The minutes of the proceedings of the Board or a
statement attached thereto shall show to whom and for what purpose
every such account was allowed and the amount.
§ 3.24.020 GRAFTON CODE § 3.29.010
1.01:58
§ 3.29.010. Three installments permitted. [Added by Ord. No.
A-531-89, 1989; amended by Ord. No. A-533-89, 1989]
The payment of real property taxes may be made in three installments as
provided in this chapter. If the total real property tax is less than $100, it
shall be paid in full on or before January 31.
§ 3.29.020. Time for payment. [Amended by Ord. No. A-533-89,
1989]
Real property taxes may be paid in three installments due as follows:
§ 3.29.030. Balance may be paid prior to due date.
On any installment date or any prior date a taxpayer may pay the balance of
the taxes due.
§ 3.29.040. Special charges and special taxes.
§ 3.29.045. Personal property taxes.
A. Fifty percent of real property taxes shall be paid on or before January
31.
B. Twenty-five percent of real property taxes shall be paid on or before
March 31.
C. Twenty-five percent of real property taxes shall be paid on or before
May 31.
A. All special taxes, special charges and special assessments that are
placed on the tax roll shall be paid in full on or before January 31, and
any amounts unpaid as of that date are delinquent as of February 1.
B. If any special assessments, special charges or special taxes are entered
on the tax roll as charges against a parcel of real property and are
delinquent under Subsection A of this section, the entire annual amount
of real property taxes on that parcel which is unpaid is delinquent as of
February 1. [Added by Ord. No. A-531-89, 1989]
A. All personal property taxes shall be paid in full on or before January 31.
[Added by Ord. No. A-533-89, 1989]
B. All personal property taxes that become delinquent shall be paid,
together with interest and penalties charged from the preceding
February 1. [Added by Ord. No. 026, Series 2003]
§ 3.29.010 CODE ADOPTION § 3.29.050
1.01:59
§ 3.29.050. Delinquent first installment. [Added by Ord. No.
A-531-89, 1989]
If the first installment of real property taxes is not paid on or before January
31, the entire amount of the remaining unpaid taxes on that parcel is
delinquent as of February 1.
§ 3.29.060. Delinquent subsequent installments. [Added by Ord. No.
A-531-89, 1989]
If the second or any subsequent installment payment of real property taxes
is not paid by the due date specified in § 3.29.020B, the entire amount of the
taxes that remain unpaid on that parcel are delinquent as of the first day of
the month after the payment is due.
§ 3.29.070. Delinquent payment; collection and interest.
§ 3.29.080. Taxes and duties of Village Clerk. [Added by Ord. No.
A-531-89, 1989]
The Village Clerk shall retain the tax roll and make collections through
July 31. On or before August 15, the Village Clerk shall return the tax roll
to the County Treasurer. The County Treasurer shall collect all returned
delinquent real property taxes, together with interest and penalty assessed
from the previous February 1, as provided under § 74.47, Wis. Stats.
§ 3.29.090. Payment priority for taxes paid. [Added by Ord. No.
A-531-89, 1989]
A. All general property taxes, special assessments, special charges and
special taxes that become delinquent and are paid on or before July 31
shall be paid together with interest and penalties charged from the
preceding February 1 to the Village Clerk.
B. All general property taxes, special assessments, special charges and
special taxes that become delinquent and are not paid under Subsection
A of this section shall be payable together with interest and penalties
charged from the preceding February 1 to the County Treasurer.
[Added by Ord. No. A-531-89, 1989]
C. The interest rate on delinquent real property and personal property
taxes, special charges, special assessments and special taxes included
in the tax roll for collection is 1% per month or fraction of a month,
pursuant to § 74.47(1), Wis. Stats. [Added by Ord. No. 026, Series
2003]
D. In addition to the interest rate outlined in Subsection C, there is
imposed an additional 0.5% penalty on any delinquent real estate and
personal property taxes, special charges, special assessments and
special taxes that are included in the tax roll for collection, pursuant to
§ 74.47(2), Wis. Stats. [Added by Ord. No. 026, Series 2003]
§ 3.29.050 GRAFTON CODE § 3.29.090
1.01:60
Chapter 3.32
MAINTENANCE AND ACCESS TO GRAFTON RECORDS
§ 3.32.010. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. No. 006, Series 2004]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORITY — Any of the following Village entities having custody of
a Village record: an office, elected official, agency, board, commission,
committee, council, department or public body corporate and politic
created by constitution, law, ordinance, rule or order; or a formally
constituted subunit of the foregoing.
CUSTODIAN — That officer, department head, division head, or employee of
the Village designated under § 3.32.030 or otherwise responsible by law to
keep and preserve any Village records on file, deposit or keep such records
in his or her office, or is lawfully in possession or entitled to possession
of such public records, and who is required by this chapter to respond to
requests for access to such records.
RECORD — Any material on which written, drawn, printed, spoken, visual,
or electromagnetic or electronically generated or stored data is recorded or
preserved, regardless of physical form or characteristics, which has been
created or is being kept by an authority. "Record" includes, but is not
limited to, handwritten, typed or printed pages, maps, charts, photographs,
films, recordings, tapes, optical disks, and any other medium on which
electronically generated or stored data is recorded or preserved. E-mail
relating to official business and maintained or kept on a computer, or in
the possession of a "custodian," as defined in this section, is considered a
record. "Record" does not include drafts, notes, preliminary computations
and like materials prepared for the originator's personal use or prepared by
A. If the Village Clerk receives a payment from a taxpayer which is not
sufficient to pay all general property taxes, special charges, special
assessments and special taxes due, the Village Clerk shall apply the
payment to the amounts due, including interest and penalties, in the
following order:
1. Special charges;
2. Special assessments;
3. Special taxes;
4. General property taxes.
B. The allocation under Subsection A.1 through 4 is conclusive for
purposes of settlement under §§ 74.23 to 74.29, Wis. Stats., and for
determining delinquencies under this chapter. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
§ 3.29.090 CODE ADOPTION § 3.32.010
1.01:61
the originator in the name of a person for whom the originator is working;
materials which are purely the personal property of the custodian and have
no relation to his or her office; materials to which access is limited by
copyright, patent or bequest; and published materials in the possession
of an authority other than a public library which are available for sale or
which are available for inspection at a public library.[Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
§ 3.32.020. Duty to maintain records. [Amended by Ord. No. 006,
Series 2004]
§ 3.32.030. Legal custodian(s).
A. Except as provided under § 3.32.070, each officer and employee of the
Village shall safely keep and preserve all records received from his or
her predecessor or other persons and required by law to be filed,
deposited or kept in his or her office or which are in the lawful
possession or control of the officer or employee or his or her deputies,
or to the possession or control of which he or she or they may be
lawfully entitled as such officers or employees.
B. Upon the expiration of an officer's term of office or an employee's term
of employment, or whenever the office or position of employment
becomes vacant, each such officer or employee shall provide to his or
her successor all records then in his or her custody. If a vacancy occurs
before a successor is selected or qualifies, such records shall be
maintained in their current location for conveyance to the appropriate
person.
A. The Village Clerk or, in his or her absence or disability or in case of
vacancy, the Deputy Clerk, as well as the department head of each
Village department, is hereby designated the official legal custodians of
all Village records. [Amended Ord. No. 006, Series 2004]
B. Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the Village Clerk or the Clerk's
designee shall act as legal custodian for the Village Board and for any
committees, commissions, boards or other authorities created by
ordinance or resolution of the Village Board.
C. For every authority not specified in Subsection A or B of this section,
the authority's chief administrative officer is the legal custodian for the
authority, but the officer may designate an employee of his or her staff
to act as the legal custodian.
D. The legal custodian maintains public records and has the duty to make
decisions regarding access to the records. Each departmental legal
custodian shall name a person to act as legal custodian in his or her
absence. [Amended by Ord. No. 006, Series 2004]
E. The legal custodian shall have full legal power to render decisions and
to carry out the duties of an authority under Subch. II of Ch. 19, Wis.
§ 3.32.010 GRAFTON CODE § 3.32.030
1.01:62
§ 3.32.040. Public access to records.
Stats., and this section. The designation of a legal custodian does not
affect the powers and duties of an authority under this section.
A. Except as provided in § 3.32.060, any person has a right to inspect a
record and to make or receive a copy of any record as provided in
§ 19.35(1), Wis. Stats..
B. Records will be available for inspection and copying during all regular
office hours, as outlined in § 3.32.050. [Amended by Ord. No. 006,
Series 2004]
C. If regular office hours are not maintained at the location where records
are kept, the records will be available for inspection and copying upon
at least 48 hours' advance notice of intent to inspect or copy.
D. A requester shall be permitted to use facilities comparable to those
available to Village employees to inspect, copy or abstract a record.
E. The legal custodian may require supervision during inspection or may
impose other reasonable restrictions on the manner of access to an
original record if the record is irreplaceable or easily damaged.
F. A requester shall be charged a fee to defray the cost of locating and
copying records, as follows:
1. The cost of photocopying shall be $0.25 per page. Said cost has
been calculated not to exceed the actual, necessary and direct cost
of reproduction.
2. If the form of a written record does not permit copying, the actual
and necessary cost of photographing and photographic processing
shall be charged.
3. The actual full cost of providing a copy of other records not in
printed form on paper, such as films, computer printouts and
audiotapes or videotapes, shall be charged.
4. If mailing or shipping is necessary, the actual cost thereof shall also
be charged.
5. There shall be no charge for locating a record unless the actual cost
therefor exceeds $50; in which case the actual cost shall be
determined by the legal custodian and billed to the requester.
6. The legal custodian shall estimate the cost of all applicable fees and
may require a cash deposit adequate to assure payment, if such
estimate exceeds $5.
7. Elected and appointed officials of the Village shall not be required
to pay for public records they may reasonably require for the
proper performance of their official duties.
§ 3.32.030 CODE ADOPTION § 3.32.040
1.01:63
§ 3.32.050. Access procedures. [Added by Ord. No. 006, Series
2004]
8. The legal custodian may provide copies of a record without charge
or at a reduced charge where he or she determines that waiver or
reduction of the fee is in the public interest.
9. No copies associated with a request for records shall be mailed to
any applicant unless prior arrangements are made with the Village
Clerk for the payment of postage. [Amended by Ord. No. 006,
2004]
10. The Director of Administrative Services is authorized and directed
to prepare a statement of "real property status" form, which shall
include such information as is normally sought by interested
parties when ownership of real property is transferred. The form
may include, but is not necessarily limited to, the amount of
outstanding special assessments, deferred assessments, changes in
assessments, outstanding water bills, latest water bill,
contemplated improvements, floodplain status and violation of the
building and health codes. The Director of Administrative Services
is authorized and directed to charge $35 for each statement of real
property status form requested. No copies of any nature shall be
mailed to any applicant unless prior arrangements are made with
the Director of Administrative Services for payment of postage.
[Amended by Ord. No. 006, Series 2004]
G. Pursuant to § 19.34, Wis. Stats., and the guidelines therein listed, each
authority shall adopt, prominently display and make available for
inspection and copying at its offices, for the guidance of the public, a
notice containing a description of its organization and the established
times and places at which, the legal custodian for whom, and the
methods whereby the public may obtain information and access to
records in its custody, make requests for records or obtain copies of
records, and the costs thereof. Each authority shall, upon request,
provide a copy of §§ 19.31 to 19.39, Wis. Stats., for the guidance of the
public. This subsection does not apply to members of the Village Board.
[Amended by Ord. No. A-542-89, 1989; Ord. No. 006, Series
2004]
A. A request to inspect or copy a record shall be made to the legal
custodian. A request shall be deemed sufficient if it reasonably
describes the requested record or the information requested. However,
a request for a record without a reasonable limitation as to subject
matter or length of time represented by the record does not constitute a
sufficient request. A request may be made orally, but a request must be
in writing before an action to enforce the request is commenced under
§ 19.37, Wis. Stats. Except as provided below, no request may be
refused because the person making the request is unwilling to be
identified or to state the purpose of the request. No request may be
§ 3.32.040 GRAFTON CODE § 3.32.050
1.01:64
refused because the request is received by mail, unless prepayment of
a fee is required under § 3.32.040F.6. A requester may be required to
show acceptable identification whenever the requested record is kept
at a private residence or whenever security reasons or federal law or
regulations so require.
B. Each custodian, upon request for any record, shall, as soon as
practicable and without delay, either fill the request or notify the
requester of the authority's determination to deny the request in whole
or in part and the reasons therefor. If the legal custodian, after
conferring with the Village Attorney, determines that a written request
is so general as to be unduly time-consuming, the party making the
request may first be required to itemize his or her request in a manner
which would permit reasonable compliance.
C. A request for a record may be denied as provided in § 3.32.060. If a
request is made orally, the request may be denied orally unless a
demand for a written statement of the reasons denying the request is
made by the requester within five business days of the oral denial. If a
written request is denied in whole or in part, the requester shall receive
a written statement of the reasons for denying the request. Every
written denial of a request shall inform the requester that, if the
request for the record was made in writing, then the determination is
subject to review upon petition for a writ of mandamus under
§ 19.37(1), Wis. Stats., or upon application to the Attorney General or a
district attorney.
D. Except as otherwise indicated, information, access to records, requests
for records, and copies of records may be made to or obtained from the
designated legal custodian, as follows: [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
Village Hall (Administration, Clerk, Finance, Planning and
Development, Inspection, and Assessing)
860 Badger Circle
Grafton, WI 53024
8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Monday to Friday, excluding holidays
Grafton Police Department
1981 Washington Street
Grafton, WI 53024
8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Monday to Sunday
§ 3.32.050 CODE ADOPTION § 3.32.050
1.01:65
§ 3.32.055. Employee records. [Amended by Ord. No. 006, Series
2004]
Public Works Department
675 N. Green Bay Road
Grafton, WI 53024
7:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon/1:00 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. Monday to Friday,
excluding holidays
Parks and Recreation Department
675 N. Green Bay Road
Grafton, WI 53024
7:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. Monday to Friday, excluding holidays
Water and Wastewater Utility (Billing and Records)
860 Badger Circle
Grafton, WI 53024
8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Monday to Friday, excluding holidays
U.S.S. Liberty Memorial Public Library
1620 Eleventh Avenue
Grafton, WI 53024
10:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Monday to Thursday and 10:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m. Friday
A. As defined in Wisconsin Act 47, there are hereby established three
categories of records relating to employees:
1. Employee-related records that are absolutely closed to public
access under the Open Records Law.9
2. Employee-related records that may be released under the
balancing test only after a notice of impending release and the
right of judicial review have been provided to the employee that is
subject to the record request.
3. Employee-related records that may be released under the general
balancing test without providing a right of notice or judicial review
to the employee that is subject to the record request.
9. Editor's Note: See §§ 19.31 to 19.39, Wis. Stats.
§ 3.32.050 GRAFTON CODE § 3.32.055
1.01:66
B. A public records authority may not provide access to records containing
the following information, except to an employee or the employee's
representative, to the extent required by § 103.13, Wis. Stats.:
1. The home address, home e-mail address, home telephone number
or social security number of an employee, unless the employee
authorizes the authority to provide access to the information.
2. Information relating to the current investigation of a possible
criminal offense or possible employment-related misconduct.
3. Information pertaining to an employee's employment examination,
except an examination score if access to that score is not otherwise
prohibited.
4. Information relating to one or more specific employees that is used
by an authority or the employer for staff management planning,
including performance evaluations, judgments or
recommendations concerning future salary adjustments or other
wage treatments, management bonus plans, promotions, job
assignments, letters of reference or other comments or ratings
related to employees.
C. A notice of impending release of employee records and the right to
judicial review of employee records shall apply only to the following
types of records:
1. Any records containing information that is the result of an
investigation into a disciplinary matter or possible employmentrelated
violation.
2. Any record obtained by the authority through a subpoena or search
warrant.
3. Any record prepared by an employer other than the authority if it
contains information relating to an employee of that employer,
unless the employee authorizes the authority to provide access to
that information.
D. No notice is required when access is provided to the employee who is
the subject of the record or to his or her representative or bargaining
representative. Notice is not required when an authority releases a
record produced for equal rights, discrimination, or fair employment
law compliance purposes.
E. Within three days of deciding to release a record outlined in Subsection
C, and before allowing access to the record, a custodian must notify the
subject of the record requested, by certified mail or personal service
upon the record subject, of his or her decision to release the record. The
notice must briefly describe the requested record and explain the
record subject's rights to file a notice of intent to appeal and also to
seek a court order restraining the custodian from providing access.
§ 3.32.055 CODE ADOPTION § 3.32.055
1.01:67
§ 3.32.060. Limitations on right to access. [Amended by Ord. No.
006, Series 2004]
F. Within five days after receiving notice of the custodian's decision to
release the record, the record subject may notify the authority in
writing that he or she intends to seek a court order restraining the
authority from providing access to the requested record.
G. Within 10 days after receiving the notice from the custodian, the record
subject may commence an action seeking to restrain the custodian from
releasing the record. If the record subject commences an action, the
authority may not provide access to the record within the 12 days of
sending the record subject notice of an intent to release the record. No
record can be released until the matter has proceeded through the
various courts and all the appeal periods have expired.
A. As provided by § 19.36, Wis. Stats., the following records are exempt
from inspection under this chapter:
1. Records specifically exempted from disclosure by state or federal
law or authorized to be exempted from disclosure by state law;
2. Any record relating to investigative information obtained for law
enforcement purposes if federal law or regulations require
exemption from disclosure or if exemption from disclosure is a
condition to receipt of aids by the state;
3. Computer programs, although the material used as input for a
computer program or the material produced as a product of the
computer program is subject to inspection; and
4. A record or any portion of a record containing information
qualifying as a common law trade secret as defined in
§ 134.90(1)(c), Wis. Stats. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
B. As provided by § 43.30, Wis. Stats., public library circulation records
are exempt from inspection under this chapter.
C. In responding to a request for inspection or copying of a record which is
not specifically exempt from disclosure, the legal custodian, after
conferring with the Village Attorney, may deny the request, in whole or
in part, only if he or she determines that the harm to the public interest
resulting from disclosure would outweigh the public interest in full
access to the requested record. Examples of matter for which
disclosures may be refused include, but are not limited to, the
following:
1. Records obtained under official pledges of confidentiality, which
were necessary and given in order to obtain the information
contained in them;
§ 3.32.055 GRAFTON CODE § 3.32.060
1.01:68
2. Records of current deliberations after a quasi-judicial hearing;
3. Records concerning current strategy for crime detection or
prevention, among but not limited to the reasons for denying all or
parts of police records, as in the following:
a. This portion identifies a juvenile.
b. This portion names law enforcement personnel. Disclosure will
impair their effectiveness in their duties and subject them to
harassment and physical injury.
c. This portion identifies a person. Disclosure of such person in
this context would be likely to have a substantial adverse effect
on their reputation.
d. This portion if released would result in harm to the public
interest, which outweighs the legislative policy of allowing
inspection of public records.
e. This portion contains investigative information.
f. This portion contains confidential information furnished only
by a confidential source who has requested anonymity as a
condition of supplying this information.
g. This portion would identify a confidential source and would
endanger the life or physical safety of this source.
h. This portion would identify a confidential source, and this
would jeopardize a criminal investigation.
i. This portion will jeopardize an ongoing criminal investigation
in that it will disclose evidence.
j. This portion would disclose the contents of a communication
between administrative or executive personnel on matters of
policy, the disclosure of which would inhibit the frank and full
discussion of matters necessary to set policy.
k. This portion contains employee performance evaluation data.
l. This information is unsubstantiated; if released it would unduly
damage the reputation of the individual(s) involved.
m. Other information specifically exempted by law.
4. Records of current deliberations or negotiations on the purchase of
Village property, investing of Village funds, or other Village
business, whenever competitive or bargaining reasons require
nondisclosure;
5. Financial, medical, social or personal histories or disciplinary data
of specific persons which, if disclosed, would be likely to have a
§ 3.32.060 CODE ADOPTION § 3.32.060
1.01:69
§ 3.32.070. Preservation through microfilm.
Any village clerk or the director of any department or division of village
government may, subject to the approval of the Village Board, keep and
preserve public records in his or her possession by means of microfilm
or other photographic reproduction method. Such records shall meet the
standards for photographic reproduction set forth in § 16.61(7)(a), (b), Wis.
Stats., and shall be considered original records for all purposes. Such
records shall be preserved along with other files of the department or
division and shall be open to public inspection and copying according to the
provisions of state law and of §§ 3.32.040 through 3.32.060 of this chapter.
Chapter 3.36
SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
§ 3.36.010. General procedures for special assessments. [Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
Where special assessments for public improvements or services are to be
made against abutting or benefited property, the Village Board shall levy
such assessments in accordance with the provisions of §§ 66.0701 and
66.0703, Wis. Stats., except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
substantial adverse effect upon the reputation of any person
referred to in such history or data;
6. Communications between legal counsel for the Village and any
officer, agent or employee of the Village, when advice is being
rendered concerning strategy with respect to current litigation in
which the Village or any of its officers, agents or employees is or is
likely to become involved, or communications which are privileged
under § 905.03, Wis. Stats.
D. If a record contains information that may be made public and
information that may not be made public, the custodian of the record
shall provide the information that may be made public and delete the
information that may not be made public from the record before
release. The custodian shall confer with the Village Attorney prior to
releasing any such record and shall follow the guidance of the Village
Attorney when separating out the exempt material. If, in the judgment
of the custodian and the Village Attorney, there is no feasible way to
separate the exempt material from the nonexempt material without
unreasonably jeopardizing nondisclosure of the exempt material, the
entire record shall be withheld from disclosure.
§ 3.32.060 GRAFTON CODE § 3.36.020
1.01:70
§ 3.36.020. Sidewalk and curbing assessments. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
Assessments for sidewalk improvement, construction and repair and
curbing may be levied by the Board in accordance with the provisions of
§§ 66.0701 and 66.0703, Wis. Stats.
§ 3.36.030. Proration of construction costs for storm sewers.
Except as modified by the regulations for the division and platting of land in
Title 18, Subdivisions, of this Code, the construction cost of storm sewers is
to be prorated. For the purpose of having the cost of storm sewers equitably
proportioned between the Village and the property owners, the cost of the
same shall be prorated as follows:
A. The amount which the owner shall pay shall be based upon the ratio of
the area of each owner's "contributing parcel" fronting on or within 500
feet of said improvement to the entire "contribution area" tributary to
said improvement.
B. A "contributing parcel" shall be defined as:
1. A lot within a platted subdivision, the majority of whose area
contributes to an abutting street which contains or drains to said
improvement; or
2. An unplatted parcel of land which fronts on or contributes to a
street containing or draining to the said improvement, where:
a. The depth shall be defined as 135 feet as measured at right
angles to the street line where the drainage area falls away
from the street or improvement; or
b. The depth shall be defined as the depth of the parcel from the
street line or from the improvement, where no street exists, to
the rear limits of the contributing drainage area where the
drainage area contributes to the said improvement and where
no future storm sewer extensions will be made in the parcel's
drainage area;
c. In Subsection B.2 of this section, where future storm sewer
extensions will be made into the drainage area, the depth shall
be considered as 135 feet as measured at right angles to the
said future improvement.
d. The width shall be defined as the width of the contributing
parcel which falls within the tributary drainage area of said
improvement.
C. The "contribution area" shall be defined as the sum of all "contributing
parcels," defined above, to be assessed and shall not include street
area.
§ 3.36.020 CODE ADOPTION § 3.36.030
1.01:71
§ 3.36.040. Sanitary sewer assessment policy.
D. The cost of said improvement shall be considered to include the storm
sewer and all connections and appurtenances thereto.
E. The cost of said improvements shall be considered to include an
engineering and administration fee of 15%.
F. The cost for the services for obtaining assessment bonds for the
purpose of paying for this improvement program shall be a part of the
cost of this said improvement.
G. The cost per square foot to be assessed to the contributing and/or
abutting property shall be the ratio of the total cost of the improvement
to the total number of square feet in the contribution area.
A. Intent. The intent of this policy is to equitably assess the costs of new
major sanitary sewer installations and related appurtenances to
abutting and/or benefited property. [Amended by Ord. No. 014,
Series 2003]
B. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
APPURTENANCES — Public installation of facilities necessary to
operate a complete sanitary sewer conveyance system, such as (but not
limited to) gravity sewer piping, manholes, service laterals extended to
the property line, municipal pump stations and force mains.
COSTS — The amount of money expended by the Board of Public
Works and/or the Village to design and construct the sanitary sewer
and appurtenances.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1.01, Code Adoption)]
ENR INDEX — The "20 cities" construction cost index published by
Engineering News Record magazine, a national publication of the
construction industry.
INDEX AT BID — The value of the ENR Index at the time of the bid
opening for the facilities.
INDEX AT PAYMENT — The value of the ENR Index at the time the
facilities are paid for by the property owners.
INTERCEPTOR SEWER — A gravity sanitary sewer 12 inches or larger
in diameter.
PRIMARY SERVICE AREA — The limits of an area that can be served or
developed as a direct result of the oversized sewer installation and as
delineated by the Village Engineer.
C. Policy. Unless otherwise agreed between the landowner(s) and the
Village, the costs for all sanitary sewers and interceptor sewers and the
related appurtenances shall be assessed as follows:
§ 3.36.030 GRAFTON CODE § 3.36.040
1.01:72
1. It being understood that owners of single-family residential
properties benefit similarly from the availability of sanitary sewers
regardless of the length of front footage of the owners' properties,
the single-family residential properties abutting an eight-inch
sanitary sewer shall be assessed a fixed cost as calculated by the
Village Engineer and approved by the Village Board. Said
calculation shall be based upon the ENR Index eight-inch sanitary
sewer, constructed at a normal depth and at a standard length. All
other properties abutting an eight-inch sanitary sewer shall be
assessed at cost not to exceed the ENR Index eight-inch sanitary
sewer, constructed at a normal depth. In the event of a mixed-use
assessment, involving a combination of single-family residential
and other uses, the Village Engineer shall attempt to apportion the
sanitary sewer costs in a uniform manner, always considering the
policy set forth herein. [Amended by Ord. No. 012, Series 2005]
2. It being understood that owners of single-family residential
properties benefit similarly from the availability of sanitary sewers
regardless of the length of front footage of the owners' properties,
the single-family residential properties abutting the oversized
sewer shall be assessed a fixed cost as calculated by the Village
Engineer and approved by the Village Board. Said calculation shall
be based upon an equivalent eight-inch sewer, at a normal depth
and a standard length, if the oversized sewer is or can reasonably
be expected to be used by the abutting properties in lieu of an
eight-inch collector sewer. All other properties abutting the
oversized sewer shall be assessed for the cost of an equivalent
eight-inch sewer at a normal depth, if the oversized sewer is or can
reasonably be expected to be used by the abutting properties in
lieu of an eight-inch collector sewer. In the event of a mixed-use
assessment, involving single-family residential uses and other uses,
the Village Engineer shall attempt to apportion the sanitary sewer
costs in a uniform manner, always considering the policy set forth
herein. [Amended by Ord. No. 014, Series 2003; Ord. No. 012,
Series 2005]
3. The costs of an oversized sanitary sewer not assessed as an
equivalent eight-inch sewer shall be prorated among the properties
in the service area, based upon gross acres in the service area. In
no case shall the prorated costs (not otherwise assessed as an
equivalent eight-inch sewer) exceed the "cap" figure per acre as
established annually.
4. In some instances, ten-inch sanitary sewer may be required, at the
discretion of the Department of Public Works. In these cases, the
developer shall be reimbursed the over-sizing cost of materials by
the Department.
5. Interceptor special assessments will not apply, per se, to areas
outside the Village limits. Interceptor costs will, however, be
recovered by the Village per existing code language which includes
§ 3.36.040 CODE ADOPTION § 3.36.040
1.01:73
§ 3.36.045. Water main assessment policy.
provision for collection of a connection fee prior to annexation. The
"connection fee" or "right to connect" fee will be determined per
interceptor special assessment methods outlined herein.
6. Project service areas shall be as delineated by the Village Engineer
and approved by the Village Board. In general, delineation of
service area will be serviceability rather than land use, either
ultimate or proposed.
7. The assessment cost of an eight-inch sanitary sewer shall be
established annually by the Village Engineer. [Amended by Ord.
No. 014, Series 2003]
8. The limitations on length of sewer to be assessed, set forth in
Subsection C.1 and 2 above shall only apply to single-family
residential lots within the Village or to be annexed to the Village
that were created prior to January 2004. [Amended by Ord. No.
012, Series 2005]
D. Timing of fee collection.
1. Any area or parcels already within the Village limits that are
benefited from the installation of the interceptor sewer and
appurtenances will be required to pay the applicable special
assessment at the time of final plat approval.
2. Connection fees are normally collected prior to or at the time of
annexation to the Village. At Village Board discretion, collection of
these fees may be commuted to the time of official zoning adoption
by the Village Board for the annexed land.
E. Fee updating.
1. The area-wide interceptor assessment figure per acre shall be
adjusted annually by adding interest at one point above the average
rate at which money was borrowed or otherwise applied at the time
of project's payment. In no case shall the assessment cost per acre
in any year be less than the original per acre assessment.
2. The assessment cost of an equivalent eight-inch sewer shall be
updated annually in accordance with current costs for normal
eight-inch sewer construction, as determined by the Village
Engineer, utilizing the ENR Index. [Amended by Ord. No. 014,
Series 2003]
3. The 1989 assessment cap shall be established at $1,500 per acre.
This cap figure will also be updated annually in accordance with
ENR indexing methods and as adopted by the Village Board.
[Amended by Ord. No. A-525-89, 1989]
§ 3.36.040 GRAFTON CODE § 3.36.045
1.01:74
A. Intent. The intent of this policy is to equitably assess the costs of new
major water main installations and related appurtenances to abutting
and/or benefited property.
B. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
APPURTENANCES — Public installation of facilities necessary to
operate a complete water main conveyance system, such as (but not
limited to), main piping, manholes, hydrants, and service laterals
extended to the property line.
COSTS — The amount of money expended by the Board of Public
Works and/or the Village to design and construct the water main and
appurtenances.
ENR INDEX — The "20 cities" construction cost index published by
Engineering News Record magazine, a national publication of the
construction industry.
INDEX AT BID — The value of the ENR Index at the time of the bid
opening for the facilities.
INDEX AT PAYMENT — The value of the ENR Index at the time the
facilities are paid for by the property owners.
C. Policy. Unless otherwise agreed between landowner(s) and the Village,
the costs for all water mains and the related appurtenances shall be
assessed as follows:
1. The properties abutting an eight-inch water main shall be assessed
for the cost not to exceed the ENR Index eight-inch water main,
constructed at a normal depth. [Amended by Ord. No. 012,
Series 2005; Ord. No. 018, Series 2008]
2. The properties abutting a larger than eight-inch water main shall
be assessed for the cost not to exceed the equivalent eight-inch
water main, at a normal depth, utilizing the ENR Index. The cost of
an equivalent eight-inch water main shall be established annually
by the Village Engineer. [Amended by Ord. No. 012, Series
2005; Ord. No. 018, Series 2008]
3. In some instances, a greater than eight-inch water main may be
required at the discretion of the Utility Director. In these cases, the
developer shall be responsible for all water main costs up to and
including typical twelve-inch sizing. Where water main above
twelve-inch sizing is required by the Utility Director, the developer
shall be reimbursed the over-sizing cost of materials by the Utility
and as determined by the Village Engineer. [Amended by Ord.
No. 007, Series 2005; Ord. No. 018, Series 2008]
4. The assessment cost of an eight-inch water main shall be
established annually by the Village Engineer.
§ 3.36.045 CODE ADOPTION § 3.36.045
1.01:75
§ 3.36.050. Street, curb and gutter, driveway and streetlighting
assessment.
D. Timing of fee collection.
1. Any area or parcels already within the Village limits that are
benefited from the new installation of the water main and
appurtenances will be required to pay the applicable special
assessment upon completion of the installation.
2. Connection fees are normally collected prior to or at the time of
annexation to the Village. At Village Board discretion, collection of
these fees may be commuted to the time of official zoning adoption
by the Village Board for the annexed land.
E. Fee updating. The assessment cost of an equivalent eight-inch water
main shall be updated annually in accordance with current costs for
normal eight-inch water main construction as determined by the Village
Engineer utilizing the ENR Index. [Amended by Ord. No. 014, Series
2003]
A. New construction. The entire cost of new street, curb and gutter, and
sidewalk construction shall be assessed to the abutting property
owners on a front-foot basis, as follows: [Amended by Ord. No. 014,
Series 2003; Ord. No. 016, Series 2003]
1. The assessable front footage shall be the actual lot width at the
minimum building setback line. In districts with no minimum
required setback line, the assessable front footage shall be the
actual lot width measured at a depth equal to 1/4 of the actual
average lot depth.
2. In the case of corner lots, the front footage shall be calculated as in
Subsection A.1 above for improvements on the front yard side of
the lot. The side yard shall be assessed at 50% of the side yard
frontage, provided the side yard frontage does not exceed 150 feet.
If the side yard exceeds 150 feet, that portion in excess of 150 feet
shall be assessed in the same manner as front yard frontage. On
properties in commercial, industrial or PID zoned districts, the side
yard frontage shall be assessed at 100%, irrespective of length.
3. For unplatted parcels, the assessable front footage shall be the
actual frontage of the parcel along the street being improved.
4. The quantity of new pavement which shall be assessed shall be
limited to an area of 16 square feet per front foot. The intent of this
provision is that the amount of new street assessed shall be limited
to a width of 36 feet, measured at the face of curb.
5. New concrete driveway construction shall be assessed 100% to the
benefiting property.
§ 3.36.045 GRAFTON CODE § 3.36.050
1.01:76
§ 3.36.060. Assessments for regional stormwater facilities.
6. New streetlighting shall be assessed at 100% by dividing the entire
cost of streetlight installation by the total assessable front footage
of the street being constructed.
7. Clearing, grubbing, grading, cut, fill, milling, grinding, base
course, landscaping and other items incidental to the construction
of street shall be included in the cost of street construction.
8. Policy. The costs for all street, curb and gutter, and streetlighting
assessments shall be assessed as follows:
a. The properties abutting the improvements shall be assessed
for the cost not to exceed the ENR Index for improvement
constructed consistent with Subsection A.4.
b. The assessment cost shall be established annually by the
Village Engineer.
B. For the purposes of this section, the upgrading of existing rural-type
roadways shall be assessed in the same manner as new street
construction. Rural-type roadways are defined as those which do not
have curb and gutter or are less than the minimum width specified in
§ 18.20.070 of the Code.
C. When calculating improvement costs, the actual costs of legal,
engineering, inspection and construction management shall be
included.
A. The Village Board may establish drainage districts for the purpose of
assessing the cost of regional stormwater facilities, including retention
ponds, channels or structures which have the purpose of controlling the
quantity or quality of stormwater discharge from more than one parcel
of land. The drainage district shall encompass the entire land area
which will, when developed, drain into the improvement being
constructed.
B. When drainage districts are established, the Village Engineer shall
determine the area of each parcel in the district, and any assessment
for improvements shall be made on the basis of proportional area. In
the event that there are significant differences in the impervious areas
of properties in the district, the Board may make assessments on the
basis of proportional impervious area. In such cases, the impervious
area of undeveloped parcels shall be calculated based on the estimated
area under fully developed conditions. The impervious area of all singlefamily
residential lots shall be assumed to be 3,400 square feet.
C. No parcel shall be assessed for regional drainage improvements more
than once; however, multiple improvements may be included in one
assessment. [Amended by Ord. No. 036, Series 1994]
§ 3.36.050 CODE ADOPTION § 3.36.070
1.01:77
§ 3.36.070. Special assessments for regional watershed
improvements.
A. Intent. The intent of this section is to equitably assess the costs of
regional watershed improvements by specially assessing the costs of
those improvements benefiting property owners in accordance with this
section.
1. When the Village Board determines that a proposed watershed
improvement confers a special benefit upon a limited and
determinable area and is, therefore, subject to a special
assessment levied in accordance with the provisions of §§ 66.0701
and 66.0703, Wis. Stats., and § 3.36.010 of this chapter, including
assessment of all costs and expenses outlined therein, the Village
shall determine the amount of the applicable special assessment
for each parcel in the area benefited by the improvement utilizing
the proportional area method as required by § 3.36.060 of this
chapter. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01,
Code Adoption)]
2. Except as otherwise provided herein, the owner of any property
benefiting from the watershed improvement project and which
property is located within the corporate limits of the Village of
Grafton shall pay 50% of the special assessment calculated under
Subsection A.1 of this section and which is attributable to the
owner's property. No assessment shall be levied against parcels
which were in the Village and fully developed on May 18, 1998,
unless said parcels were subject to compliance with the provisions
of an approved stormwater management plan. [Amended by Ord.
No. 003, Series 2001]
3. The Village, in calculating the special assessments under
Subsection A.1 of this section, shall calculate any special
assessable amounts that are attributable to parcels of land which
are benefited by the watershed improvement but which lie outside
of the corporate limits of the Village of Grafton and which are,
therefore, beyond the Village's special assessment powers. The
Village shall place any special assessable amounts which are
attributable to properties lying outside the Village and which
assessments remain after application of any funding grants as
provided for herein on the Village's general property tax levy. In the
event said property owner seeks to annex the parcel of property
into the Village, the Village shall receive as an annexation fee, prior
to annexation, an amount equal to the special assessment as
calculated plus interest thereon at the annual rate of 8% per
annum.
4. In the event that the watershed improvement project qualifies for
any funding through a state or federal grant or similar funding
source and the Village actually receives said funds, the Village shall
apply those funds on a pro rata basis to the fifty-percent portion of
§ 3.36.070 GRAFTON CODE § 3.36.070
1.01:78
Chapter 3.40
FEES FOR ANNEXATION REQUESTS
§ 3.40.010. Fees for annexation requests. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
To defray the cost of administrative burden resulting from the act of
submitting a petition for annexation, an annexation fee as set from time
to time by the Village Board shall be paid by each applicant submitting a
petition for annexation at the time of filing such petition.
Chapter 3.44
IMPACT FEES
§ 3.44.010. Purpose.
In order to provide for the capital costs for the construction, expansion
and improvement of public facilities, including the cost of land, legal,
engineering and design costs to serve growth in the Village of Grafton's
population, there are hereby imposed the following impact fees upon
developers to pay for the capital costs that are necessary to accommodate
land development in compliance with the requirements of § 66.0617, Wis.
Stats.
§ 3.44.020. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable as follows:
the special assessment that is the property owner's responsibility
under this policy. The pro rata reduction shall apply to special
assessments actually levied against properties located in the
Village and the amount that would have been specially assessed
against properties benefited by the improvement but which are
located outside the Village's corporate limits and, therefore, not
subject to special assessment by the Village.
5. The Village shall exercise its best efforts to coordinate work to be
performed in connection with the watershed improvement project
and the levy of any special assessment with any other municipality
having jurisdiction over properties located in the contributing
watershed which are benefited by the watershed improvement.
[Amended by Ord. No. 004, Series 1995]
A. Applicability to all land development for which an impact fee has not
been collected. The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all
land development for which an impact fee has not been collected by the
Village prior to July 5, 1995.
§ 3.36.070 CODE ADOPTION § 3.44.020
1.01:79
§ 3.44.030. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CAPITAL COSTS — The capital costs to construct, expand or improve
public facilities, including the cost of land, and including legal, engineering
and design costs to construct, expand or improve public facilities, except
that not more than 10% of capital costs may consist of legal, engineering
and design costs unless the political subdivision can demonstrate that its
legal, engineering and design costs which relate directly to the public
improvement for which the impact fees were imposed exceed 10% of capital
costs. "Capital costs" does not include other non-capital costs to construct,
expand or improve public facilities, vehicles; or the costs of equipment to
construct, expand or improve public facilities.
DEVELOPER — A person that constructs or creates a land development.
IMPACT FEES — Cash contributions, contributions of land or interests in
land, or any other items of value that are imposed on a developer by a
political subdivision under this chapter.
B. Effects upon all building permits issued prior to chapter effective date.
All building permits issued prior to the effective date of this chapter
shall not be affected by this chapter, except as follows:
1. Nothing in this chapter or any amendment thereto shall be deemed
to require any change in the plans, construction or designated use
of any building or structure if a building permit (also see
Subsection B.2 of this section) for such building or structure was
lawfully and properly issued prior to the effective date of this
chapter, or any such amendment thereto, and such building permit
and/or certificate of occupancy had not by its own terms expired
prior to such effective date of this chapter, and construction
pursuant to such building permit is commenced prior to the
expiration date of such building permit.
2. Where a building permit for a building or structure has been issued
in accordance with law prior to the effective date of this chapter,
and provided that construction is begun within 90 days of such
effective date and the exterior of the building or structure is
completed within six months of such effective date, said building or
structure may be completed in accordance with the approved plans
on the basis of which the building permit has been issued; and
further, may, upon completion, be occupied under a certificate of
occupancy by the use for which originally designated, subject
thereafter to the provisions of the Village of Grafton Code.
C. Pending applications. This chapter and any amendment thereto shall
apply to all applications for land development pending and not finally
decided on the effective date thereof to which it would apply if such
applications were filed on or after such effective date.
§ 3.44.020 GRAFTON CODE § 3.44.030
1.01:80
LAND DEVELOPMENT — The construction or modification of
improvements to real property that creates additional residential dwelling
units within a political subdivision or that results in nonresidential uses
that create a need for new, expanded or improved public facilities within a
political subdivision.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — A city, village, town or county.
PUBLIC FACILITIES — Highways, as defined in § 340.01(22), Wis. Stats.,
and other transportation facilities, traffic control devices, facilities for
collecting and treating sewage, facilities for collecting and treating
stormwater and surface waters, facilities for pumping, storing and
distributing water, parks, playgrounds and land for athletic fields, solid
waste and recycling facilities, fire protection facilities, law enforcement
facilities, emergency medical facilities, and libraries. "Public facilities" does
not include facilities owned by a school district. With regard to impact fees
that were first imposed before June 14, 2006, "public facilities" includes
other recreational facilities that were substantially completed by June 14,
2006.
SERVICE AREA — A geographic area delineated by a political subdivision
within which there are public facilities.
SERVICE STANDARD — A certain quantity or quality of public facilities
relative to a certain number of persons, parcels of land, or other appropriate
measure, as specified by the political subdivision.
§ 3.44.040. Amount of impact fees.
The amount of impact fees to be collected for each residential dwelling
unit created after the effective date of this chapter shall be in an amount
as specified under §§ 3.44.090, 3.44.092, 3.44.094, 3.44.096 and 3.44.098
of this chapter. The amount of impact fees to be collected for commercial,
industrial and institutional development shall be in accordance with the
amount specified under §§ 3.44.094, 3.44.096 and 3.44.098 of this chapter.
A. Determination. Impact fee amounts shall be determined from time to
time and shall be based upon detailed estimates of the capital costs of
providing new public facilities or the improvement or expansion of
existing public facilities which will be required because of land
development, in accordance with § 66.0617, Wis. Stats. Such
determination shall include an estimate of the effect of the impact fees
on the availability of affordable housing within the Village. The full
amount of the impact fee shall be determined based upon the number of
residential dwelling units created.
B. Guidelines and criteria for the impact fees imposed by this chapter. The
impact fees imposed by this chapter:
1. Shall bear a rational relationship to the need for new, expanded or
improved public facilities that are required to serve land
development.
§ 3.44.030 CODE ADOPTION § 3.44.040
1.01:81
§ 3.44.050. Payment of fees.
§ 3.44.060. Segregation of impact fees.
Impact fees shall be placed in segregated, interest-bearing accounts as
follows:
2. May not exceed the proportionate share of the capital costs that are
required to serve land development, as compared to existing uses
of land within the political subdivision.
3. Shall be based upon actual capital costs for new, expanded or
improved public facilities.
4. Shall be reduced to compensate for other capital costs imposed by
the Village with respect to land development to provide or pay for
public facilities, including special assessments, special charges,
land dedications or fees in lieu of land dedication under Ch. 236,
Wis. Stats., or any other items of value.
5. Shall be reduced to compensate for moneys received from the
federal or state government specifically to provide or pay for the
public facilities for which the impact fees are imposed.
6. May not include amounts necessary to address existing deficiencies
in public facilities.
7. Shall be payable by the developer or the property owner to the
political subdivision in full upon the issuance of a building permit
by the political subdivision.
A. The payment of all fees imposed by this chapter shall be at the time of
building permit issuance. The Village Clerk shall be notified in writing
by the Building Inspection Department when a building permit is issued
that will require the collection of an impact fee. The required fee shall
be paid to the Village Finance Department, which shall notify the
Village Clerk of said payment.
B. The payment of impact fees imposed by this chapter shall apply to the
following types of development:
1. Single-family dwelling units.
2. Two-family dwelling units.
3. Multifamily dwelling units.
4. Commercial developments (excluding condominiums, which are
classified as residential units for the purposes of this chapter).
5. Industrial developments.
6. Institutional developments.
§ 3.44.040 GRAFTON CODE § 3.44.060
1.01:82
§ 3.44.070. Time limitations on use of impact fees.
The impact fees imposed by this chapter shall be used or refunded based
upon the provisions of Wisconsin Act 44, which became effective on January
19, 2008. The Act established the following timeline for the use or refund of
the impact fees imposed by this chapter:
§ 3.44.080. Parks and recreational facilities needs assessment.
A. Revenues from impact fees collected to be placed in segregated,
interest-bearing accounts. Revenues from impact fees collected
pursuant to this chapter shall be placed in an interest-bearing account
and each service area district or zone as established in this chapter
shall be individually accounted for.
B. Expenditure of impact fee funds. All funds collected from land
development activities within a given service area district or zone, and
interest thereon, shall be expended only within that service area district
or zone and only for capital costs for which they were imposed.
A. Police facility impact fees - approved December 20, 2004.
1. Fees collected before April 11, 2006, must be used not later than
the first day of the 120th month beginning after the date on which
the fee was collected.
2. Fees collected after April 10, 2006, and collected within seven
years of the effective date of the ordinance imposing the fee must
be used within 10 years after the effective date of the ordinance.
3. Fees collected after April 10, 2006, and collected more than seven
years after the effective date of the ordinance imposing the fees
must be used within a reasonable period of time after collected.
B. Department of Public Works facility impact fees - approved December 5,
2005.
1. Fees collected before April 11, 2006, must be used not later than
the first day of the 120th month beginning after the date on which
the fee was collected.
2. Fees collected after April 10, 2006, and collected within seven
years of the effective date of the ordinance imposing the fee must
be used within 10 years after the effective date of the ordinance.
3. Fees collected after April 10, 2006, and collected more than seven
years after the effective date of the ordinance imposing the fees
must be used within a reasonable period of time after collected.
A. The Village of Grafton has caused to be prepared a 2015 Needs
Assessment Study – Parks and Recreational Facilities Impact Fees,
based upon the 2014 Park and Open Space Plan.
§ 3.44.060 CODE ADOPTION § 3.44.080
1.01:83
§ 3.44.086. Police station facility needs assessment.
The Village of Grafton, in response to the 2001 Village of Grafton Police
Department Space Needs Study, has prepared a Police Facility Needs
Assessment, which is on file in the Village Clerk's office. In accordance with
§ 66.0617, Wis. Stats., the police station needs assessment evaluates the
physical adequacy of the original facility as well as a projection of the future
needs based on forecasted growth. The Police station needs assessment
considers any deficiencies that may have existed in the original police
station facility as well as the recommended police station expansion in
order to compensate for new development. The police station facility needs
assessment was utilized as a primary source for forecasting the future
demands for public services from projected residential and nonresidential
development and to determine the costs that shall be recovered from this
new growth in the form of an impact fee.
§ 3.44.088. Public works facilities needs assessment.
The Village of Grafton, in response to the 2003 Village of Grafton Public
Works Department Space Needs Study, has prepared a Public Works
Transportation Facility Needs Assessment and Impact Study, which is on
file in the Village Clerk's office. In accordance with § 66.0617, Wis. Stats.,
the Public Works Department needs assessment evaluates the physical
adequacy of the original facility as well as a projection of the future needs
based on forecasted growth. The Public Works Department needs
assessment considers any deficiencies that may have existed in the original
public works facility as well as the recommended public works facility
expansion in order to compensate for new development. The Public Works
Transportation Facility needs assessment was utilized as a primary source
for forecasting the future demands for public services from projected
residential and nonresidential development and to determine the costs that
shall be recovered from this new growth in the form of an impact fee.
B. The study evaluated the current park and recreational facilities and
new facilities needed to support anticipated growth within the
community. Park and recreational facilities needs within the Village of
Grafton are based on per capita standards, as established in the 2014
Park and Open Space Plan Update.
C. Each single-family residential unit constitutes one residential
equivalent unit (REU), whether located within a one-family, multifamily,
condominium, cooperative, rental or owner-occupied unit. Impact fees
for park and recreational facilities will be assessed only to residential
uses since the demand for these public facilities is generally utilized by
the residential portion of the community.
§ 3.44.080 GRAFTON CODE § 3.44.090
1.01:84
§ 3.44.090. Impact fees – park, playground and land for athletic
field. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code
Adoption)]
The developer or the owner shall pay to the Village a park, playground and
land for athletic field impact fee for each dwelling unit that has been issued
a building permit. The amount of the impact fee shall be as indicated in
the 2015 Needs Assessment Study and updated annually per § 3.44.110. If
the land is suitable for the dedication and development of a public park,
playground or land for athletic field, as determined by the Village Board,
the above impact fee shall be reduced by an amount as determined by the
Village President by subtracting the value of any lands dedicated within
the land development for public park, playground or land for athletic field
purposes.
§ 3.44.096. Impact fees – police station facilities.
§ 3.44.098. Impact fees – public works facilities.
A. The following fees schedule is the amount as set by the Village Board
upon creation of the Police Station Facility impact fee. This amount
shall be adjusted annually based upon the current year's Consumer
Price Index (CPI) and shall be utilized for the imposition of Police
Station Facility impact fees:
1. Residential development: $631 per dwelling unit.
2. Commercial development: $0.40 per square foot.
3. Industrial development: $0.40 per square foot.
4. Institutional development: $0.40 per square foot.
B. The fees imposed by this section shall apply to any and all land
development projects that occur following the effective date of this
chapter. In addition, the fees imposed by this section shall apply to land
development projects that were approved prior to the effective date of
this chapter but that have not been signed and/or recorded as of the
date of the adoption of this chapter. The fees imposed herein shall be
paid according to § 3.44.050 of this chapter. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
A. The following fees schedule is the amount as set by the Village Board
upon creation of the Public Works Facility impact fee. This amount shall
be adjusted annually based upon the current year's Consumer Price
Index (CPI) and shall be utilized for the imposition of Public Works
Facility impact fees:
1. Residential development: $918 per dwelling unit.
2. Commercial development: $0.20 per square foot.
3. Industrial development: $0.18 per square foot.
§ 3.44.090 CODE ADOPTION § 3.44.098
1.01:85
§ 3.44.100. Exemptions.
Any single-family land development for which fees for parks, playgrounds,
or land for athletic fields have been paid prior to May 1, 1995, pursuant to
the provisions and requirements of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code as
said Municipal Code existed prior to May 1, 1995, shall be exempt from the
impact fees imposed under this chapter.
§ 3.44.105. Low-cost housing.
The Village Board may consider a written request from a developer of lowcost
housing to exempt or reduce the amount of the impact fee on a land
development that provides low-cost housing. Low-cost housing is defined
as any housing in which the resident's income is restricted by law to not
more than 80% of Ozaukee County's median income. The Village Board
shall prepare written findings justifying its decision on any such request.
Should a request be approved by resolution of the Village Board the Village
shall not shift the reduced impact fee to any other development in the land
development in which the low-cost housing is located or any other land
development in the Village.
§ 3.44.110. Fee increases.
The impact fees imposed in this chapter for parks, playgrounds and land
for athletic fields, police station facilities and public works facilities shall
be automatically adjusted, without further Village Board action, during the
first quarter of each year by the percentage equal to that of the rate
of consumer inflation based upon the percent of change of the yearly
Consumer Price Index for the previous year for the Milwaukee Metropolitan
Area as reported by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor
Statistics. The Village Director of Administrative Services, or the Village
Director of Administrative Services' designee, shall determine such
adjustment and maintain a copy of the said Consumer Price Index upon
which such adjustment was made in the Village Department of Finance.
§ 3.44.120. Administration.
All fees collected and special accounts maintained under this chapter shall
be subject to administration by the Village Director of Administrative
Services.
4. Institutional development: $0.20 per square foot.
B. The fees imposed by this section shall apply to any and all land
development projects that occur following the effective date of this
chapter. In addition, the fees imposed by this section shall apply to land
development projects that were approved prior to the effective date of
this chapter but that have not been signed and/or recorded as of the
date of the adoption of this chapter. The fees imposed herein shall be
paid according to § 3.44.050 of this chapter.
§ 3.44.098 GRAFTON CODE § 3.44.120
1.01:86
§ 3.44.130. Appeals.
Any developer who disputes the amount, collection or use of the impact fees
provided for herein shall have the right to appeal to the Village Board, and
the procedure for such appeal shall be as follows:
A. Report required. Commencing with the calendar year subsequent to the
effective date of this chapter, the Village Director of Administrative
Services shall report annually to the Village Board with regard to all
deposits, withdrawals, and fund balances in regard to impact fees. The
purpose of the annual report is to provide the Village Board with
information necessary to determine that all funds collected are spent
within a reasonable amount of time pursuant to this chapter, for the
purposes intended, and that the amount of the fees imposed continues
to represent an equitable and reasonable apportionment of the cost of
public facilities for land development.
B. Refunds. Should the Village Board determine that any refunds be made,
such refund shall be made by the Village Director of Administrative
Services proportionally to the current owner(s) of the lot(s), parcels(s),
or dwelling unit(s), as applicable, and taking into account the time and
amount of fees paid for such lot(s), parcels(s), or dwelling unit(s), as
applicable.
A. Appeal initiation and appeal application fee. An appeal shall be initiated
by filing a written notice of appeal with the Village Clerk accompanied
by an appeal application fee in the amount of $125 plus postage.
B. Content of the written notice of appeal. The written notice of appeal
shall include the name, address and telephone number of the
developer; the legal description of the land development for which the
impact fee is imposed and the appeal is requested; the number of
residential dwelling units being created; the amount and nature of the
impact fee imposed; and the specific objections to the amount of the
impact fee, collection of the impact fee, or the use of the impact fee.
C. Hearing the appeal. Upon receipt of the written notice of appeal and
appeal application fee, the Village Clerk shall schedule a special
meeting of the Village Board for the special purpose of hearing the
appeal. Such special meeting shall be scheduled not more than 30 days
from the date of the receipt of the written notice of appeal unless a later
date for the hearing is agreed to by the developer in writing.
D. Conduct of the appeal proceedings. The developer may present such
oral and documentary evidence as the developer may desire upon the
hearing and the Village Plan Commission may similarly submit evidence
in support of the impact fee(s). All proceedings shall be electronically
recorded or taken by a court reporter, at the option of the developer. If a
court reporter is requested, the developer shall pay the costs thereof.
§ 3.44.120 CODE ADOPTION § 3.44.130
1.01:87
Title 4: (Reserved)
Title 5: Business Regulations
Chapter 5.04
LICENSE AND PERMIT PROCEDURE
§ 5.04.010. Chapter provisions to govern.
Unless otherwise specifically provided by the laws of the state or ordinances
of the Village, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to the issuance,
transfer and revocation of all licenses and permits issued under the
provisions of this Code.
§ 5.04.020. Application forms.
All applications for licenses or permits shall be made upon regular forms
approved by the Village Board and furnished by the Village Clerk to the
applicant.
§ 5.04.030. Fees.
The amount of the license or permit fee shall be first paid to the Village
Clerk, and his receipt therefor shall be attached to the application.
§ 5.04.040. Application signing and notarizing.
The application shall be signed by the applicant and, where required, shall
be sworn to before a notary public or other public officer authorized to
administer oaths, and filed with the Village Clerk.
§ 5.04.050. Consideration and hearing.
The Village Clerk shall present such application to the Village Board at
its next meeting held after the filing thereof, except when some Village
officer, board or commission is first required to examine or report upon such
application, in which case the Village Clerk shall refer the application for
report to such officer, board or commission and shall present the application
and report thereon to the Village Board as soon as reasonably possible
thereafter. Opportunity shall be given by the Village Board to any person to
be heard for or against the granting of any license or permit.
E. Village Board determination. The Village Board shall make its
determination based upon the evidence presented and shall issue its
decision in writing within 20 days of the hearing.
F. Certification to the Ozaukee County Circuit Court. The decision of the
Village Board may be certified to the Ozaukee Circuit Court as a special
writ for judicial review.
§ 3.44.130 GRAFTON CODE § 5.04.060
1.01:88
§ 5.04.060. License issuance generally.
The Village Clerk shall issue such license or permit only after its issuance
has been authorized by the Village Board or proper officer.
§ 5.04.070. License issuance by administrative authorities.
When administrative authority to issue any license or permit is delegated
to any Village officer, board or commission under the terms of this Code,
such officer, board or commission shall grant such license when proper
application has been made in accordance with the provisions of this Code.
In the event such application is denied, the reasons for denial shall be
reduced to writing and delivered or mailed to the applicant. Such applicant
may at any time within 30 days thereafter request the Village Board to
review such determination or any failure to make the same, which action
shall be taken by the Village Board within eight days after written request
therefor has been filed with the Village Clerk.
§ 5.04.080. Conditions of issuance.
A. All obligations to Village to be paid. Before any license or permit, except
for one- and two-family residential, shall be issued under the provisions
of this Code, the Village Finance Department or its designee shall check
all Village records to determine whether or not any applicant, owner or
owner's personal representative or agent, heirs and assigns are in
arrears for taxes or any other obligation to any department of the
Village, with the exception of citations issued by the Grafton Police
Department. If the Finance Department, or its designee, finds any
applicant, owner or owner's personal representative or agent, heirs and
assigns to be in arrears for taxes or any other obligation, with the
exception of citations issued by the Grafton Police Department, the
issuing officer or department shall withhold any and all licenses and
permits for which application has been made until such taxes or
obligations have been paid in full. [Amended by Ord. No. 021, Series
2010]
B. Consent to inspection of premises. As a condition of the granting of any
license or permit, the licensee or permittee shall agree in writing that,
during the period of such license or permit, the Chief of Police, police
officer or other duly authorized officials of the Village may at all
reasonable hours enter into and upon the licensed premises for the
purpose of inspecting the premises to ascertain if the provisions of this
Code with respect to the license and the state laws with respect to the
license are being obeyed, and such person shall also consent to the
removal from the licensed premises, without warrant, of all things and
articles they had in violation of Village ordinances and state laws with
respect to the license and to the introduction and receipt of such things
and articles in any prosecution or proceeding for violation of any
provision of Village ordinances or state law with respect to the license.
§ 5.04.060 CODE ADOPTION § 5.04.090
1.01:89
§ 5.04.090. License transfer. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
Licenses or permits shall not be transferable from one person to another but
may be transferred from one location to another by approval of the Village
Board, and the full license or permit fee shall be charged for one year or
any portion thereof. A fee of $25 shall be charged for any such transfer.
§ 5.04.100. Replacement. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
Whenever any license or permit shall be lost or destroyed without fault on
the part of the holder or his agent or employees, a duplicate in lieu thereof
may be issued by the Village Clerk, upon satisfying himself of the facts, for
a fee of $10.
§ 5.04.110. Revocation; violations and penalties. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
Any license or permit issued by the Village Board or any officer or
department of the Village may be revoked by the Village Board at any
regular or special meeting by a majority vote in favor of such revocation,
provided that no license or permit shall be revoked until the holder thereof
has been given an opportunity to be heard by the Village Board. Notice of
such hearing shall be given to the permit or license holder either personally
or by registered mail by the Village Clerk in the time and manner as
directed by the Village Board. Any license or permit issued by the Village
Board, any Village officer or department shall be and remain the property
of the Village and, upon revocation thereof, the same shall be returned to
the Village Clerk's office, and if not so returned after demand, the Village
reserves the right to institute suit against the holder or anyone having
possession of such license or permit for the return of the same. Any person
failing to return any such license or permit after revocation thereof and
demand having been made as provided in this section shall be deemed
to have violated the provisions of this section and shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the general penalty in Chapter 1.08 of this Code.
Whenever any license or permit is revoked, no refund of any unearned
portion of the fee paid therefor shall be made.
Chapter 5.05
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS FOR PRIVATE BUSINESS
§ 5.05.010. Employee benefits for private businesses.
No ordinance of the Village of Grafton, nor any other municipal ordinance,
rule or regulation shall mandate that any business entity, other than the
Village itself, shall provide certain wages or benefits to its employees or set
forth the amount or type of any employee wages or benefits provided by an
employer located within the Village limits.
§ 5.04.090 GRAFTON CODE § 5.05.010
1.01:90
Chapter 5.06
LICENSING OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND CIGARETTE
RETAILERS
§ 5.06.010. Adoption of state statutes and definitions.
A. Adoption of state statutes. The provisions of §§ 134.65; 139.30 to
139.45 and/or 139.75 to 139.86, Wis. Stats., and all acts amendatory
thereof and supplementary thereto are hereby adopted as a portion of
this chapter so far as applicable. A violation of any such provision shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.
B. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CIGARETTE — Any roll of tobacco wrapped in paper or any substance
other than tobacco.
LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment licensed by the
Village Board of the Village of Grafton to sell tobacco products and/or
cigarettes.
MANUFACTURER — Any person who manufactures cigarettes for the
purpose of sale.
PERSON — A natural person, sole proprietor, partnership, corporation
or association.
PREMISES — The area described in a license or permit.
RETAILER — Any person who sells, exposes for sale or possesses with
the intent to sell to consumers any tobacco products or cigarettes.
SELL or SALE — Includes the transfer, gift, barter, trade or exchange
or any shift, device, scheme or transaction whereby cigarettes and/or
tobacco products may be obtained and the solicitation of orders for, or
the sale for, future delivery of cigarettes and/or tobacco products.10
TOBACCO PRODUCTS — Cigars, cheroots, stogies, periques,
granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready-rubbed and other smoking
tobacco, snuff, snuff flour, cavendish, plug and twist tobacco, fine cut
and other chewing tobacco, shorts, refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings,
and sweepings of tobacco and other kinds and forms of tobacco
prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing or smoking
in a pipe or otherwise, or both for chewing or smoking; but "tobacco
products" does not include cigarettes, as defined in § 139.30(1m), Wis.
Stats.11
10.Editor's Note: The original definition of "stamp," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption).
11.Editor's Note: The original definitions of "underage person" and "vending machine," which
immediately followed this definition, were repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1.01, Code Adoption).
§ 5.05.010 CODE ADOPTION § 5.06.010
1.01:91
§ 5.06.020. License required.
§ 5.06.025. Special event tobacco products license. [Added by Ord.
No. 024, Series 2005]
VILLAGE — The Village of Grafton.
A. When required. No person, as provided by § 134.65, Wis. Stats., shall
distribute, vend, sell, offer or keep for sale at retail, deal or traffic in or,
for the purpose of evading any law or ordinance, give away or gift any
tobacco product or cigarette or cause the same to be done without
having obtained a license from the Village of Grafton. All statutes,
ordinances and regulations of the state and Village applicable thereto
shall be complied with.
1. License applications to vend, sell, offer or keep for sale at retail,
deal or traffic in cigarette or tobacco products shall be made in
writing on a form prescribed by law and shall be sworn to by the
applicant. Said application shall be presented to the Village Clerk
for approval by the Village Board.
B. Separate license required for each place of sale. A license shall be
required for each of those premises where tobacco products and/or
cigarettes are kept, sold or offered for sale.
C. The fee for such license for the manufacture, sale, exchange, barter,
disposition of, giving away or keeping for sale of cigarettes, and tobacco
products shall be $100 per year.
D. The licensing period for said license shall be July 1 to June 30 of a given
year.
A. The Village Board shall have the authority to issue a limited-term
tobacco products license for special events. Such license shall only be
issued to registered not-for-profit organizations as defined for taxation
purposes in § 70.11, Wis. Stats.
B. A license application to vend, sell, offer or keep for sale at retail, deal or
traffic in cigarette or tobacco products at a limited term special event
shall be made in writing on a form supplied by the Village of Grafton
and shall be sworn to by the applicant. Said application shall be
presented to the Village Clerk for approval by the Village Board.
C. The term of said special event tobacco products license shall not exceed
four consecutive days.
D. The fee for said special event tobacco products license shall be $10. The
Village Board may waive the license fee requirement upon written
request from the applicant.
§ 5.06.010 GRAFTON CODE § 5.06.030
1.01:92
§ 5.06.030. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the general penalty in Chapter 1.08 of this
Code. Conviction of a violation of this chapter shall immediately terminate
the license of the person(s) convicted of being personally guilty of such
failure to exercise due care, and the person shall not be entitled to another
license hereunder for a period of five years thereafter, nor shall the person
in that period act as the servant or agent of a person licensed hereunder for
the performance of the acts authorized by such license. [§ 134.65(5), Wis.
Stats.]
Chapter 5.16
LIQUOR
§ 5.16.010. Adoption of statutes and definitions.
A. Adoption of state statutes. The provisions of Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., as
created by Chapter 79 of the 1981 Laws of Wisconsin, and all acts
amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto relating to the
regulation of intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverages, are
adopted as a portion of this chapter insofar as applicable, except as
otherwise lawfully provided by this chapter. A violation of any such
provisions shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
B. Regulation of underage persons: violations and penalties. As provided
for in § 125.10, Wis. Stats., the provisions of §§ 125.07(4)(a), (b) and
(bm), 125.08(3)(b) and 125.09(2), Wis. Stats., regulating the conduct of
underage persons, are expressly adopted and incorporated into this
chapter by reference. Violators of these provisions shall be subject:
1. For a first violation, to a forfeiture of not more than $50, suspension
of the person's operating privilege as provided under
§ 343.30(6)(b)1, Wis. Stats., or a combination of both. For purposes
of this subsection, all violations arising out of the same incident or
occurrence shall be counted as a single violation;
2. For a violation committed within 12 months of a previous violation,
either a forfeiture of not more than $100, suspension of the
person's operating privilege as provided under § 343.30(6)(b)2,
Wis. Stats., or a combination of both. For purposes of this
subsection, all violations arising out of the same incident or
occurrence shall be counted as a single violation;
3. For a violation committed within 12 months of two or more
previous violations, either a forfeiture of not more than $500,
revocation of the person's operating privilege under
§ 343.30(6)(b)3, Wis. Stats., or a combination of both. For purposes
§ 5.06.030 CODE ADOPTION § 5.16.010
1.01:93
of this subsection, all violations arising out of the same incident or
occurrence shall be counted as a single violation.
C. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ALCOHOL BEVERAGES — Fermented malt beverages and intoxicating
liquor.
CLUB — An organization, whether incorporated or not, which is the
owner, lessee or occupant of a building or portion thereof used
exclusively for club purposes, which is operated solely for a
recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent or athletic
purpose but not for pecuniary gain, and which only sells alcohol
beverages incidental to its operation.
FERMENTED MALT BEVERAGES — Any beverage made by the alcohol
fermentation of an infusion in potable water of barley malt and hops,
with or without unmalted grains or decorticated and degerminated
grains or sugar containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.
HOTEL — A hotel, as defined in § 254.61(3), Wis. Stats., provided with
a restaurant.
INTOXICATED PERSON — An individual who does not have the normal
use of such individual's physical or mental faculties due to the
consumption of intoxicating liquor, fermented malt beverage, narcotics
or other controlled substance to a degree that such individual is
incapable of acting in the manner in which an ordinary prudent and
cautious person in full possession of one's faculties, using reasonable
care, would act under like conditions, thereby endangering such
individual or other persons or property in his or her vicinity.[Amended
by Ord. No. 033, Series 1998]
INTOXICATING LIQUOR — All ardent, spirituous, distilled or vinous
liquors, liquids or compounds, whether medicated, proprietary,
patented or not, and by whatever name called, containing 0.5% or
more of alcohol by volume, which are beverages, but does not include
fermented malt beverages.
LEGAL DRINKING AGE — Has the meaning prescribed in
§ 125.02(8m), Wis. Stats.
LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment licensed by the
Village Board of the Village of Grafton to sell alcohol beverages
pursuant to Ch. 125, Wis. Stats.[Amended by Ord. No. 035, Series
1998]
LICENSEE — The holder of a retail "Class A," "Class B," Class "A," Class
"B" or Class "C" license granted by the Village Board of the Village of
Grafton pursuant to Ch. 125, Wis. Stats.[Amended by Ord. No. 035,
Series 1998]
PERSON — A natural person, sole proprietorship, partnership,
corporation or association.
§ 5.16.010 GRAFTON CODE § 5.16.010
1.01:94
§ 5.16.020. Licenses required.
§ 5.16.030. Classes of license, permits and fees. [Amended by Ord.
No. 027-93, 1993; Ord. No. 013, Series 1996; Ord. No. 027, Series
1998; Ord. No. 028, Series 1998; Ord. No. 028, Series 1999; Ord.
No. 019, Series 2003; Ord. No. 024, Series 2003; Ord. No. 025,
Series 2003; Ord. No. 020, Series 2007; 6-20-2011 by Ord. No.
PREMISES — The area described in a license or permit.
RESTAURANT — A restaurant as defined in § 254.61(5), Wis. Stats.
SELL, SOLD, SALE or SELLING — Any transfer of alcohol beverages
with consideration or any transfer without consideration, if knowingly
made for purposes of evading the law relating to the sale of alcohol
beverages, or any shift, device, scheme or transaction for obtaining
alcohol beverages, including the solicitation of orders for, or the sale
for future delivery of, alcohol beverages.
UNDERAGE PERSON — A person who has not attained the legal
drinking age.
VILLAGE — The Village of Grafton.
WHOLESALER — A person, other than the brewer, manufacturer or
rectifier, who sells alcohol beverages to a licensed retailer or to another
person who holds a permit to sell alcohol beverages at wholesale.
WINE — Products obtained from the normal alcohol fermentation of the
juices or must of sound, ripe grapes, other fruits or other agricultural
products, imitation wine, compounds sold as wine, vermouth, cider,
perry, mead and sake, if such products contain not less than 0.5% or
more than 21% of alcohol by volume.[Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
WINE COOLER — Beverages containing products obtained from the
normal alcohol fermentation of the juices or must of sound, ripe grapes,
other fruits or other agricultural products, imitation wine, compounds
sold as wine, vermouth, cider, perry, mead and sake, if such beverages
contain not more than 6% of alcohol by volume.
A. When required. No person, except as provided by § 125.06, Wis. Stats.,
shall distribute, vend, sell, offer or keep for sale at retail or wholesale,
deal or traffic in or, for the purpose of evading any law or ordinance,
give away or gift any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage, or
cause the same to be done, without having procured a license, permit or
authorization as provided in this chapter, nor without complying with all
the provisions of this chapter and all statutes, ordinances and
regulations of the state and Village applicable thereto.
B. Separate license required for each place of sale. A license shall be
required for each of those premises where intoxicating liquor or
fermented malt beverages are kept, sold or offered for sale.
§ 5.16.010 CODE ADOPTION § 5.16.030
1.01:95
016-2011; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code
Adoption)]
There shall be the following classes and denominations of licenses which,
when issued by the Village Clerk under the authority of the Village Board
after payment of the fee herein specified, shall permit the holder to sell, deal
or traffic intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages as provided in this
section and as provided in §§ 125.17, 125.18, 125.25, 125.26 and 125.51,
Wis. Stats. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the full license fee
shall be charged for the whole or fraction of any year. All license years shall
be deemed to commence as of July 1.
A. Retail Class "A" license. A Class "A" license authorizes retail sales of
fermented malt beverages in original packages, containers or bottles
only for consumption off the premises where sold. The license fee shall
be $100 per year.
B. Retail Class "B" license. Class "B" license authorizes retail sales of
fermented malt beverages to be consumed either on the premises
where sold or off the premises. Persons holding a Class "B" license may
sell beverages containing less than 0.5% alcohol by volume without
obtaining a license under § 66.0433(1), Wis. Stats.
1. The fee for a Class "B" license shall be $100 per year. A Class "B"
license may be issued at any time after July 1 for a period of six
months in any license year, for which a seventy-five-dollar license
fee shall be paid. But such temporary licenses shall not be
renewable during the July 1 through June 30 license year in which
issued. All Class "B" licenses issued under this section shall expire
no later than the following June 30.
2. Special events. A temporary Class "B"/"Class B" license may be
issued to bona fide clubs, to state, county or local lodges or
societies and to posts of veterans organizations, any of which have
been in existence for at least six months before the date of the
application for the special event. A license issued under this section
authorizes the sale of fermented malt beverages (Class "B") and/or
wine ("Class B") at particularly described picnics or other similar
gatherings. As allowed by §§ 125.26(1) and 125.51(1)(a), Wis.
Stats., the Village Clerk of the Village of Grafton is hereby
authorized to issue temporary Class "B"/"Class B" licenses to
organizations as allowed in this section. The fee for a special event
license shall be $10 per event. [Amended by Ord. No. 027,
Series 1993]
C. Special permit. A special permit may be issued by the Village Clerk to
families or clubs, including, but not limited to, nonprofit charitable
organizations, to state, county or local fair associations or agricultural
societies, to churches, lodges or societies and to posts of veterans
organizations. A special permit issued under this section authorizes the
consumption and dispensing of fermented malt beverages and/or wine
§ 5.16.030 GRAFTON CODE § 5.16.030
1.01:96
coolers at particularly described picnics or other similar gatherings
which are held on public property. No charge shall be allowed in
connection with the serving, selling, consumption or distribution of
fermented malt beverages and/or wine coolers at events for which a
special permit has been granted, unless a temporary Class "B" license
has also been obtained under this chapter for said event. A special
permit for an event for which a temporary Class "B" license has been
or will be procured may only be issued by the Village Clerk upon
proof by the applicant that liability insurance coverage of not less
than 1/2 million dollars has been procured for the contemplated event.
This subsection is not intended to regulate the internal activities of
private organizations nor legitimate private social events held entirely
on private property.
1. Except as otherwise provided within Subsection C of this section,
or authorized by resolution of the Village Board under authority of
§ 125.09(1), Wis. Stats., the consumption or dispensing of alcohol
beverages on any public property or on a highway as defined in
§ 340.01(22), Wis. Stats., is prohibited.
2. The application for a special permit under the provisions of this
section shall be made to the Village Clerk not less than 48 hours
before the event takes place. Said application shall include an
agreement signed by the applicant on behalf of the entity applying
for a special permit, whereby the applicant expressly warrants and
represents that the Village, its officers, agents and employees shall
be held harmless and indemnified from any and all claims which
may arise from the issuance of a special permit under this chapter.
The Village Clerk shall refer to the Village Board any applications
for a special permit under this section where there is a question as
to whether an applicant qualifies for a special permit under this
section.
3. There shall be no fee for a special permit under this subsection.
However, a special permit may not be issued to anyone for more
than three occasions per year under this section, provided that
each occasion be defined to mean no more than three consecutive
calendar days.
D. Retail "Class A" license. A "Class A" license authorizes the retail sale of
intoxicating liquor in original packages and containers for consumption
off the premises where sold. The fee shall be $400 per year. Effective
with the licensing period that begins on July 1, 2004, the fee for a "Class
A" license shall be $500 per year.
E. Retail "Class B" license. A "Class B" license authorizes the sale of
intoxicating liquor to be consumed by the glass only on the premises
where sold and also authorizes the sale of intoxicating liquor in the
original package or container, in quantities not to exceed four liters at
any one time, and to be consumed off the premises where sold. Wine,
§ 5.16.030 CODE ADOPTION § 5.16.030
1.01:97
however, may be sold for consumption off the premises in the original
package or container in any quantity. The fee shall be $500 per year.
F. Retail "Class C" license.
1. A "Class C" license authorizes the retail sale of wine by the glass or
in an opened original container for consumption on the premises
where sold.
2. A "Class C" license may be issued to a person qualified under
§ 125.04(5), Wis. Stats., for a restaurant in which the sale of alcohol
beverages accounts for less than 50% of gross receipts and which
does not have a barroom or a restaurant in which the sale of alcohol
beverages accounts for less than 50% of gross receipts and which
has a barroom in which wine is the only intoxicating liquor sold.
3. The fee for a "Class C" license shall be $100 per year.
G. Retail reserve "Class B" license. Those licenses available under the
quota system existing before December 1, 1997, that were not granted
or issued by the municipality as of December 1, 1997. The number of
reserve "Class B" licenses available to a municipality is determined by a
series of calculations described in § 125.51(4), Wis. Stats.
1. Initial retail reserve "Class B" license fee. There shall be a tenthousand-
dollar fee, to be paid in addition to the regular Class "B"
and "Class B" fee under Subsections B and F above, upon approval
of a retail reserve "Class B" license. The ten-thousand-dollar fee
shall not be prorated, as required for the retail reserve "Class B"
license, if it is issued for a portion of the licensing period.
2. Business development grants for certain reserve "Class B" licenses.
a. Findings and purpose. 1997 Wisconsin Act 27, effective
December 1, 1997, establishes a new alcohol license called a
retail reserve "Class B" license, and requires that all who are
granted such a license pay an initial license fee of $10,000 in
addition to the regular Class "B" and "Class B" license fees. The
Village Board finds that businesses such as restaurants, hotels
and taverns make important contributions to the Village's
economy and serve important public purposes, including but
not limited to increasing the Village's property tax base,
providing employment and promoting tourism. The Village
Board also finds that the new initial fee for reserve "Class B"
licenses far exceeds the actual cost of licensing the activity and
that excessive license fees deter new business and are contrary
to economic growth. It is the purpose of this chapter to utilize
the excess revenue generated by Wisconsin Act 27 to assist
new reserve "Class B" licensees in order to assist in the
establishment of new businesses.
§ 5.16.030 GRAFTON CODE § 5.16.030
1.01:98
b. The Village Board may provide a one-time business
development grant, in an amount not to exceed $9,500, to a
reserve "Class B" licensee if the following conditions are met:
1. A retail reserve "Class B" license is granted to the licensee.
2. The retail reserve "Class B" license applicant properly
completes, executes and submits an application for a
business development grant to the Village Board on a form
provided by the Village Clerk.
3. Only applicants whose business is located in a tax
incremental financing district (TID) located west of the
Milwaukee River shall be eligible for a business
development grant.
4. The application for a business development grant is
submitted to the Village Clerk, for referral to the Village
Board, no earlier than three months or later than 12
months after the granting of said reserve license.
5. The retail reserve "Class B" licensee pays the initial tenthousand-
dollar fee to the Village.
6. The Village Clerk, with the assistance of any other Village
agency or department, has certified that the applicant for
the business development grant is in full compliance with
the requirements of Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., and all local
ordinances governing the issuance of retail alcohol
beverage licenses.
7. If the Village Clerk determines that the licensee is not in
compliance with the approved license, no business
development grant may be awarded. The Village Clerk
shall provide a written determination to the licensee/
applicant and the Village Board.
8. The Village shall retain $500 of the initial ten-thousanddollar
license fee for administrative purposes.
3. Any business development grant awarded to a retail reserve "Class
B" liquor licensee under this chapter shall be subject to the
following conditions:
a. The licensee must provide documentation, from a certified
public accountant or tax preparer, that:
1. More than 50% of the gross sales of the business are from
the sale of food, and the business is in fact a restaurant;
2. The business is a hotel, bed-and-breakfast or motel
operation; or
§ 5.16.030 CODE ADOPTION § 5.16.030
1.01:99
3. More than 50% of the gross sales of the business are from
the sale of alcohol, beer or wine. [Added 9-16-2013 by
Ord. No. 017-2013]
4. In accepting the one-time grant award, the applicant/licensee must
sign an agreement that, in the event any court determines that the
Village's business development grant program does not serve a
public purpose or is contrary to law, the applicant/licensee will,
upon demand by the Village, repay the one-time economic
development grant to the Village of Grafton.
H. For "Class A," Class "A," "Class B" and Class "B" licenses:
1. A license may be issued after July 1 in any license year. All licenses
shall expire on the following June 30. The fee for the license shall
be prorated according to the number of months or fractions thereof
remaining until the following June 30.
2. Licenses valid for up to six months may be issued at any time. The
fee for the license shall be 50% of the annual license fee. The
license may not be renewed during the calendar year in which
issued.
I. Operator's license.
1. An operator's license is issued for the purpose of compliance with
§ 125.17, Wis. Stats. The licensing period shall be from July 1 to
June 30 for two consecutive years. The fee for an operator's license
shall be $50 for a full or partial licensing period. [Amended
6-20-2011 by Ord. No. 016-2011]
2. Applications for operator's licenses shall be made in writing on a
form provided by the Village Clerk. The application form shall be
filed with the Village Clerk a minimum of seven days before the
meeting of the Village Board where such application shall be
considered. Any application received less than seven days before
action is to be taken will be held until the next meeting of the
Village Board.
3. The Village Clerk shall forward the operator's license application to
the Grafton Police Department for a full background review of the
applicant. The Police Chief or his or her designee shall prepare a
report for Village Board review of the license request.
4. There is no distinction between Class A and Class B operator's
licenses in the application approval/denial process.
5. In addition to the terms and conditions of Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., and
this chapter relating to the issuance of alcohol beverage operator's
licenses, the following factors are hereby established to assist the
Village Board in its consideration of applications for the issuance of
an operator's license for use within the Village of Grafton.
§ 5.16.030 GRAFTON CODE § 5.16.030
1.01:100
6. An operator's license may be denied to any applicant who:
a. Is under the age of 18;
b. Has not successfully completed a "responsible beverage server
training course";
c. Submits an incomplete application or provides false
information on an application;
d. Has an arrest or conviction record which substantially relates
to the circumstances of the licensed activity. For the purposes
herein, "offenses which substantially relate to the
circumstances of the licensed activity" shall include, but are
not limited to, the following:
1. A history of two or more non-felony alcohol-related
convictions within the past 60 months, as long as the most
current conviction or arrest is within the last 18 months;
2. Any non-felony drug-related convictions or pending
charges within the last 12 months;
3. Any non-felony convictions or pending charges within the
last 12 months which involve resisting arrest, battery to a
police officer, or obstructing justice in direct connection to
activity at a licensed alcohol establishment;
4. Two or more non-felony convictions or pending charges in
the last 36 months for disorderly behavior or domesticviolence-
type offenses if they occurred in direct connection
to activity at a licensed alcohol establishment or the use of
alcohol and/or illegal drugs played a role in the incident;
5. One or more felony conviction(s) in the last five years
involving alcohol, drugs or other behavior which
substantially relates to activity at a licensed alcohol
establishment; or
6. Any other arrest or conviction that is reasonably
determined to be substantially related to the
circumstances of the licensed activity.
7. Operator's license applicants that are denied a license may not
reapply for a license for six months from the date of the denial.
J. Temporary operator's license. A temporary operator's license is issued
for purposes of compliance with §§ 125.17(4), 125.32(2) and 125.68(2),
Wis. Stats. The Village Board may issue a temporary operator's license
to persons employed by or donating their services to a nonprofit
corporation. The license is valid for a period of from one day to 14 days.
There is no fee for such license.
§ 5.16.030 CODE ADOPTION § 5.16.030
1.01:101
§ 5.16.040. License applications.
K. Provisional operator's license. A provisional operator's license is issued
for the purposes of compliance with §§ 125.17(5), 125.32(2) and
125.68(2), Wis. Stats. The Village Clerk may issue a provisional license
to the applicant for a regular operator's license in the event that the
applicant's employment begins prior to the scheduled date of approval
of the regular operator's license. A provisional license shall expire after
60 days or when the regular operator's license is issued, whichever is
sooner. The fee for such license shall be $15.
A. Applications for a license to sell or deal in intoxicating liquor or
fermented malt beverages shall be made in writing on the form
prescribed by law and shall be sworn to by the applicant. Said form
shall be filed with the Village Clerk for presentation to the Village
Board. On or before the first Monday in June of each year, the Village
Board shall determine as to whether any or all applications so filed shall
be granted or denied. Any application for license filed with the Village
Clerk after April 15 of any year may be presented to the Village Board
at any regular or special meeting for action, but in no event shall the
license be granted by the Village Board in less than 15 days after the
application for such license has been filed with the Village Clerk.
[Amended by Ord. No. A-024-1992, 1992]
B. Prior to approval of a license application under this chapter, the Village
Clerk shall publish each application for a "Class B" license. Said notice
shall be published in a newspaper having circulation within the Village
and designated by the Village Board. If the designated newspaper is a
daily newspaper, notice shall be published on three successive
occasions or at least one time if the designated newspaper is a weekly
newspaper. Such publication shall include the name and address of the
applicant, the kind of license applied for and the location of the
premises to be licensed.
C. Upon the filing of the application, the applicant shall pay the Village a
sum for publication of the notice of the application for license as
computed by the rate per folio for legal notices as established by law.
D. Within 10 days of any change in any fact set out in an application for a
license or permit to sell alcohol beverages, the licensee or permittee
shall file a written description of the changed fact with the Village
Clerk.
E. The Village Clerk shall retain all applications made for licenses to sell
beverages. However, the Village Clerk may destroy all applications
more than four years old.
F. Any person may inspect applications for licenses to sell alcohol
beverages retained by the Village.
§ 5.16.030 GRAFTON CODE § 5.16.040
1.01:102
§ 5.16.050. License restrictions.
G. Upon issuance of a license to sell alcohol beverages, the Village Clerk
shall mail to the Wisconsin Department of Revenue a copy of the
application for license and all information relevant to the application
and the license which is required by law to be furnished by the Village
to the Department.
H. Upon receipt of the notice required in Subsection D of this section, the
Village Clerk shall mail to the Wisconsin Department of Revenue a copy
of any change in fact set out in the required application.
A. Statutory requirements. Licenses shall be issued only to persons
eligible therefor under §§ 125.04(5), (6), 125.33(7)(b) and 125.69(4)(b),
Wis. Stats.
B. Inspection and review.
1. The Village Clerk shall notify the Fire Inspector, Health Inspector,
Building Inspector, Electrical Inspector and Plumbing Inspector of
each Class "B" or "Class B" new, renewal or transfer application
received. These officials shall inspect each application and
premises to determine whether the premises sought to be licensed
complies with the health, sanitary and safety regulations,
ordinances and laws applicable thereto, including those governing
buildings and sanitation in restaurants. A determination shall also
be made by the Police Department regarding whether the applicant
is a proper recipient of a license. These officials shall furnish to the
Village Clerk, in writing, the information derived from such
inspections and review along with a recommendation as to whether
a license should be granted or denied. The Village Clerk shall
forward this information to the Village Board for its review,
approval or denial. No license shall be granted, renewed or
transferred without a reinspection of the premises and a report as
originally required.
2. If the inspecting officials recommend the denial of the application,
the procedures in § 5.16.130 shall be followed as an appeal
process. [Amended by Ord. No. A-024-92, 1992]
C. License quota. The number of persons and places that may be granted a
"Class B" liquor license under this section is limited as provided in
§ 125.51(4), Wis. Stats. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
D. Corporations. No license shall be granted to any corporation which
does not meet the requirements set forth in § 125.04(5) and (6), Wis.
Stats.
E. Age requirements. Except for operator's licenses, no license hereunder
shall be granted to any person under the minimum age specified by
Wisconsin Statutes pursuant to §§ 125.02(8m) and 125.04(5), Wis.
§ 5.16.040 CODE ADOPTION § 5.16.050
1.01:103
§ 5.16.060. Form and expiration of licenses. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and
shall state clearly the specific premises for which granted, the date of
issuance, the fee paid and the name of the licensees and, unless sooner
revoked, shall expire on June 30 thereafter, except as otherwise provided.
The license shall not be delivered until the applicant shall produce and
file with the Village Clerk a receipt showing payment of the sum required
therefor to the Director of Administrative Services.
§ 5.16.070. Transfer of licenses.
Stats., for the consumption of alcohol. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
F. Delinquent taxes and assessments. No license shall be issued by the
Village Clerk for any premises for which personal property taxes, water
and sewer bills and/or assessments of the Village are delinquent and
unpaid or to any person delinquent in payment of such claims to the
Village. [Amended by Ord. No. 021, Series 2008]
G. Issuance for sales and sales in dwellings prohibited. No license may be
issued to any person for the purpose of possessing, selling or offering
for sale any alcohol beverage in any dwelling house, flat or residential
apartment. No person shall sell or offer to sell any alcohol beverage in
any dwelling house, flat or residential apartment.
H. Sales of alcohol beverages to intoxicated persons. No licensee may
procure for, sell, dispense or give away alcohol beverages to a person
who is intoxicated. Any licensee who violates this provision shall be
subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100 nor more than $500 or
imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
A. As to persons:
1. Licenses to sell alcohol beverages may be transferred to persons
other than the licensee if the licensee or an applicant for a
subsequently granted license dies, becomes bankrupt or makes an
assignment for the benefit of creditors during the license year or
after filing the application. If a retail licensee becomes disabled,
the Village may, upon application, transfer the license to the
licensee's spouse, if that spouse may hold that type of license under
the Wisconsin Statutes and complies with all requirements under
this chapter applicable to original applicants, except that the
spouse is exempt from payment of the license fee for the year in
which the transfer takes place.
2. Upon the happening of any of the events under Subsection A.1 of
this section, the personal representative, the surviving spouse if a
§ 5.16.050 GRAFTON CODE § 5.16.070
1.01:104
§ 5.16.080. Posting and care of license.
Every license issued under this chapter shall be posted and at all times
displayed as provided in § 125.04(10), Wis. Stats.
§ 5.16.090. Regulation of licensed premises.
personal representative is not appointed, the trustee or the
receiver may continue or sell or assign the business.
3. Business may be continued under Subsection A.2 of this section
only if the personal representative or surviving spouse is a United
States citizen.
4. If the business is sold or assigned, the license may be transferred to
the successor owner or assignee at no charge, if:
a. He or she complies with the requirements applicable to
original applicants; and
b. He or she is acceptable to the Village and consent to the
transfer is given by the Village.
B. As to place. Every alcohol beverage license or permit may be
transferred to another place or premises within the Village. An alcohol
beverage warehouse permit under § 125.19, Wis. Stats., a winery
permit under § 125.53, Wis. Stats., or an intoxicating liquor
wholesaler's permit under § 125.54, Wis. Stats., may be transferred to
another premises within this state. Transfers shall be made by the
Village upon payment of a fee of $10. No retail licensee, retail
permittee, intoxicating liquor wholesaler or holder of a warehouse or
winery permit is entitled to more than one transfer during the license or
permit year. The Village shall promptly notify the Wisconsin
Department of Revenue of all transfers under this subsection.
A. Gambling and disorderly conduct prohibited. Each licensed premises
shall at all times be conducted in an orderly manner, and no disorderly,
riotous or indecent conduct or gambling shall be allowed at any time on
any licensed premises.
B. Employment of underage persons. Minors 14 through 17 years of age
may be employed in places where alcohol beverages are stored, sold or
served, provided the minors are not serving, selling, dispensing or
giving away alcohol beverages and they are at all times under the
immediate supervision of the licensee, a member of the licensee's
immediate family who is of legal drinking age or a person holding an
operator's license.
C. Safety and sanitation requirements. Each licensed premises shall be
maintained and conducted in a sanitary manner and shall be a safe and
proper place for the purpose for which used.
§ 5.16.070 CODE ADOPTION § 5.16.090
1.01:105
§ 5.16.095. Prohibitions. [Amended by Ord. No. 005, Series 2003]
§ 5.16.100. Closing hours.
D. Presence on licensed premises of licensee or operator during serving of
alcohol beverages.
1. Pursuant to §§ 125.32(2) and 125.68(2), Wis. Stats., except as
otherwise permitted under §§ 125.32(3)(b) and 125.07(3)(a)10,
Wis. Stats., there shall be upon such premises at all times during
operation of the business the licensee or some person who shall
have an operator's license, or a member of the immediate family of
the licensee who has attained the legal drinking age, who shall be
responsible for the acts of all persons serving as waiters or in any
other manner serving fermented malt beverages or intoxicating
liquor to customers. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
2. No person, including underage members of a licensee's immediate
family other than the licensee or agent, may serve alcohol
beverages in any establishment licensed by a Class "A," Class "B,"
"Class A" or "Class B" license under this chapter unless he or she
has an operator's license or is at least 18 years of age and is under
the immediate supervision of the licensee or agent or a person
holding an operator's license, who is on the premises at the time of
the service.
E. Restriction of persons allowed on licensed premises after hours. No
persons, other than employees at work, shall be allowed upon the
licensed premises after closing hours.
A. It shall be prohibited in a sexually oriented business, as defined in
Chapter 9.35, Sexually Oriented Businesses, of the Code, to serve, sell,
use, provide or consume any intoxicating liquor, cereal malt beverage
or any other alcohol beverage.
B. Penalties. Any person, partnership or corporation who violates any of
the provisions of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture of $500 plus
court costs per violation. A separate offense and violation shall be
deemed committed on each day on which a violation occurs or
continues. In addition, a violation of this chapter constitutes sufficient
grounds for suspending, revoking or not renewing an alcohol beverage
license under § 125.12, Wis. Stats.
A. No premises for which a retail liquor or fermented malt beverage
license has been issued shall remain open for the sale of alcohol
beverages: [Amended 1-16-2012 by Ord. No. 001-2012; at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
1. If a Class "A" or "Class A" license, between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 5.16.090 GRAFTON CODE § 5.16.100
1.01:106
§ 5.16.110. Revocation or suspension of licenses.
§ 5.16.115. Cancellation for non-use of license. [Amended by Ord.
No. 033, Series 1998]
2. If a Class "B" or "Class B" license, between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.;
except on Saturdays and Sundays, between 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
On January 1, the premises shall not be required to close.
B. Between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. no person may sell fermented
malt beverages on Class "B" licensed premises in an original unopened
package, container or bottle or for consumption away from the
premises.
C. Hotels and restaurants whose principal business is the furnishing of
food or lodging to patrons and bowling alleys and golf courses may
remain open for the conduct of their regular business, but no
intoxicating liquors or fermented malt beverages shall be sold during
prohibited hours.
A. Any licensee or permittee who violates any portion of this chapter or
does any of the following: keeps or maintains a disorderly or riotous,
indecent or improper house; sells or gives away alcoholic beverages to
habitual drunkards or does not possess the qualifications under this
chapter or Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., to hold a license; shall be subject to
suspension or revocation as provided under § 125.12, Wis. Stats.
B. Any licensee who procures for, sells, dispenses or gives away alcoholic
beverages to a person who is a minor under state law shall be subject to
suspension as provided under § 125.07, Wis. Stats.
A. Abandonment of premises.
1. Grounds for cancellation for non-use of license. Any Class A or
Class B fermented malt beverage and/or intoxicating liquor
licenses granted under this chapter may be canceled by the Village
Board for the following reasons:
a. The subject premises is not open for business within 120 days
of the granting of such license; or
b. The subject premises is not open for business for a period of
120 consecutive days or more; or
c. The subject premises is not open for business at least 50% of
the days within any twelve-month period, either within a
licensing year or overlapping two licensing years.
2. Licenses issued under this chapter may be canceled in accordance
with this section, unless after notice and hearing as provided in
Subsection B hereof the Village Board may determine that good
cause exists for the failure of the licensee to be open for business
§ 5.16.100 CODE ADOPTION § 5.16.115
1.01:107
§ 5.16.118. Demerit point system. [Amended by Ord. No. 033, Series
1998]
for periods in excess of the minimums set forth herein. If such
cause is found to exist, the Village Board may set such terms as it
deems appropriate to the continuation of the license with respect
to minimum days of operation or a time frame within which the
subject premises must open for business to avoid cancellation of
the subject license(s). The provisions of this section will not apply
to not-for-profit organizations.
B. Notice and hearing. Prior to the cancellation of any license, the Village
Clerk shall notify the licensee in writing of the Village's intention to
cancel the license for non-use and provide the licensee with an
opportunity for a hearing. Such notice shall also specify the time, place
and date of the hearing, which shall not be less than 15 days after the
date of the notice. Such hearing shall be conducted as provided in
§ 125.12(2)(b), Wis. Stats., or any amendments thereto. Judicial reviews
shall be provided as in § 125.12(2)(d), Wis. Stats., or any amendments
thereto.
A. In addition to the regulations of Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., there is hereby
established a point system for the purpose of guiding the Village Board
in the suspension or revocation of alcohol beverage licenses. Demerit
points shall be assessed in accordance with the violations set forth
herein. The demerit point system is intended to identify habitually
troublesome liquor licensees who repeatedly violate state statutes and/
or Village of Grafton municipal ordinances and to allow the Board to
take consistent action against said licensees.
B. There is hereby assigned the following demerit points for each type of
violation:
Type of Violations
Demerit Points
(per incident)
Owner/employee convicted of any violation of
Chapter 961 of the Wisconsin Statutes/
Uniform Controlled Substances Act, as
amended from time to time
125 points
Sale of alcohol without a license or permit:
§§ 125.04(1), 125.66(1), Wis. Stats.; § 5.16.020
of this chapter
100 points
Conducting unlawful business 100 points
Refusal to allow police search of premises
and/or refusal to cooperate with lawful police
investigation [Amended 2-25-2013 by Ord.
No. 009-2013]
150 points
§ 5.16.115 GRAFTON CODE § 5.16.118
1.01:108
Type of Violations
Demerit Points
(per incident)
Sale of alcohol to intoxicated person:
§ 125.07(2), Wis. Stats.; § 5.16.050H of this
chapter
100 points
Gambling/gambling paraphernalia on
premises: § 945.04, Wis. Stats.; § 5.16.090A of
this chapter
50 points
Sale of alcohol to person under the age of 21:
§ 125.07(1), Wis. Stats.
50 points
Person under age 21 on premises: § 125.07(3),
Wis. Stats.
50 points
Intoxicated bartender 50 points
Failure to maintain order/disorderly conduct
on premises: § 125.12(2), Wis. Stats.;
§ 5.16.090A of this chapter
50 points
Licensee, agent or licensed operator
(bartender) not on premises at all times:
§§ 125.32(2); 125.68(2), Wis. Stats.;
§ 5.16.090D.1 of this chapter
25 points
Open after hours, after-hours consumption
and/or persons on premises after closing
hours: § 125.32(3), Wis. Stats.; §§ 5.16.090E
and 5.16.100 of this chapter
25 points
Violation of carry-out hours: § 125.68(4)(c)(3),
Wis. Stats.; § 5.16.100B of this chapter
25 points
Other acts: exceeding capacity, noise
complaints, etc.
25 points
Additional penalty for severe offenses. 200 points
There shall be an additional penalty for
conduct which:
1. Results in bodily harm to any
individual;
2. Creates a substantial risk of death or
bodily harm; or
3. Involves the use of a firearm or other
dangerous weapon.
C. Calculating violations. Demerit points shall be assessed against the
holder or registered agent for a license held by a corporation of a retail
or operator's license based upon entry of a judgment of conviction for
violating a provision of the Grafton Municipal Code or the Wisconsin
Statutes. The demerit points shall be assessed in accordance with the
§ 5.16.118 CODE ADOPTION § 5.16.118
1.01:109
terms and conditions of this chapter and shall be assessed at the
expiration of the time period allowed for taking appeal of the conviction
or convictions or the conclusion of any appeal in which the conviction
is affirmed. Demerit points shall be assessed against the licensee based
on either convictions of the licensee or for convictions of the licensee's
agents or employees; provided, however, that in the case of an agent or
employee an element of the offense for which such person is convicted
occurred on the licensed premises or with the knowledge and consent
of the licensee. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1.01, Code Adoption)]
D. The Police Department shall notify the Village Board of any convictions
which result in the assessment of demerit points against any licensee.
Following this notification or the filing of a complaint pursuant to
§ 125.12, Wis. Stats., the Village Board shall hold a hearing, if required,
and shall take the following action after determining the number of
demerit points to be assessed against the licensee:
1. For demerit points totaling 25 to 149 within a twelve-month period,
a warning shall be given to the licensee of the consequences of
additional violations.
2. For demerit points totaling 150 to 199 within a twelve-month
period, the Village Board shall suspend the license for a period of
not less than 10 days nor more than 60 days.
3. For demerit points totaling 200 to 300 within an eighteen-month
period, the Village Board shall suspend the license for a period of
not less than 60 days nor more than 120 days.
4. For demerit points totaling over 300 within a twenty-four-month
period, the Village Board shall revoke the license.
5. Any conviction of the holder or registered agent for a license held
by a corporation of the retail or operator's license of an offense
under Ch. 125 or 139, Wis. Stats., or any other federal or state
liquor or fermented malt beverage law, shall be considered a
conviction under this subsection and shall result in the assessment
of demerit points. For purposes of this subsection, demerit points
will be assessed as of the date of the violation for which a judgment
of conviction is finally entered or affirmed, regardless of the date
on which judgment of conviction is entered or affirmed on appeal.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code
Adoption)]
E. Effect of revocation of license.
1. Whenever any license is revoked, at least 12 months shall elapse
before another license shall be granted to the person whose license
was revoked.
§ 5.16.118 GRAFTON CODE § 5.16.118
1.01:110
§ 5.16.120. Procedure on hearing; effect of revocation.
The provisions of § 125.12(1), Wis. Stats., are incorporated by reference
in their entirety. Whenever the Village Board or Municipal Court revokes
or suspends a license or permit or imposes a penalty on a licensee or
permittee for the violation of this chapter or Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., the Village
Clerk or the Clerk of the Municipal Court shall, within 10 days after the
revocation, suspension or imposition of the penalty, mail a report to the
Department of Revenue at Madison, Wisconsin, giving the name of the
licensee, the address of the licensed premises and a full description of the
penalty imposed.
§ 5.16.130. Failure to grant license. [Amended by Ord. No.
A-024-92, 1992]
The Village Board may refuse to grant a new license or renew an existing
license for the causes provided in § 125.12(2)(a), Wis. Stats. Prior to the
time for the granting of a new license or the renewal of the existing license,
the Village Board shall direct the Village Clerk to notify the licensee in
writing of the Village's intention not to grant or renew the license. A
provision shall be made to provide the licensee with an opportunity for a
hearing on this matter. The notice shall state the reasons for the intended
action. The hearing shall be conducted as provided in § 125.12(2)(b), Wis.
Stats., and judicial review shall be as provided in § 125.12(2)(d), Wis. Stats.
§ 5.16.140. Violation by agent.
A violation of this chapter by a duly authorized agent or employee of the
licensee shall constitute a violation by the licensee or permit holder.
§ 5.16.150. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, any person who himself
or by his agents or employees violates any provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to the general penalty in Chapter 1.08
of this Code.
Chapter 5.20
AMUSEMENT AND MUSIC DEVICES
2. In the case of the revocation of any license issued under the
provisions of this chapter, no refund shall be made of the license fee
for the remaining unused license period.
3. Nothing in this section shall be construed to conflict with, abridge
or modify the rights or procedures established for revocation or
suspension of licenses in § 125.12, Wis. Stats.
§ 5.16.118 CODE ADOPTION § 5.20.010
1.01:111
§ 5.20.010. Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this chapter, shall be construed as follows:
AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any coin-operated machine commonly referred to
as shooting (electric ray) games, bowling games, miniature pool and hockey,
ski-ball games, and baseball games and other similar devices, the operation
of which involves a skill feature and which are operated by coins but do not
deliver, pay out, or emit coins, tokens, coupons, tickets, receipts, chips or
other thing which may be redeemed or exchanged for money, merchandise,
or other thing of value.
GAMBLING DEVICE — Any machine, instrument, device or thing which
for a consideration affords the player an opportunity to obtain something
of value, the award of which is determined by chance, even though
accompanied by some skill, and whether or not the prize is automatically
paid by the machine, instrument, device or thing.
MUSIC DEVICE — Any instrument or device which is operated by any
insertion of any coin or token which may entitle the operator to music or
entertainment.
§ 5.20.020. Gambling devices prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to set up for operation, lease or distribute for
the purpose of operation any gambling device within the Village.
§ 5.20.030. Registration of amusement and music devices.
Any person owning any amusement or music device or maintaining or
permitting the maintenance of any such amusement device on premises
owned by him or under his control shall register such amusement or music
device as provided in this chapter. Every amusement or music device shall
be registered with the Village Clerk by the owner or possessor thereof.
§ 5.20.040. Registration fee. [Amended by Ord. No. 007, Series
2011]
The registration fee for each amusement or music device shall be $25 per
year effective July 1, 2011.
§ 5.20.050. Information and investigation.
The Village Clerk shall require the registrant to submit such information
as may be necessary to identify the device. If the Village Clerk, upon
consultation with the Village Attorney and the Chief of Police, is satisfied
that the amusement or music device is entitled to be registered, he shall
issue to the registrant an appropriate registration symbol so designed as
to permit secure attachment to the device registered. No person shall be
entitled to register any amusement or music device unless he is of good
moral character. Such registration shall remain effective until the next
succeeding July 30.
§ 5.20.010 GRAFTON CODE § 5.20.060
1.01:112
§ 5.20.060. Transfer of registration.
The Village Clerk may authorize the transfer of a registration symbol from
one amusement or music device to another when evidence is presented
showing that the use of the device previously registered has been
discontinued and that the new device to which the symbol is proposed to
be attached is an amusement or music device within the definition of this
chapter. A fee of $1 shall be charged for each transfer.
§ 5.20.070. Recordkeeping.
The Village Clerk shall keep an appropriate record of the registration of
each amusement or music device, showing the name and number and
such information as he shall deem necessary concerning each machine
registered, and also keep a similar record of any registration transfers
authorized by him.
§ 5.20.080. Seizure of nonregistered devices.
The Village President, Chief of Police, any police officer of this Village
may seize or cause to be seized any gambling device, slot machine or any
amusement or music device to which there is not affixed a registration
symbol as required by this chapter and shall forthwith cause a complaint
to be issued against the owner or possessor thereof for violation of this
chapter, and the court shall order the device so seized to be destroyed.
§ 5.20.090. Counterfeiting registration symbol prohibited.
No person shall counterfeit a registration symbol or shall transfer any such
symbol issued by the Village Clerk from one amusement or music device to
another without having previously registered such transfer with the Village
Clerk.
§ 5.20.100. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the general penalty in Chapter 1.08 of this
Code.
Chapter 5.24
DIRECT SELLERS
§ 5.24.010. Registration required.
It is unlawful to engage in direct sales within the Village without being
registered for that purpose as provided in this chapter.
§ 5.20.060 CODE ADOPTION § 5.24.015
1.01:113
§ 5.24.015. Adoption of statutes by reference. [Added by Ord. No.
A-501-87, 1987; amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01,
Code Adoption)]
Chapter ATCP 127, Wis. Adm. Code, relating to home solicitation selling,
is adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter with the same
force and effect as though set out in full. Failure to comply with any of the
provisions of such regulations shall constitute a violation of this chapter,
punishable according to the penalties provided in this chapter. A copy of Ch.
ATCP 127, Wis. Adm. Code, shall be on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 5.24.020. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — Includes any benevolent, philanthropic,
patriotic or eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation,
or one purporting to be such.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Village Chief of Police or his duly appointed
officer.
DIRECT SELLER — Any individual who, for himself/herself or for a
partnership, association or corporation, sells goods or takes sales orders
for the later delivery of goods at any location other than the permanent
business place or residence of said individual, partnership, association or
corporation, and includes, but is not limited to, peddlers, solicitors and
transient merchants. The sale of goods includes donations required by the
direct seller for the retention of goods by a donor or prospective customer.
GOODS — Includes personal property of any kind and includes goods
provided incidental to services offered or sold.
PERMANENT MERCHANT — A direct seller who, for at least one year prior
to the consideration of the application of this chapter to said merchant:
§ 5.24.030. Exemptions.
The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this chapter:
Has continuously operated an established place of business in this
Village; or
A.
Has continuously resided in this Village and now does business from
his/her residence.
B.
A. Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products or bakery goods
to regular customers on established routes;
B. Any person selling goods at wholesale to dealers in such goods;
C. Any person selling agricultural products which such person has
grown;12
§ 5.24.015 GRAFTON CODE § 5.24.030
1.01:114
§ 5.24.040. Registration.
D. Any person who has an established place of business where the goods
being sold are offered for sale on a regular basis and in which the buyer
has initiated contact with and specifically requested a home visit by
said person;
E. Any person who has had, or one who represents a company which has
had, a prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit
arrangement, with the prospective customer;
F. Any person selling or offering for sale a service unconnected with the
sale or offering for sale of goods;
G. Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of any court
and any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law;
H. Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable organization who
engages in direct sales for or on behalf of said organization, provided
that there is submitted to the Chief of Police proof that such charitable
organization is registered under § 202.12, Wis. Stats. Any charitable
organization not registered under § 202.12, Wis. Stats., or which is
exempt from that statute's registration requirements, shall be required
to register under this chapter.13
A. Applicants for registration must complete and return to the Chief of
Police a registration form furnished by the Chief of Police, which shall
require the following information:
1. Name, permanent address and telephone number, and temporary
address, if any;
2. Age, height, weight, color of hair and eyes;
3. Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm,
association or corporation that the direct seller represents or is
employed by, or whose merchandise is being sold;
4. Temporary address and telephone number from which business will
be conducted, if any;
5. Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the
goods offered and any services offered;
6. Proposed method of delivery of goods, if applicable;
12.Editor's Note: Original Subsection D, pertaining to any permanent merchant or employee
thereof who takes orders away from the established place of business, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 10-17-2016 by Ord. No. 018-2016.
13.Editor's Note: Original Subsection J, pertaining to complaints made against person
claiming to be a permanent merchant, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 10-17-2016 by Ord. No. 018-2016.
§ 5.24.030 CODE ADOPTION § 5.24.040
1.01:115
§ 5.24.050. Investigation.
7. Make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by the
applicant in the conduct of his/her business;
8. Last cities, villages, towns, not to exceed three, where the
applicant conducted similar business;
9. Place where the applicant can be contacted for at least seven days
after leaving this Village;
10. Statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any
crime or ordinance violation related to the applicant's transient
merchant business within the last five years; the nature of the
offense and the place of the conviction.
B. Applicants shall present for examination:
1. A driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be
reasonably required;
2. A state certificate of examination and approval from the Sealer of
Weights and Measures where the applicant's business requires use
of weighing and measuring devices approved by state authorities;
3. A state health officer's certificate where the applicant's business
involves the handling of food or clothing and is required to be
certified under state law; such certificate to state that the applicant
is apparently free from any contagious or infectious disease, dated
not more than 90 days prior to the date the application for license is
made.
C. Fee and statement.
1. At the time the registration is returned, a fee of $15 shall be paid to
the Chief of Police to cover the cost of processing the registration.
Employees of permanent merchants are exempt from the
registration fees. [Amended by Ord. No. 018, Series 2003;
10-17-2016 by Ord. No. 018-2016]
2. The applicant shall sign a statement appointing the Chief of Police
or his agent to accept service of process in any civil action brought
against the applicant arising out of any sale or service performed
by the applicant in connection with the direct sales activities of the
applicant in the event the applicant cannot, after reasonable effort,
be served personally.
3. Upon payment of the fee and the signing of the statement, the Chief
of Police shall register the applicant as a direct seller and date the
entry. The registration shall be valid for a period of one year from
the date of entry, subject to subsequent refusal as provided in
§ 5.24.050B.
§ 5.24.040 GRAFTON CODE § 5.24.050
1.01:116
§ 5.24.055. Identification cards. [Amended 10-17-2016 by Ord. No.
018-2016]
In addition to the permit fee, a charge of $5 shall be made to the successful
applicant for an identification card to be issued by the Chief of Police. The
identification card shall have affixed to it a photograph of the applicant.
No license or identification card shall be used by any person other than
the one to whom it was issued. Such identification card shall be carried at
all times by the registrant to whom issued when engaged in direct sales
activities and shall be exhibited whenever requested to do so by any person
solicited or any police officer. The identification card shall be valid for the
same period as the permit. Employees of permanent merchants are exempt
from the identification card fee.
§ 5.24.060. Appeal.
Any person denied registration may appeal the denial through the appeal
procedure provided by ordinance or resolution of the Village Board or, if
none has been adopted, under the provisions of §§ 68.07 through 68.16, Wis.
Stats.
§ 5.24.070. Regulation of direct sellers.
A. Upon receipt of each application, the Chief of Police shall make and
complete an investigation of the statements made in such registration.
B. The Chief of Police shall refuse to register the applicant if it is
determined, pursuant to the investigation above, that:
1. The application contains any material omission or materially
inaccurate statement;
2. Complaints of a material nature have been received against the
applicant by authorities in the last cities, villages and towns, not
exceeding three, in which the applicant conducted similar
business;
3. The applicant was convicted of a crime, statutory violation or
ordinance violation within the last five years, the nature of which is
directly related to the applicant's fitness to engage in direct selling;
or
4. The applicant failed to comply with any applicable provision of
§ 5.24.040B
A. Hours of operation for calling at any dwelling or other place will be
10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except by appointment; [Amended by Ord.
No. 015, Series 2010]
1. Prohibited acts:
§ 5.24.050 CODE ADOPTION § 5.24.070
1.01:117
a. Calling at any dwelling or other place where a sign is displayed
bearing the words "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors," or words of
similar meaning;
b. Calling at the rear door of any dwelling place;
c. Remaining on any premises after being asked to leave by the
owner, occupant or other person having authority over such
premises.
2. A direct seller shall not misrepresent or make false, deceptive or
misleading statements concerning the quality, quantity or
character of any goods offered for sale, the purpose of his/her visit,
his/her identity or the identity of the organization he/she
represents. A charitable organization direct seller shall specifically
disclose what portion of the sale price of goods being offered will
actually be used for the charitable purpose for which the
organization is soliciting. Said portion shall be expressed as a
percentage of the sale price of the goods.
3. No direct seller shall impede the free use of sidewalks and streets
by pedestrians and vehicles. Where sales are made from vehicles,
all traffic and parking regulations shall be observed.
4. No direct seller shall make any loud noises or use any soundamplifying
device to attract customers if the noise produced is
capable of being plainly heard outside a one-hundred-foot radius of
the source.
5. No direct seller shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in or
around the area in which he/she is conducting business.
B. Disclosure requirements.
1. After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to
a prospective customer, a direct seller shall expressly disclose his/
her name, the name of the company or organization he/she is
affiliated with, if any, and the identity of goods or services he/she
offers to sell.
2. If any sale of goods is made by a direct seller, or any sales for later
delivery of goods is taken by the seller, the buyer shall have the
right to cancel the transaction if it involves the extension of credit
or is a cash transaction of more than $25, in accordance with the
procedure as set forth in § 423.203, Wis. Stats.; the seller shall give
the buyer two copies of a typed or printed notice of that fact. Such
notice shall conform to the requirements of § 423.203(1)(a)(b) and
(c), (2) and (3), Wis. Stats.
3. If the direct seller takes a sales order for the later delivery of
goods, he/she shall, at the time the order is taken, provide the
buyer with a written statement containing the terms of the
§ 5.24.070 GRAFTON CODE § 5.24.070
1.01:118
§ 5.24.080. Records.
The Chief of Police shall keep a record of all convictions for violations of
this chapter and shall note any such violation on the record of the registrant
convicted.
§ 5.24.090. Revocation of registration.
§ 5.24.100. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of violating any provisions of this chapter shall forfeit
not less than $10 nor more than $100 for each violation plus costs of
prosecution. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 5.30
GARAGE AND RUMMAGE SALES
§ 5.30.010. Garage and rummage sales defined.
Garage and rummage sales are defined as any display and/or sale of
personal property conducted on premises located in any residential or
institutional zoned districts by the occupant, and which garage or rummage
sale does not require a business license or make taxable sales, leases or
services.
§ 5.30.020. Frequency of sales and hours of operation.
agreement; the amount paid in advance, whether full, partial or
no advance payment is made; the name, address and telephone
number of the seller; the delivery or performance date; and
whether a guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so, the terms
thereof.
A. Registration may be revoked by the Village Board after notice and
hearing, if the registrant made any material omission or materially
inaccurate statement in the application for registration; made any
fraudulent, false, deceptive or misleading statement or representation
in the course of engaging in direct sales; violated any provision of this
chapter; or was convicted of any crime or ordinance or statutory
violation which is directly related to the registrant's fitness to engage in
direct selling.
B. Written notice of the hearing shall be served personally on the
registrant at least 72 hours prior to the time set for the hearing; such
notice shall contain the time and place of hearing and a statement of
the acts upon which the hearing will be based.
A. Sales may be conducted in any residential district, provided that the
rummage sale does not exceed four consecutive days in length and is
not conducted more than three times per year.
§ 5.24.070 CODE ADOPTION § 5.30.020
1.01:119
§ 5.30.030. Property and setbacks.
All tangible personal property proposed to be sold at a residential sale shall
be arranged in an orderly manner on the premises and shall in no way be
arranged so as to obstruct the vision of persons using driveways, sidewalks,
roadways or entering and exiting within a neighborhood. In order to protect
public safety and use of public right-of-way, a minimum setback of 10 feet is
recommended for all display of personal property and merchandise that is
for sale on private property;
§ 5.30.040. Sale signage. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
Signs advertising residential sales shall not exceed eight square feet, shall
not be placed on any public property or right-of-way including terrace areas,
utility poles or other public or quasi-public infrastructure, and shall be
removed within 24 hours after the close of sale.
§ 5.30.050. Permit waived for residential sales.
A permit is not required for a rummage sale.
§ 5.30.060. Nuisance. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
A violation of this chapter is hereby determined to be a nuisance, and the
Village of Grafton may forthwith obtain an order from a court of competent
jurisdiction ordering the abatement of such nuisance, and if the danger to
the health, safety and welfare of the public or to the general harmonious
character of the residential neighborhood is imminent, the Village or its
agent may forthwith enter upon the premises and abate the nuisance.
§ 5.30.070. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the general penalty in Chapter 1.08 of this
Code.
Chapter 5.32
PUBLIC AMUSEMENTS AND SHOWS
B. Daily hours of operation should be from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., with all
outdoor items being picked up by 8:00 p.m. on the final night of the
rummage sale. Rummage sales (other than cleanup) will not be
permitted between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 5.30.020 GRAFTON CODE § 5.32.010
1.01:120
§ 5.32.010. License required. [Amended by Ord. No. 029, Series
1996]
No person shall conduct, exhibit, operate or maintain within the Village any
circus, menagerie, carnival, play, game, contest, theatrical performance,
theater, concert, athletic event of any kind or any other public amusement
or show to which admission may be had by the payment of a fee or by
the purchase, possession or presentation of a ticket or token obtained for
money or other valuable thing, or in which a charge is made indirectly for
admittance, unless a license or permit shall be obtained therefor. All such
events, for the purposes of this chapter, shall be referred to as "carnival/
amusements." This chapter shall not apply to events conducted under the
sole control and supervision of educational, charitable or religious
organizations where the entire proceeds of such show or amusement shall
be devoted to the purpose of said organization.
§ 5.32.020. Applications for licenses.
A. Contents. Applications filed with the Village Clerk under this chapter
shall, in addition to such other information as the Village Board may
from time to time require, contain the following information:
1. Name, age, residence of applicant or of principal officers, if
applicant is partnership, corporation or association.
2. Name, age and residence of person whom applicant shall designate
as manager and previous places of employment of such person.
3. Premises where such carnival/amusement is to be located or
conducted, name and residence of owner thereof, and total area to
be used for such purpose. [Amended by Ord. No. 029, Series
1996]
4. Specific nature of carnival/amusement for which license is sought.
[Amended by Ord. No. 029, Series 1996]
5. The applicant shall also present to the Village Clerk the certificate
of registration issued by the Department of Safety and Professional
Services. [Amended by Ord. No. 029, Series 1996]
6. The applicant shall provide a certificate of liability insurance,
naming the Village of Grafton as an additional insured, in the
amount of not less than $1,000,000 for personal injury and
property damage coverage. The applicant shall indemnify and hold
harmless the Village and its officers and agents and citizens against
any injuries and damages which may result or arise from the
conducting of the carnival/amusement. The applicant shall pay all
judgments, costs and charges that may be sought against the
Village or any of its officers or agents by reason of the conduct of
such carnival/amusement, together with the costs of defending any
such action against the Village, including actual attorney's fees.
§ 5.32.010 CODE ADOPTION § 5.32.020
1.01:121
§ 5.32.030. Restrictions on granting licenses.
§ 5.32.040. Fees for licenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 029, Series
1996]
The fees for licenses issued under this chapter shall be $35 per day for any
show, event or amusement.
The applicant shall also provide proof of worker's compensation
insurance. [Amended by Ord. No. 029, Series 1996]
B. Inspection of premises and mechanical devices. The Village Clerk shall
refer any application filed under this section to the respective
departments of police, health inspecting and building inspecting, which
shall inspect or cause to be inspected each application to determine
whether the place sought to be licensed complies with the regulations,
ordinances and laws applicable thereto and is a proper place for the
purpose for which it is to be used. The applicant shall indicate the date
of the last state inspection of amusement rides and other mechanical
devices. The Village reserves the right to require inspections of all
mechanical devices that would be available to the public. All inspection
costs shall be paid by the licensee. [Amended by Ord. No. A-412-81,
1981; Ord. No. 029, Series 1996]
C. Food handlers to obtain health certificate. Any person employed in such
carnival/amusement for the purpose of preparing, handling or selling
food or drink shall submit a copy of a health certificate as required by
state statute. [Amended by Ord. No. 029, Series 1996]
A. No license shall be issued under this chapter unless and until it shall be
found that all of the persons named in the application are of good moral
character, that the proposed location complies with and conforms to all
ordinances, health and fire regulations applicable thereto and is a safe
and proper place for the purpose for which it shall be used. A license
shall be refused to any applicant or applicants who shall have had a
license issued under this chapter revoked within two years of the date
of application, or to any person who has within five years of the date of
application been convicted of a felony. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
B. No license shall be issued for any public amusement place within a
residential district. No applicant to whom a license has been refused
shall make further application until a period of at least six months shall
have elapsed since the last previous rejection, unless he can show that
the reason for such objection no longer exists. No license shall be
granted to a person under 21 years of age or renewed without
reinspection of the premises.
§ 5.32.020 GRAFTON CODE § 5.32.050
1.01:122
§ 5.32.050. Suspension of licenses. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
The Village Clerk and Village President may, at any time, suspend for not
more than 10 days any license granted under the provisions of this chapter
for disorderly or immoral conduct on the premises or for the violation by the
licensee, his agent or employees of any of the rules, regulations, ordinances
or laws of the state or Village governing or applying to public peace, safety,
morals or general welfare.
§ 5.32.060. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the general penalty in Chapter 1.08 of this
Code.
Chapter 5.48
HOTEL-MOTEL TAX
§ 5.48.010. Imposition of room tax. [Amended by Ord. No. 007,
Series 2000]
Pursuant to § 66.0615, Wis. Stats., a tax is imposed on the privilege and
service of furnishing, at retail, rooms or lodging to transients by
hotelkeepers, motel operators and other persons furnishing
accommodations that are available to the public, irrespective of whether
membership is required for the use of the accommodations. Such tax shall
be at the rate of 7% of the gross receipts from such retail furnishing of
rooms or lodgings. Such tax shall not be subject to the selective sales tax
imposed by § 77.52(2)(a)1, Wis. Stats.
§ 5.48.015. Permit required; fee. [Added by Ord. No. 009, Series
2010]
Every hotelkeeper, motel operator or other persons furnishing
accommodations under § 5.48.010 shall file with the Village Clerk an
application for a permit for each place of business. Every application for a
permit shall be made upon a form prescribed by the Village Clerk and shall
set forth the name under which the applicant intends to transact business,
the location of the business and such information as the Village Clerk
requires. The application shall be signed by the owner if a sole proprietor
and, if not a sole proprietor, by the person authorized to act on behalf of
such sellers. At the time of making an application, and annually thereafter,
the applicant shall pay a fee of $50. The permit shall be renewed each year
by July 1.
§ 5.32.050 CODE ADOPTION § 5.48.016
1.01:123
§ 5.48.016. Permit issuance. [Added by Ord. No. 009, Series 2010]
After compliance with §§ 5.48.010 and 5.48.015, the Village Clerk shall
grant and issue to each applicant a separate permit for each place of
business within the Village. Such permit is not assignable and is valid
for only the person in whose name it is issued and for the transaction
of business at the place designated therein. It shall, at all times, be
conspicuously displayed at the place for which issued.
§ 5.48.017. Revocation and suspension. [Added by Ord. No. 009,
Series 2010]
When any person fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the
Village Clerk may, upon 10 days' notification and after affording such person
the opportunity to show cause why the permit shall not be revoked, revoke
or suspend any or all permits held by such person. The Village Clerk shall
give to each person written notice of the suspension or revocation of any
permits. The Village Clerk shall not issue a new permit after revocation
of a permit until §§ 5.48.020, 5.48.040, 5.48.050 and 5.48.070 have been
complied with. A fee of $50 shall be imposed for the renewal or issuance of
a permit which has been previously suspended or revoked.
§ 5.48.020. Collection of tax.
The room tax imposed by § 5.48.010 for each calendar quarter is due and
payable and must be received by the Director of Administrative Services at
the Village Hall on or before the last business day of the following month
succeeding the calendar quarter for which it is imposed. The business entity
collecting the tax shall be entitled to retain 1% of the amount collected as
reimbursement for its costs and efforts in the collection of the tax and the
reporting requirements of this chapter.
§ 5.48.030. Liability for unpaid tax. [Amended 7-16-2012 by Ord.
No. 008-2012]
The room tax imposed hereunder shall be a continuing liability upon the
business entity or person upon whom it is imposed until paid in full.
Business successors shall be liable for all quarters for which a return has
not been filed and payment not received.
A. Quarterly room tax returns. A return shall be filed with the Director of
Administrative Services on or before the same date on which such tax is
due and payable. Such return shall be on a form provided by the Village
and shall show the gross receipts of the preceding calendar quarter
from such retail furnishing of rooms or lodging, the amount of taxes
imposed for such period, and such other information as the Director of
Administrative Services deems necessary, provided it is directly related
to the tax.
§ 5.48.016 GRAFTON CODE § 5.48.040
1.01:124
§ 5.48.040. Interest on unpaid taxes.
All unpaid taxes under this chapter shall bear interest at the rate of 12%
per annum from the due date of the return until the first day of the month
following the month in which the tax was paid.
§ 5.48.050. Delinquent tax returns.
Tax returns required hereunder and not timely filed shall be deemed
delinquent and shall be subject to a ten-dollar late filing fee.
§ 5.48.060. Administration of tax collection.
§ 5.48.070. Penalty assessment.
If any person fails to timely file a return, as required by this chapter, the
Director of Administrative Services shall make an estimate of the amount of
the gross receipts upon which the tax is determined. Such estimate shall be
made for the period for which such person failed to make a return and shall
be based upon any information which is in the Director of Administrative
Services' possession or may come into his or her possession or such other
information as may have a bearing upon the determination of gross receipts.
On the basis of this estimate, the Director of Administrative Services shall
compute and determine the amount required to be paid to the Village,
adding to the sum thus arrived at a penalty equal to 10% thereof. Such
determination may be made for each quarterly period for which no return
is filed. Such penalty shall be due upon written notice to the business entity
or person owing the tax and shall not be in lieu of the tax due hereunder.
A. The Director of Administrative Services shall be responsible for the
administration and collection of the room tax. The Director of
Administrative Services may, by field audit, determine the tax required
to be paid to the Village or the refund due to any person under this
chapter. The determination shall be made upon the basis of the facts
contained in the return being audited and upon any other information
available to the Director of Administrative Services. The Director of
Administrative Services is authorized to examine and inspect the books,
records memoranda and property of any person which are directly
related to the tax or which have a direct bearing upon the gross
receipts upon which the tax due is determined in order to verify the tax
liability of that person or of another person. Nothing herein shall
prevent the Director of Administrative Services from making a
determination of tax at any time.
B. The room tax collection shall be allocated to the room tax fund for the
purposes of funding economic development, public works activities and
capital improvement projects as determined by the Village Board.
§ 5.48.040 CODE ADOPTION § 5.48.080
1.01:125
§ 5.48.080. Fraudulent tax returns.
If a person files a false or fraudulent return with the intent in either case
to defect or evade the tax imposed by this chapter, a penalty of 50% shall
be added to the tax required to be paid, exclusive of interest and other
penalties.
§ 5.48.090. Records to be maintained.
Every person liable for the tax imposed by this chapter shall keep or cause
to be kept such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers
in such form so as to enable the Director of Administrative Services to
determine the tax due hereunder.
§ 5.48.100. Confidentiality.
§ 5.48.110. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings given herein:14
HOTEL or MOTEL — A building or group of buildings in which the public
may obtain accommodations for a consideration, including, without
limitation, such establishments as inns, motels, tourist homes, tourist
houses or courts, lodging houses, summer camps, bed-and-breakfast,
apartment hotels, resort lodges, campgrounds, cabins and any other
A. All tax returns, schedules, exhibits, writings or audit reports relating to
such returns on file with the Director of Administrative Services are
deemed to be confidential, except the Director of Administrative
Services may divulge their contents to the following and no others:
1. The person who filed the return.
2. Such other public officials when deemed necessary and after
notification of the licensee.
3. The Village Administrator.
B. No person having an administrative duty under this section shall make
known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information
obtained by an investigation of records of any person on whom a tax is
imposed by this section; the amount or source of income, profits, losses,
expenditures or any particular thereof set forth or disclosed in any
return; or permit any return or copy thereof to be seen or examined by
any person, except as provided herein.
C. Violation of this section shall be subject to a penalty of not less than
$100 nor more than $500. [Added at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
14.Editor's Note: The original definition of "gross receipts," which immediately followed, was
repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption).
§ 5.48.080 GRAFTON CODE § 5.48.110
1.01:126
building or group of buildings in which the accommodations are available to
the public, except accommodations rented for a continuous period of more
than one month and accommodations furnished by any hospital, sanitoriums
or nursing homes, rooming houses, or by corporations or associations
organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or educational
purposes, provided that no part of the net earnings of such corporations or
associations inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.
PERSON — Includes corporations, partnerships or other business entities.
TRANSIENT — Any individual residing for a continuous period of less than
one month in a motel, hotel or other furnished accommodations available to
the public.
§ 5.48.120. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of, or noncompliance with, any of the provisions of this chapter
for which a penalty has not been prescribed herein shall subject the violator
to a forfeiture of not less than $50 nor more than $250, together with the
costs of prosecution and, in default of payment thereof, to imprisonment in
the county jail until such forfeiture has been paid, but not to exceed 15 days.
Each day of violation or noncompliance shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 5.50
HOTEL REGISTRATION AND SECURITY
§ 5.50.010. Written register.
A. Every owner, keeper or proprietor of any lodging house, rooming house,
motel or hotel shall keep a register wherein all guests, roomers or
lodgers shall inscribe their names and permanent addresses upon their
procuring lodging, a room or accommodations. The owner, keeper or
proprietor shall verify the credit card signature of each guest, roomer
or lodger making payment by way of credit card with the signature
inscribed upon the hotel register. If the signature as inscribed on the
register does not appear to reasonably match the signature on the
credit card, further identification shall be requested of the type
requested of persons paying in cash. The owner, keeper or proprietor
shall require identification of any guest, roomer or lodger paying in
cash at the time of registration and in a valid and current format
showing the person's name and date of birth and may be, but is not
limited to, a driver's license, state-issued picture identification card, or
such other form as will reasonably assure that the registrant is, in fact,
the person under whose name such lodging, room or accommodation is,
in fact, being procured, and shall maintain a photocopy of such
identification or transpose the identifying information in the
registration ledger. For any guest, roomer or lodger taking occupancy
through a prearranged reservation in the name of a corporation,
business, association or any other entity, the owner, keeper or
proprietor shall request identification of the specific guest, roomer or
§ 5.48.110 CODE ADOPTION § 5.50.010
1.01:127
§ 5.50.020. Twenty-four-hour manager on premises.
Every owner, keeper or proprietor of any lodging house, rooming house,
motel or hotel shall, at all times during which the premises accommodates
guests, roomers or lodgers, maintain on duty a responsible management
representative or designee. Such management representative or designee
shall be an individual capable of assisting and cooperating with the police
or other law enforcement officials in maintaining the public health, welfare
and safety.
§ 5.50.030. Access to register by law enforcement.
All information required to be procured and kept pursuant to § 5.50.010
of this chapter shall be provided to any federal, state or local sworn law
enforcement officer having the lawful power to arrest upon demand of the
officer. The officer shall have a reasonable suspicion that such information is
relevant to a then-pending inquiry or investigation at the time he makes the
demand. Nothing in this requirement shall be construed as giving any such
officer any greater right or license to enter a room or invade privacy than
the officer shall otherwise possess as a matter of common law, probable
cause, statutory right or warrant.
§ 5.50.040. Access to outside 911 phone service.
Every owner, keeper or proprietor of any lodging house, rooming house,
motel or hotel shall keep and maintain in each and every rental unit a
telephone equipped for outgoing calls, and which telephone will allow any
person therein to place a direct call to 911, the Grafton Police Department
or the Grafton Fire Department. The existence of a minor dialing
requirement, such as dialing "9" to obtain an outside line, shall not be
deemed a violation of this section.
§ 5.50.050. Prohibiting fraud in obtaining lodging.
No person shall procure or provide lodging in any lodging house, rooming
house, motel or hotel, or any services therefrom, through misrepresentation
or production of false identification or identification which misrepresents
the identity of the person procuring or sharing in such lodging or service.
lodger at the time of registration as will reasonably assure such person
to be the person for whom the lodging, room or accommodations have
been procured.
B. Before furnishing any lodging for hire to any person in any lodging
house or before furnishing any accommodations to any guest of any
motel or hotel, the proprietor, manager or owner thereof shall require
the person to whom such lodgings are furnished, or room rented or
accommodations furnished, to inscribe his or her name and permanent
address in such register kept for that purpose as heretofore provided,
and shall set opposite the name the time that said name was so
inscribed and the room occupied by such lodger, roomer or guest.
§ 5.50.010 GRAFTON CODE § 5.50.060
1.01:128
§ 5.50.060. Limit on guests per room.
No owner, keeper or proprietor of any lodging house, rooming house, motel
or hotel shall rent or provide a room for any number of persons greater than
the sleeping accommodations provided within the particular rental unit.
§ 5.50.070. Limit on persons congregating in room.
No owner, keeper or proprietor, guest or resident of any lodging house,
rooming house, hotel or motel shall allow to congregate within any room or
single rental unit a number of persons which is greater than three times the
number of persons for whom sleeping accommodations are provided within
the single room or rental unit.
§ 5.50.080. Violation may be basis for license revocation.
In addition to any forfeiture under § 5.50.090 for violation of this chapter,
the Village may institute an action or proceeding to enjoin a violation, and
such violation shall constitute the basis for revocation of any and all licenses
and permits where the Village is the issuing authority.
§ 5.50.090. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the general penalty in Chapter 1.08 of this
Code.
Title 6: Animals
Chapter 6.04
PROTECTED AND PROHIBITED ANIMALS, FOWL, REPTILES
AND INSECTS
§ 6.04.010. Compliance with federal regulations. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to buy, sell or
offer for sale a native or foreign species or subspecies of mammal, bird,
amphibian or reptile, or the dead body or parts thereof, which appears on
the endangered species list published in the Code of Federal Regulations
pursuant to the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (Public Law 205, 93rd
Congress), as amended.
§ 6.04.020. Possession and sale of protected animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to possess with
intent to sell or offer for sale, or buy or attempt to buy within the Village
any of the following animals, alive or dead, or any part or product thereof:
§ 5.50.060 CODE ADOPTION § 6.04.020
1.01:129
all wild cats of the family felidae, polar bear (thalarctos maritimus), red wolf
(canis niger), vicuna (vicugna vicugna), alligator, caiman or crocodile of the
order of crocodilia, gray or timber wolf (canis lupus), sea otter (enhydra
lutris), Pacific ridley turtle (lepidochelys olivacea), Atlantic green turtle
(chelonia mydas), Mexican ridley turtle (lepidochelys kempi).
§ 6.04.030. Regulating importation of certain birds. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
No person, firm or corporation shall import or cause to be imported into
the Village of Grafton any part of the plumage, skin or dead body of any
species of hawk, owl or eagle. This section shall not be construed to forbid
or restrict importation or use of the plumage, skin, body or any part thereof
legally collected for use by Native Americans for ceremonial purposes or in
the preservation of their tribal customs and heritage.
§ 6.04.040. Wild and exotic animals prohibited.
No person shall keep, raise, possess or have under such person's control,
either temporarily or permanently, any venomous reptile or snake,
constrictor snake or any nonvenomous snake more than five feet in length at
maturity; lizards up to more than five feet in length at maturity; poisonous
insect or arachnid; a wild animal, including but not limited to a live monkey
or other non-human primate, alligator or crocodile, bat, raccoon, skunk,
coyote and coyote-dog hybrids, fox, prairie dog, cheetah, cougar, jaguar,
leopard, lion, lynx, panther, tiger or hybrids thereof, wolf and wolf-dog
hybrids, or any other animal or bird of prey which can normally be found in
the wild state.
§ 6.04.050. Certain domestic species prohibited.
A. No person shall keep within the corporate limits of the Village, either
temporarily or permanently, any live bees, fowl (except domesticated
chickens per Chapter 6.10 of this title), gamecocks and other fighting
birds, cows, cattle, horses, sheep, swine, pot-bellied pigs used for
breeding purposes, goats, ducks, turkeys, geese, or any other
domesticated livestock. No rabbits shall be kept within any portion of
any multiple-family dwelling. The provisions of this section shall not
apply to cows, cattle, horses, sheep, swine, goats, chickens, ducks,
turkeys, geese, or any other domesticated livestock located on
properties in the A-1 (Prime Agriculture), A-2 (Agriculture) or A-3
(Agricultural Holding) zoning districts. [Amended 8-7-2017 by Ord.
No. 006-2017]
B. One Vietnamese pot-bellied pig (sus scrofa-domestica) per single-family
household may be kept as a pet, but not for breeding purposes. Bred
pot-bellied pigs shall be deemed livestock and are subject to the
provisions of Subsection A above. In addition, any person having a potbellied
pig in his possession or under his control shall be subject to the
§ 6.04.020 GRAFTON CODE § 6.04.050
1.01:130
§ 6.04.060. Exceptions.
§ 6.04.070. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the general penalty in Chapter 1.08 of this
Code. Each act of violation and every day upon which a violation occurs or
continues constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 6.08
REGULATION OF DOGS, CATS AND OTHER ANIMALS
§ 6.08.010. State regulations adopted.
The provisions of Ch. 174, Wis. Stats., and all subsequent amendments and
modifications thereof, are incorporated herein by reference.
§ 6.08.020. Definitions.
In this chapter, unless otherwise noted, the following terms and phrases
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
AT LARGE — An animal off the premises of its owners and on any public
street or alley, school grounds, a public park or other public grounds, or on
waste product removal requirements provided in § 6.08.090 and the
running at large provisions provided in § 6.08.110 of this title.
A. The provisions outlined in this chapter shall not be deemed to prevent
the lawful importation, possession, purchase or sale of any species by
any public agency, licensed veterinary clinics, bona fide animal
rehabilitation homes, pet shops, zoological gardens, public or private
educational institutions, agricultural fairs, shows or projects of 4-H
Clubs, a display for judging purposes, circuses and professional animal
acts, research purposes by persons holding federal permits, or by a
person holding a scientific collector's permit issued by the Secretary of
the Department of Natural Resources of the state, or to any person or
organization licensed to present a circus or similar recreational event.
B. The prohibitions outlined in this chapter shall not apply to: residents of
the Village who possessed one or more of the prohibited species prior to
the effective date of this chapter and who register same with the office
of the Village Clerk within 60 days of the effective date of this chapter.
1. Any resident who shall claim exemption under Subsection B shall
furnish satisfactory evidence in the form of a bill of sale, veterinary
records, or other proof satisfactory to the Village Clerk, which
demonstrates ownership of the otherwise prohibited species prior
to the effective date of this chapter.
§ 6.04.050 CODE ADOPTION § 6.08.020
1.01:131
private property without the permission of the owner of the person in lawful
control of the property.
CAT — All domesticated members of the felis domestica family, male or
female.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL — Any animal which:
DOG — All domesticated members of the canis familiaris family, male or
female.
DOMESTICATED ANIMAL — Any bird or animal of any species which
usually lives in or about the habitation of humans as a pet or animal
companion or which is usually raised and tended by humans in order to
contribute to the support of a family or the wealth of the community. This
term does not include a dangerous animal or prohibited dangerous animal.
FERRET — A small mammal belonging to the weasel family, including the
domestic ferret and the black-footed ferret.
OWNER — Includes any person, firm or corporation owning, harboring,
sheltering or keeping a dog or cat or any occupant of any premises on which
a dog or cat remains or to which it customarily returns daily for a period of
10 days is presumed to be harboring or keeping the dog or cat within the
meaning of this chapter.
WATERFOWL — Any bird that frequents the water, or lives about rivers,
lakes, etc., or on or near the sea; an aquatic fowl; birds that are ecologically
dependent upon wetlands for their food, shelter or reproduction, including
but not limited to ducks, geese and swans.
§ 6.08.030. Limit on number of dogs and cats.
When unprovoked, bites or otherwise inflicts bodily harm on a person,
domestic pet or animal on public or private property.
A.
Chases or approaches a person in a menacing fashion or apparent
attitude of attack without provocation upon the streets, sidewalks or
any public grounds or on private property without the permission of the
owner or person in lawful control of the property.
B.
An animal shall not be deemed "dangerous" if it bites, attacks or
menaces any person or animal to:
Defend its owner, caretaker or other person from attack by a
person or animal;
1.
2. Protect its young or another animal;
Defend itself against any person or animal which has tormented,
assaulted or abused it; or
3.
Defend its owner's or caretaker's property against trespassers,
unless the animal, without provocation, inflicts substantial bodily
harm on a person.
4.
C.
§ 6.08.020 GRAFTON CODE § 6.08.030
1.01:132
§ 6.08.040. License required.
No person residing in the Village of Grafton shall own, keep, harbor or have
custody or possession of any dog or cat of more than five months of age
unless a license has been obtained.
§ 6.08.050. Dog licensing requirements.
§ 6.08.060. Cat licensing requirements.
A. No person may keep, harbor, shelter or possess at any time more than
five dogs or cats, or combination thereof, except that no person shall
keep, harbor, shelter or possess more than three dogs which are over
the age of five months unless the person holds a valid kennel license.
B. In determining the limitations on the numbers of dogs and cats, as
provided in Subsection A above, any specific dog or cat which was
owned and/or licensed on or before the effective date of this chapter
will be grandfathered in. Any owner having more than five dogs or cats,
or any combination as indicated in this section, on or before the
effective date of this chapter will comply with this chapter as the excess
dog or cat dies, is given away or is sold.
C. The limit provisions of this section shall not apply to a litter of pups or
kittens which may be kept for not more than 16 weeks from birth.
A. Every owner of a dog more than five months of age on January 1 of any
year, or five months of age within the license year, shall annually or on
or before the date the dog becomes five months of age obtain a license
for each dog in the owner's possession. The license shall remain in
effect until December 31 of the year in which it is obtained.
B. A certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian, indicating that the dog
has been currently immunized for rabies, shall be presented to the
Village Director of Administrative Services in order to obtain a license.
C. The dog license fee shall be as established by § 174.05(2), Wis. Stats.,
with an additional amount as set from time to time by the Village Board.
A late fee shall be charged after March 31 of each year. [Amended by
Ord. No. 013, Series 2008; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1.01, Code Adoption)]
D. With the exception of the license fee, the provisions of this section shall
apply to dogs specially trained to lead blind or deaf persons or to
provide support for mobility-impaired persons.
A. Every owner of a cat more than five months of age on January 1 of any
year, or five months of age within the license year, shall annually or on
or before the date the cat becomes five months of age obtain a license
and comply with Ch. 174, Wis. Stats., as though said statutes were
equally applicable to cats insofar as they apply to the listing, licensing
and tagging of such cats.
§ 6.08.030 CODE ADOPTION § 6.08.060
1.01:133
§ 6.08.070. Feeding of waterfowl prohibited.
No person shall feed waterfowl of any type within any park or other public
area of the Village.
§ 6.08.080. Regulations for animal welfare.
B. A certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian, indicating that the cat
has been currently immunized for rabies, shall be presented to the
Village Director of Administrative Services in order to obtain a license.
C. Such cat license fee shall be the same as the fee established for a dog
license.
A. Food and water. No person owning or having custody of any animal,
reptile, snake or bird may neglect or fail to provide it with necessary
nourishing food at least once daily and provide a constant supply of
clean water to sustain the animal, reptile, snake or bird in good health.
B. Shelter. No person may fail to provide any animal or bird in his or her
charge with shelter from inclement weather to ensure the protection
and comfort of the animal or bird.
1. When sunlight is likely to cause overheating or discomfort to any
animal or bird, shade shall be provided by natural or artificial
means to allow protection from the direct rays of the sun, but still
allow air to pass to keep the animal cool.
2. Dogs and cats kept outdoors for more than one hour at a time shall
be provided with a moistureproof and windproof shelter of a size
which allows the animal to turn around freely and to easily sit,
stand and lie in a normal position and to keep the animal clean, dry
and comfortable. Whenever the outdoor temperature is at or below
40° F., clean dry bedding material shall be provided in such
shelters for insulation and to retain the body heat of the animal.
3. Motor vehicles or garages shall not be used as proper shelter under
the provisions of the section, except that during the winter months
a shelter structure may be placed inside a garage for additional
protection from the elements.
4. Any area where an animal is housed or allowed to remain shall be
kept clean of feces, animal waste and other substances in order to
keep the animal healthy and comfortable.
C. Cruelty.
1. No person shall directly or indirectly beat, frighten, overburden,
neglect or abuse any animal, reptile, snake or bird, or use any
device or chemical substance by which pain, suffering or death may
result, whether the animal or bird belongs to the person or another,
except that reasonable force may be used to drive off dangerous or
§ 6.08.060 GRAFTON CODE § 6.08.080
1.01:134
§ 6.08.090. Removal of waste products accumulations.
§ 6.08.100. Harboring certain animals prohibited.
No person shall own, keep, have in their possession or harbor any animal
which:
trespassing animals, excluding treatment by a veterinarian or
euthanasia and except the legal use of mace or similar substance.
2. The owner of any animal, reptile, snake or bird shall be responsible
to provide treatment to any ill or injured animal. No person shall
abandon any animal, reptile, snake or bird or transport any animal,
reptile, snake or bird in a cruel manner.
A. It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit a dog, cat, ferret or
other domesticated animal to be on property, public or private, not
owned or possessed by such person, unless such person has in his
immediate possession an appropriate device for scooping excrement
and an appropriate depository for the transmission of excrement to a
receptacle located upon property owned or possessed by such person.
This section shall not apply to a person who is visually or physically
handicapped.
B. All pens, yards, structures or areas where animals are kept shall be
maintained in a reasonably safe and sanitary condition. Maintenance
shall include the regular removal and disposal of defecation so as not to
attract insects or rodents, or to become unsightly or cause
objectionable odors, or to result in any condition recognized as a
nuisance by this Code or by any other common or statutory law.
C. Properties located in the A-1 (Prime Agriculture), A-2 (Agriculture) or
A-3 (Agricultural Holding) Zoning Districts shall be maintained in as
sanitary condition as possible.
A. Has not been licensed as required by this chapter;
B. Habitually pursues any vehicle upon any public street, alley or highway;
C. Habitually or frequently barks, yelps, howls or makes any other noise
which would unreasonably disturb or annoy a person of ordinary
sensibilities;
D. Which, while away from the owner's premises, causes property damage
or injury to any licensed dog or cat, domestic animal or other desirable
wildlife; or
E. Has been determined to be dangerous.
1. Any dog, cat, ferret or other domesticated animal that has caused
serious injury to a person or persons on two separate occasions off
the owner's premises, without reasonable cause, may be destroyed
as a result of judgment rendered by a court. Provocation of the dog
§ 6.08.080 CODE ADOPTION § 6.08.100
1.01:135
§ 6.08.110. Dogs, cats and other domesticated animals running at
large.
§ 6.08.120. Impounding of at large or abandoned animals.
by the person who is bitten may be considered in mitigation, and if
the amount of provocation is substantial, the court in its discretion
may accept the provocation as a defense.
2. Any concerned person may initiate action against the owner of an
animal he/she believes is dangerous by following the complaint
procedure outlined in this chapter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or possessing any dog, cat or
other domesticated animal to permit the same to run at large. Any such
animal found at large shall be deemed to be so with the permission or
sufferance of the owner.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person. except the owner of said animal or
his agent, to open any door or gate of any private premises or to
otherwise entice or enable any dog or cat to leave any private premises
for the purpose or with the result of setting such dog or cat at large.
C. An animal shall not be considered to be running "at large" if:
1. It is attached to a leash of sufficient strength to restrain the dog or
cat, the leash is not more than six feet in length, and provided said
leash is held by a person physically able to control it.
2. When properly restrained within a motor vehicle, provided such
vehicle is property ventilated for the animal's safety.
3. When not more than 50 feet from the owner or his agent competent
to govern such dog or cat at such distance, if such dog or cat is not
annoying or worrying pedestrians or trespassing on private
property or public areas where dogs and cats are forbidden.
D. No dog or cat shall be permitted in any cemetery, parks, beaches or any
swimming areas open to the public in the Village.
A. No dog, cat or other domesticated animal shall run at large or be
abandoned on any public or private lands within the Village. Any person
may seize or impound such animal found at large. The fact that a dog or
cat is without a proper license tag attached to its collar shall be
presumptive evidence that it is unlicensed. Every duly authorized
officer of the Grafton Police Department or humane officer finding a
dog, cat or other animal at large shall seize such animal and impound it
in the place provided therefor and authorized by the Village. Whenever
any unlicensed dog or cat is so impounded and delivered to the proper
officer of the Village, said officer shall give notice thereof to the owner,
if known, of such unlicensed dog or cat within 12 hours of
impoundment. Such notice shall be sufficient if given verbally to the
§ 6.08.100 GRAFTON CODE § 6.08.120
1.01:136
§ 6.08.130. Disposal of animals.
§ 6.08.140. Animals suspected of being infected with rabies.
owner, keeper or member of the owner's or keeper's family over 16
years of age.
B. The possession of any licensed or unlicensed dog or cat so seized or
impounded may be obtained by the owner upon payment to the
Ozaukee Humane Society, plus the daily boarding fee imposed by the
authorized agency for keeping such dog or cat for each day, or fraction
thereof, during which time said dog or cat was impounded. The
possession of any unlicensed dog or cat may be obtained by the owner
or owner's agent after obtaining the required license and paying the
appropriate fee to the Village Director of Administrative Services, as
provided in this chapter.
A. Any animal that has been impounded for a minimum of seven days that
has not been reclaimed by its owner may be disposed of by the proper
agency in the most humane manner available or per the policy
established by the Ozaukee Humane Society but not in less than seven
days.
B. Carcasses of animals must be disposed of in a sanitary manner within
24 hours after death. If possible, the Village will notify the owners of
said animal of the disposal of their animal.
C. Whenever in the opinion of any law enforcement officer an animal is
hopelessly injured or diseased so as to be beyond the probability of
recovery, it shall be lawful for such officer to kill such animal.
A. The owner of any dog or cat shall be responsible to have such animal
vaccinated at periodic intervals to ensure effective immunization
against rabies at all times. Proof of such immunization shall be
evidenced by a certificate of immunization from a licensed veterinarian
presented at time of licensing or renewal.
B. Any officer of the Grafton Police Department may impound any animal
which he/she believes from appearance and conduct to be infected with
rabies.
C. Any person who shall suspect that any animal is infected with rabies
shall report his/her suspicion to the appropriate Village Health
Inspector, describing the animal and giving the name of the owner, if
known. Any such animal shall, upon demand of the Village Health
Inspector, be delivered to the Inspector. If upon examination by the
Village Health Inspector the animal is suspected of being infected with
rabies, the animal may be killed by an officer of the Grafton Police
Department or humane officer in the most humane manner and in a
manner which avoids damage to the animal's head. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
§ 6.08.120 CODE ADOPTION § 6.08.140
1.01:137
§ 6.08.150. Animals causing injury.
Any owner of any dog or cat which has bitten any person shall cause the
dog or cat to be confined and isolated for a period of at least 10 days. This
quarantine may be on the premises of the owner if the animal is immunized
currently against rabies. Notice of such bite shall be made to the Village
Health Inspector, immediately, in writing. The Village Health Inspector may
order such dog or cat to be immediately examined by a trained individual
or, at the owner's expense, by a licensed veterinarian. Said examiner shall
issue to the Village Health Inspector and/or Police Department a certified
statement of determination as to whether or not the dog or cat is infected
with rabies. A dog or cat will be released from confinement only after a
determination that it is free from rabies and a proper written release is
obtained from the Village Health Inspector, Police Department or humane
officer, upon demand. If quarantine cannot be imposed because the dog or
cat cannot be captured, the officer may kill the animal. The officer may kill
a dog or cat only as a last resort or if the owner agrees. The officer shall
attempt to kill the animal in a humane manner which avoids damage to the
animal's head.
§ 6.08.160. Protection of animals utilized by law enforcement.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully tease, taunt, torment, strike,
kick, mutilate, disable or otherwise injure or kill or to interfere or to meddle
with any dog or horse which animal is being utilized by a law enforcement
official in the performance of any function or duty of said law enforcement
officer.
§ 6.08.170. Complaint procedure.
D. During the time that this Village or any part thereof shall be
quarantined for rabies, pursuant to the provisions of § 95.21, Wis.
Stats., or any other provisions of the law, all dogs and cats within the
district so quarantined shall be securely confined, tied, leashed or
muzzled. Any dog or cat not kept securely confined, tied, leashed or
muzzled is declared to be a public nuisance and shall be impounded by
any humane officer, police officer, or other person as designated by the
Grafton Police Department.
A. Any adult person(s) may seek relief from a problem resulting from a
violation of this chapter by filing a written complaint to the Grafton
Police Department or Village Health Inspector. Such written complaint
shall contain:
1. Name and address of complainant(s);
2. Description of animal responsible for violation;
3. Name and address of the owner of the animal;
4. Description of alleged violation; and
§ 6.08.140 GRAFTON CODE § 6.08.170
1.01:138
§ 6.08.180. Enforcement provisions. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
The Grafton Police Department, Village Health Inspector or the Ozaukee
Humane Society may enforce any provision of this chapter and is authorized
to confiscate and remove animals from premises for a violation of any part
of this chapter. Animals removed because of such action may be stored
or disposed of in a humane manner by the Ozaukee Humane Society or
designee. Probable cause that such a violation exists is sufficient reason to
confiscate such animal. Conviction of a violation is not required.
§ 6.08.190. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the general penalty in Chapter 1.08 of this
Code.
Chapter 6.10
KEEPING OF DOMESTICATED CHICKENS
§ 6.10.010. Purpose and definitions.
5. Dates, times and length of times alleged violation occurred.
B. Upon receipt of the written complaint, the Grafton Police Department
or Village Health Inspector will notify the owner of the animal in
question, in writing, of the alleged violation and provisions of this
section.
C. If the violation persists, the complainant(s) shall submit a written
petition to the Village Attorney for commencement of prosecution to
obtain compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Such written
petition shall include a thorough explanation of the violation and
include the following information:
1. Date reported to the Grafton Police Department or Village Health
Inspector.
2. Statement that the petitioners will be willing to sign a written
complaint and to testify in court, if necessary.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish conditions under
which small-scale keeping of domestic chickens for personal use and
enjoyment may be permitted on lots zoned for single-family residential
use.
B. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings given:
§ 6.08.170 CODE ADOPTION § 6.10.010
1.01:139
§ 6.10.020. Permitting.
1. Abutting property. All real property that in any way shares a
boundary with the real property of the applicant or permittee.
2. Chicken. A female hen (gallus domesticus) of any age, including
chicks. "Chicken" should be interpreted to encompass the singular
and the plural.
3. Coop. An enclosed structure in which a chicken roosts or is housed.
4. Rear yard. See § 19.09.0103, as amended.15
5. Side yard. See § 19.09.0103, as amended.16
6. Street yard. See § 19.09.0103, as amended.17
A. Permit and compliance with chapter required.
1. No owner of real property shall keep or allow to be kept a live
chicken within the Village without a valid permit issued under this
chapter.
2. No occupant of real property shall keep or allow to be kept a live
chicken within the Village unless the occupant holds a valid permit
issued under this chapter or the owner of the real property holds a
valid permit issued under this chapter.
3. No owner or occupant of real property shall keep a live chicken
within the Village contrary to the terms of this chapter or contrary
to the terms of any permit issued under this chapter.
4. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to invalidate deed
restrictions or other real property restrictions or covenants that
may prohibit the keeping of chickens within local areas or
subdivisions within the Village.
B. Procedure governing permits.
1. To apply for a permit under this chapter, the applicant must
complete and submit the following to the Building Inspector:
a. An application form signed by all owners of record. If an owner
of record is a trust or business entity, the application form shall
be signed by the trustee, a corporate officer, or member or
manager of a limited liability entity. If the applicant is a tenant
or occupant of the premises, the application form must be
15.Editor's Note: Reference is to a section of the Zoning Code, which is available for viewing
on the Village's website.
16.Editor's Note: Reference is to a section of the Zoning Code, which is available for viewing
on the Village's website.
17.Editor's Note: Reference is to a section of the Zoning Code, which is available for viewing
on the Village's website.
§ 6.10.010 GRAFTON CODE § 6.10.020
1.01:140
§ 6.10.030. Conditions for keeping chickens.
The following conditions shall apply to each permit issued under this
chapter:
signed by the applicant and be countersigned by all owners
of record as evidence of the owner's consent to the tenant or
occupant obtaining a permit.
b. The registration number of the applicant's completed
Livestock Premises Registration with the Wisconsin
Department of Agriculture, Trade, and Consumer Protection.
c. A nonrefundable application fee of $50 and annual renewal fee
in the amount of $25.
d. A site plan showing the location of all structures located on the
applicant's real property, the location of all structures located
on all abutting property, and the site of the proposed coop.
e. Drawings or photos of the coop design.
2. Each permit shall pertain to a single parcel of real property as set
forth in the property tax records of the Village.
3. A permit shall be issued only for a parcel which is zoned for singlefamily
residential use. No permit shall be issued for any parcel
which contains a condominium, duplex or any type of multifamily
residential use.
4. Each permit shall allow the keeping of no more than four chickens
in strict compliance with the conditions set forth in § 6.10.030.
5. A permit shall not be transferable in any way.
6. The permit year commences on January 1 and ends on December
31 of each calendar year. Permits applied for after January 1 of a
year will expire on December 31 of that year; permit fees shall not
be prorated.
7. If there are no changes to be made to the information submitted in
the original application, a permittee shall renew the permit
annually by paying the renewal fee. If the permittee wishes to make
changes, the permittee shall submit a new full application.
C. Revocation. In addition to all other remedies available to the Village,
the Village shall revoke a permit issued under this chapter in the event
that the Building Inspector has issued two or more violations of this
chapter to a permittee. Once a permit is revoked, it shall not be
reissued.
A. No roosters or other crowing fowl are permitted.
§ 6.10.020 CODE ADOPTION § 6.10.030
1.01:141
B. Noise from chickens shall not be so loud as to disturb a person of
ordinary sensitivity.
C. No chicken may be kept within a principal residence.
D. Chickens shall be kept as pets and for personal use only. No owner shall
sell or barter eggs or engage in chicken breeding or fertilizer
production for commercial purposes.
E. Chickens shall be housed in a coop. A coop shall be no less than three
cubic feet of space per chicken and must be connected to a secured and
fully ventilated pen (also required) which contains not less than seven
cubic feet of space per chicken and an appropriately sized nesting box
(also required) at a rate of not less than one box per two birds. Pens
shall be properly sized as will permit full spread of the kept bird's
wingspan and allow each chicken to walk and run. An existing garage,
shed or small structure may serve as a coop if compliant with the
remaining terms and conditions of this chapter.
F. No person shall keep a chicken in any location on the property other
than the rear yard.
G. All coops, pens, nesting boxes, and any other structure or enclosure
associated with the keeping of chickens must be located at least 40 feet
from a neighboring residential structure, not including a detached
garage, at least 10 feet from a side or rear property line and at least 10
feet from the residence on the property where the chickens or other
similar domesticated fowl are kept.
H. Coops and pens shall not be located closer than 75 feet from the
ordinary high-water mark of a lake, stream, creek or river.
I. Upon death of a chicken, the permittee must promptly dispose of the
chicken in a sanitary manner.
J. The on-site slaughtering of chickens is prohibited.
K. Chickens shall be kept and handled in a sanitary manner.
L. Chickens must be kept in a coop and pen when not being monitored by
a responsible individual. When allowed to roam free, chickens must be
monitored and within a fenced enclosure. Chickens shall be secured in
the coop during non-daylight hours.
M. The coop and pen system shall be properly designed, laid out and
maintained as will provide safe and healthy living conditions for
chickens while minimizing adverse impacts on the neighborhood
through use of material, colors, architecture and special site design
that are complementary to the existing buildings on the premise and in
the surrounding area. The Village Building Inspector shall have sole
discretion for coop design and location.
§ 6.10.030 GRAFTON CODE § 6.10.030
1.01:142
§ 6.10.040. Inspection and orders.
Title 7: Fire Prevention and Protection
Chapter 7.01
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 7.01.010. Title.
This chapter shall be known as, referred to, and cited as the "Fire
Prevention, Protection and Control Code" or the "Fire Protection Code" and
is hereinafter referred to as "this chapter."
N. All coops must be clean, dry and kept in a neat and sanitary condition at
all times.
O. The coop shall be enclosed on all sides and have a roof and doors.
Access doors must be able to be shut and locked at night. Opening
windows and vents must be covered with predator- and bird-proof wire
or fencing of no more than one-inch openings.
P. All enclosures must provide adequate ventilation as well as sun
protection and be sanitary, insulated, weatherproofed and impermeable
to rodents, wild birds and predators, including dogs and cats. These
enclosures must also be sound and moistureproof and maintained in
good repair with sufficient space for freedom of movement and
retention of body heat with elevated perches for natural roosting
position. The nesting boxes must be elevated off the ground.
Q. Provisions must be made for the daily removal and lawful disposal of
chicken waste in order to prevent any adverse effects related to odor or
unsanitary conditions.
R. Chickens shall not be turned loose or taken to the local humane society
when no longer wanted.
S. In addition to compliance with the requirements of this chapter, no one
shall keep a chicken that causes any nuisance, unhealthy condition,
creates a public health threat, or otherwise interferes with the normal
use of property and the enjoyment of life by humans or other animals.
A. The Village shall have the power, whenever it may deem reasonably
necessary, to enter a structure or property where a chicken is kept to
ascertain whether the permittee is in compliance with this chapter. The
permittee shall be responsible for all costs associated with inspections.
B. In addition to all other remedies available to the Village, the Building
Inspector may issue orders requiring compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 6.10.030 CODE ADOPTION § 7.01.020
1.01:143
§ 7.01.020. Intent.
The intent of this Code includes the following:
§ 7.01.030. Scope.
A. To provide the Village of Grafton (Municipality) with comprehensive
regulations to improve public safety by attempting to control, limit,
restrict and/or eliminate fire hazards.
B. To improve life safety for residents, occupants, employees, firefighters,
and frequenters of places of employment and public buildings.
C. To regulate the installation, use and maintenance of equipment;
regulating the use of structures, occupancies and open areas.
D. To require the removal and/or reduction of fire hazards; establishing
the responsibilities and procedures for code enforcement; and to set the
minimum standards for compliance and achievement of these
objectives.
E. To protect property from the hazards of fire and explosion by
establishing minimum standards for the use, operation, maintenance
and inspection of buildings, structures and premises.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all public buildings and
places of employment.
B. The following buildings and uses are not public buildings or places of
employment and are not subject to the provisions of this chapter:
1. One- and two-family dwellings except where specifically included,
as provided in this section and this chapter.
2. Buildings used exclusively for farming as described in § 102.04(3),
Wis. Stats.
3. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as applying to
the transportation of any article or thing shipped in conformity with
the regulations prescribed by the Interstate Commerce
Commission, or as applying to the military forces of the United
States.
4. Temporary buildings used for construction purposes only, not to
exceed one story in height and not used as living quarters.
5. Buildings owned by the federal government.
C. The provisions of this chapter shall apply equally to new structures,
including additions, and to change of use, change of occupancy, change
of occupants, renovations of, alterations of, remodeling of and/or
modifications to existing structures and existing conditions, except that
existing conditions not in strict compliance with the terms of this
chapter shall be permitted to continue where the exceptions do not
§ 7.01.020 GRAFTON CODE § 7.01.030
1.01:144
constitute a distinct hazard to life or adjoining property, as determined
by the authority having jurisdiction (AHJ), or have been superseded by
this chapter.
D. The provisions of this chapter apply equally to the property owner and/
or occupant.
E. If any conflicts exist between this chapter and any NFPA code and/or
standard and/or state code, the most restrictive, as determined by the
AHJ, shall be enforced by the AHJ.
F. Where the AHJ finds that an existing building, because of current
occupancy, or a change in occupancy, constitutes a hazard to its
occupants or adjoining property, the AHJ may order compliance with
the provisions of this chapter. A hazard shall be determined by the
existence of one or more of the following conditions:
1. Any building which by reason of its construction or highly
combustible occupancy and/or contents involves a hazard to its
occupants or, in the judgment of the AHJ, constitutes a fire menace,
e.g., paint shop and other occupancies involving processing,
mixing, storing, and dispensing of volatile liquids or solids.
2. Non-fire-resistive characteristics of a structure.
3. Accumulation of flammable or combustible materials of any kind.
4. Lack of accessibility to the premises for firefighting equipment.
5. Substantial number of fire calls or complaints on the premises.
6. Traffic patterns for pedestrian ingress and egress which require
protection under this section.
7. Insufficient ventilation system.
8. Lack of an internal communication system, or, due to the size or
type of building making regular Fire Department radio
communication inoperable, the building owner is required to install
a repeater system or something comparable to assist radio
communications.
9. Number, characteristics and movement of employees which require
protection under this section.
G. Additions to, change of use, renovated, altered, remodeled or modified
buildings.
H. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all existing structures,
public buildings and places of employment that are additions, changes
of use, renovations of, alterations of, remodeling of and/or modifications
to existing structures and existing conditions.
§ 7.01.030 CODE ADOPTION § 7.01.030
1.01:145
I. If the use of and/or contents of any existing building is changed and
becomes more hazardous as determined by the AHJ, the building shall
be brought into compliance with this chapter.
J. Those portions, elements, systems or components of existing buildings
and structures to be renovated, altered, remodeled or modified on or
after the effective date of the rules under this chapter, and where the
alteration, modification or the addition affects a building element or
component relating to subject matters regulated by this chapter, shall
be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the
applicable rules of this chapter as the rules exist on one of the
following:
1. The date plans for the alteration or modification are conditionally
approved by the AHJ.
2. The date the local building permit is issued.
3. The date the replacement is initiated, where § 7.01.030J.1 and 2 do
not apply.
K. Any change in occupancy or change of use of any premises. Any owner,
agent or occupant making a change in occupancy or use of any
premises, or occupying a previously vacant space, excluding any
private dwelling, shall be required to obtain a safety inspection by the
Fire Department prior to the new tenant taking occupancy of any
building or structure that was previously vacated or any change in
occupancy or change of use of any existing building or structure or
portion thereof.
1. The owner, agent or occupant of a building shall schedule an
appointment with the Fire Inspector for an inspection of the
building and/or occupied space(s).
2. Any violations of this chapter, including all applicable codes and/or
standards adopted by reference, or other portion of the Village of
Grafton Municipal Code observed at the time of inspection shall be
corrected prior to the new tenant taking occupancy or any change
of use taking place.
3. The Fire Department is authorized to require a consultation and/or
inspection fee for this inspection.
a. System submittal requirements. Any time that an automatic
fire sprinkler, fire protection, fire alarm, fire control, fireextinguishing
and/or fire suppression system and/or any
portion thereof is to be installed, altered, added on to, or has
appliances removed, plans shall be submitted to the AHJ for
review, permitting and conditional approval.
L. All plans for automatic fire sprinkler, fire protection, fire alarm, fire
control fire-extinguishing, and/or fire suppression systems and/or any
§ 7.01.030 GRAFTON CODE § 7.01.030
1.01:146
portion thereof must meet or exceed the applicable NFPA and AHJ's
requirements. Also see specific requirements in each system type
section.
M. Plans and all equipment data and manuals shall be submitted for review
and conditional approval to the AHJ prior to a permit being issued.
N. A minimum of five complete sets of each plan, specification, equipment
data and manuals and all calculations required by the AHJ shall be
submitted to the approved location.
O. Complete and accurate as-built drawings and revised hydraulic
calculations must be resubmitted for the AHJ's review and approval for
all fire sprinkler systems that utilize CPVC piping prior to any piping
being concealed.
P. A completed permit application must accompany all plan submittals.
Q. The permit application must be signed by the individual assuming
complete responsibility for the submitted system(s).
R. The permit application for all fire sprinkler and standpipe systems must
be signed by an individual who holds a valid Wisconsin automatic fire
sprinkler contractor's license.
S. The appropriate permit, inspection and/or plan review fees must be
submitted with each permit application.
T. Plans will not be reviewed until all fees have been received by the
municipality.
U. All fire protection systems must meet or exceed all applicable State of
Wisconsin codes, Village of Grafton local codes and all applicable
requirements of NFPA codes and/or standards.
V. Conditional approval of any fire protection submittal and/or portion of
any fire protection submittal is not intended to imply waiver or
modification of any requirements of any applicable code, standard,
regulation and/or law.
W. In granting any conditional approval, the Village of Grafton and/or the
Village of Grafton Fire Department reserve(s) the right to require
changes or additions should conditions arise making them necessary
for code compliance.
X. As set forth in § 101.12(2) Wis. Stats., nothing in any review and/or
conditional approval shall relieve the designer of the responsibility for
designing a safe building, structure, or component.
Y. As set forth in SPS 305.51, Wis. Admin. Code, a person licensed as an
automatic fire sprinkler contractor shall be responsible for each
installation of an automatic fire sprinkler system.
§ 7.01.030 CODE ADOPTION § 7.01.030
1.01:147
§ 7.01.040. Permits required.
Z. All fire protection, fire control, fire suppression, fire alarm and/or fireextinguishing
system, plan and/or submittal reviews are based on
information provided.
AA. All fire protection, fire control, fire suppression, fire alarm and/or fireextinguishing
system plan and/or submittal reviews are done for
general code compliance only.
AB. Fire protection, fire control, fire suppression, fire alarm and/or fireextinguishing
system plan and/or submittal review(s) do not relieve or
limit the responsibility and/or liability of the contractor(s), architect,
engineer, designer or any other responsible party for the system(s)
reviewed.
AC. The Village of Grafton and/or the Village of Grafton Fire Department or
any of its agents and/or firm or persons hired by the Village of Grafton
and/or the Village of Grafton Fire Department to review plans are not
responsible for and do not accept any responsibility and/or liability for
the system(s) indicated on any plans and/or submittals reviewed.
AD. The conditional approval of any fire protection, fire control, fire
suppression, fire alarm and/or fire-extinguishing system, plan and/or
submittal by the Village of Grafton Fire Department and/or its
authorized representative(s) shall not be construed as an assumption of
any design responsibility by the Village of Grafton Fire Department and/
or its authorized representative(s).
A. The following permits are required, and the Fire Department shall
review submissions of an acceptable application:
1. Fireworks permits.
2. Blasting permits.
3. Tent permits.
4. Construction/installation and/or modification permits for any
portion of the modification of any fire protection, fire alarm, fire
detection, fire suppression, or fire control system.
5. Change in occupancy or use.
B. A permit must be obtained prior to the start of installation and/or
alteration of any portion of a fire protection, fire alarm, fire control,
and/or fire suppression system.
C. Permits will only be issued after the required fire protection, fire alarm,
fire control, and/or fire suppression system plans and specifications
have been reviewed and conditionally approved by the AHJ.
§ 7.01.030 GRAFTON CODE § 7.01.040
1.01:148
D. Permits for the installation and/or alteration of fire sprinkler and/or
standpipe systems and/or any portion thereof will only be issued to
individuals who hold a valid automatic fire sprinkler contractor's
license.
E. Any contractor that begins installation and/or alteration of any system
regulated by this chapter prior to obtaining the required permit will be
charged a double permit fee or a $50 minimum.
F. Anyone that begins installation and/or alteration of any system
regulated by this chapter prior to obtaining the required permit will be
charged a double permit fee or a $50 minimum.
G. Any change in use or occupancy shall require a new permit.
H. Permit described. A permit, as specified and/or required by this chapter,
shall constitute permission to maintain, store or handle materials or
conduct processes which produce conditions hazardous to life or
property or install equipment used in connection with such activities
and/or for the installation and/or alteration of any portion of a fire
protection, fire alarm, fire control, and/or fire suppression system. Such
a permit shall not take the place of any other license or permit required
by law.
I. A permit shall be valid for a stated or twelve-month period as may be
specified thereon as determined by the AHJ to be reasonably necessary
to promote safety in the permitted activity.
J. A permit shall not be transferable.
K. Inspection. Before a license, occupancy permit or other permit for the
conducting of a business, trade, occupation or calling may be issued by
the municipality or its departments under other chapters or provisions
of this Municipal Code, the AHJ shall inspect and conditionally approve
the receptacles, vehicles, buildings or storage places to be used.
L. Location of permit. Permits and licenses subject to the issuing,
inspection or approval authority of the Fire Department or the AHJ
under this chapter shall, at all times, be kept on the premises
designated therein and be subject to inspection by the AHJ.
M. Certificates of occupancy. The Fire Department shall have dual
authority with the Building Inspector in the issuance of certificates of
occupancy for multifamily, public buildings, places of employment,
commercial structures, places of public assembly and schools to the
extent that the Fire Department shall inspect and have approval
authority over proposed occupancies to ensure compliance with this
chapter.
N. Plans. A copy of structural or applicable plans for all proposed
construction of multifamily residences, commercial and industrial
buildings and installations or upgrades of above- and below-ground
§ 7.01.040 CODE ADOPTION § 7.01.040
1.01:149
§ 7.01.050. Revocation and/or expiration of permits.
§ 7.01.060. Variances.
tanks as required by ch. ATCP 93, Wis. Admin. Code, shall be submitted
to the AHJ for review.
O. Building permits. Building permits shall be issued only for those
buildings which conform to the provisions of this chapter.
P. The AHJ shall review and conditionally approve or deny all plans
submitted to the Fire Department under this chapter within 10 working
days of submission and, upon a denial, shall within such time
electronically mail to the applicant a written statement setting forth the
fact of such denial and the reasons therefor. If the AHJ denies a plan,
the Building Inspection Department shall not issue a permit. The
applicant may appeal the decision of the AHJ to the Zoning Board of
Appeals within 30 days of the date of the written denial. Plans not
returned to the Building Inspection Department stamped "denied" or
"conditionally approved" within 10 working days of submission to the
AHJ shall be considered "conditionally approved."
Q. Whenever the applicant shall claim that the provisions of this section do
not apply to the structure in question or that the intent and meaning of
this section have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted by the AHJ,
the applicant may appeal such decision of the AHJ to the Zoning Board
of Appeals within 30 days of the date of the decision.
A. The AHJ may revoke any permit issued in accordance with this chapter
in any case where the AHJ may find that any of the conditions for the
issuance have not been maintained or where there has been a false
statement or misrepresentation of any material fact in the application
or plans on which the issuance was based.
B. The AHJ shall promptly notify the permit holder of the request for
revocation and, if so requested by the permit holder, the effective date
of the revocation shall be deferred pending a hearing before the Chief
of the Fire Department. The decision of the Chief for revocation,
following the hearing, shall be final.
C. All permits and conditional approvals shall automatically expire one
year after the date of the permit or conditional approval, whichever is
later, if the system or equipment has not been completely installed and
tested to the satisfaction of the AHJ.
D. The AHJ may extend a permit and/or conditional approval as required if
requested in writing by the owner or the owner's authorized
representative.
A. The AHJ thereon shall enter upon the records of the Department, and a
signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant of, the particulars of
such variances when granted.
§ 7.01.040 GRAFTON CODE § 7.01.060
1.01:150
§ 7.01.070. Stop-work orders.
§ 7.01.080. Occupancy inspection.
B. The AHJ may require tests as proof of compliance with the intent of this
chapter. Such tests are to be made by an approved agency at the
expense of the person requesting approval of the alternate material or
method of construction.
C. If technical expertise is unavailable within the municipality because of
new technology, processes, products, facilities, materials, design,
operation or use of a building or premises subject to the inspection of
the municipality, the AHJ may require the owner or the person in
possession or control of the building or premises to provide, without
charge to the municipality, a technical opinion and report. The opinion
and report shall be prepared by a qualified engineer, specialist,
laboratory or fire safety organization, acceptable to the AHJ and the
owner, and shall analyze the fire safety properties of the design,
operation or use of the building or premises and the facilities and
appurtenances situated thereon, and prescribe all necessary
recommended changes. The Fire Department may also acquire
technical assistance from a consultant and may charge a fee to the
owner or occupant for the service provided.
A. The AHJ may request that the Building Inspector issue a stop-work
order upon any permit issued subject to the inspection and approval
authority of this chapter, where the AHJ finds that any of the conditions
for issuance have not been maintained or where there has been any
false statement or misrepresentation of any material fact made in the
application or plans upon which the issuance was based.
B. If the AHJ determines requirements of this chapter are not complied
with, the AHJ may issue a stop-work order on any project or portion
thereof.
C. No work may begin on installation of a fire sprinkler, fire alarm, fire
control, fire suppression, fire-extinguishing system or any portion
thereof until plans have been submitted and reviewed by the Village of
Grafton Fire Department or its designee and a permit and conditional
approval have been obtained from the Village of Grafton Fire
Department. A stop-work order may be given to any contractor, owner
or agent who has begun work on any system without conditionally
approved plans and permit. All fees will be tripled and a special
inspection fee as set by the Village Board will be charged by the Fire
Department. An inspection of all work completed at the time of the stopwork
order will be performed after plans have been conditionally
approved. Should any discrepancy exist from the conditionally
approved plans and the actual installation, it shall be corrected prior to
a start-work release being issued.
A. Occupancy inspections are required.
§ 7.01.060 CODE ADOPTION § 7.01.080
1.01:151
§ 7.01.090. Inspections and testing.
§ 7.01.100. Right of entry; required inspections.
B. The Fire Department shall conduct inspections of public buildings and
places of employment prior to the issuance of local occupancy permits.
C. Written documentation of the inspections shall be kept by the Fire
Department and Building Inspection Department.
A. All fire sprinkler, fire control, fire-extinguishing, fire suppression
systems and fire alarm systems shall be inspected by the AHJ and/or
their agent prior to having any of their parts covered up or concealed in
any manner whatsoever.
B. The AHJ and/or their agent shall be given a minimum of a seventy-twohour
notice prior to any system inspection.
C. The AHJ and/or their agent shall witness all tests of fire sprinkler, fire
control, fire-extinguishing, fire suppression systems, fire alarm
systems, fire alarm initiating devices, notification appliances, and any
other required system requiring an operational test.
D. The AHJ and/or their agent shall be given a minimum of a seventy-twohour
notice prior to any system witness test.
E. All testing for any reason that requires the use of a pressure gauge shall
be done using a liquid-filled gauge that is new or has been calibrated
and certified within six months of any test the AHJ requires. The
certification shall be acceptable to the AHJ and documentation of such
shall be provided when requested.
A. The AHJ and/or its authorized representative may, at all reasonable
hours, enter any place of employment and/or public building within its
jurisdiction for the purposes of making any inspection or investigation
which, under the provisions of this chapter, it shall deem necessary.
B. The AHJ shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, all places of
employment and public buildings as often as may be necessary, but not
less than once a year.
C. The purpose of any inspection and/or investigation is to determine if
any violations of the provisions or intent of this chapter and/or the
codes or standards adopted by reference exist and to order corrections
of the violations observed.
D. The AHJ, upon the complaint of any person or whenever it shall deem
necessary, shall inspect any place of employment and/or public building
and premises within its jurisdiction.
E. Any owner or occupant of any place of employment and/or public
building who refuses to permit, prevents, or interferes with entry into
or upon the premises by anyone authorized by the AHJ shall be guilty of
§ 7.01.080 GRAFTON CODE § 7.01.100
1.01:152
§ 7.01.110. Enforcement and documentation.
§ 7.01.120. Service of correction orders.
violating this chapter and shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in
§ 7.09.010.
F. Inspection warrants. The Fire Chief or Fire Inspector may obtain a
special inspection warrant as provided under § 66.0119, Wis. Stats.,
when necessary in their opinion for the purpose of making an
inspection or investigation of any building or premises where the owner
has either failed to respond to previous orders for entry or has refused
entry.
A. The Fire Chief or anyone the Fire Chief has designated as the AHJ shall
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. Whenever any AHJ or any designee of the Fire Department shall
discover fire hazards as listed below, he or she shall order such
conditions or materials removed or remedied in such manner as may be
specified or in a manner acceptable to the AHJ:
1. Dangerous or unlawful amounts of flammable, combustible or
explosive material as determined by the AHJ.
2. Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly
installed equipment for handling or using flammable, combustible
or explosive material.
3. Dangerous accumulations of rubbish, waste paper, boxes, shavings,
or other highly flammable materials as determined by the AHJ.
4. Accumulations of dust, grease, or waste materials in airconditioning
systems, exhaust ducts or vent hoods.
5. Obstructions to or in fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors, or
windows, liable to interfere with the operation of the Fire
Department or egress of occupants. This includes snow.
C. Any building, structure, or premises which for want of repairs, lack of
exit facilities, fire alarm apparatus or fire-extinguishing equipment or
by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or from any cause, creates a
fire hazard.
D. The AHJ may use any means in documentation of any inspections and/or
conditions, including but not limited to the use of photographing, video
and/or electronic equipment.
A. The service of correction orders may be made upon the owner, occupant
or both or any other person responsible for the conditions that violate
any section of this chapter. A copy of the service order can be delivered
via electronic mail (email), delivering personally to the abovementioned
parties or by leaving it with the person in charge of the
§ 7.01.100 CODE ADOPTION § 7.01.120
1.01:153
§ 7.01.130. Notification of use or occupancy change.
premises at the time of the inspection. Any such order may be given
verbally, handwritten on an approved inspection form or typed and
delivered, in the means listed above or by placing such order in a
conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of the premises.
B. Compliance with service of correction orders that include conditions
that are hazardous to life or safety of the occupants shall require
immediate correction. All violations shall be corrected within a
specified time or date, as the AHJ shall determine and shall list on the
correction order.
C. When the owner of any property or person in apparent control of the
property is issued an order by the AHJ and fails to comply with the
order, the municipality may do the work ordered or cause the work
ordered to be done, and the cost of such work shall constitute a special
charge against the property upon which the work is done and shall be
levied against such property pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
D. No person shall refuse to permit or shall prevent or interfere with any
entry into or upon any building or premises by the AHJ who is lawfully
on the premises or interfere with any such inspection. If consent to
enter onto personal or real properties which are not public buildings, or
to portions of public buildings which are not open to the public, has
been denied, the AHJ shall obtain a special inspection warrant under
§ 66.0119, Wis. Stats.
E. Compliance with orders. Any such order given shall forthwith be
complied with by the owner and occupant of such building, structure or
premises. The owner or occupant may, within 24 hours of the receipt of
such order, appeal to the Fire Chief in writing for a review of such order,
who shall thereafter as soon as possible file their decision. Unless such
order is revoked or modified by the Fire Chief, it shall remain in full
force and shall be complied with in the time fixed in said order. Appeals
of orders in conflict with orders of the Department of Safety and
Professional Services may be made pursuant to § SPS 314.01(9), Wis.
Adm. Code.
A. Whenever there is a change in occupancy or the agent(s) (manager,
shift supervisor, after-hours emergency contact, etc.) of that occupancy,
the owner or his or her duly authorized agent shall submit the changes
in writing to the Fire Department and Building Inspection Department
within five working days. The information shall consist of the following:
1. Name and address of occupancy.
2. Owner's name, address and phone number(s).
3. Agent's name, address and phone number(s).
4. Other information as required by the AHJ.
§ 7.01.120 GRAFTON CODE § 7.01.130
1.01:154
§ 7.01.140. Temporary use.
The AHJ may allow a building or portion of a building to be used temporarily
in a manner that differs from the approved use for the building or space, or
may approve a temporary building to be used by the public, subject to all of
the following provisions:
§ 7.01.150. Liability for damages.
This chapter shall not be construed to affect the responsibility of any
persons owning, operating, or installing equipment for injury to persons or
damage to property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the municipality,
or any person, firm, company or agent(s) for the municipality, be held as
assuming such liability by reason of any plan, system, submittal review and/
or conditional approval, inspection or reinspection authorized herein or the
permit issued herein provided or by reason of the disapproval or approval
of any equipment and/or system authorized herein.
Chapter 7.02
B. Whenever a change in the service company for the alarm system has
occurred within the occupancy, the owner or authorized agent shall
submit the changes in writing to the Fire Department within five
working days. The information shall consist of the following:
1. All information required in § 7.01.130A.1.
2. Type(s) of fire protection systems.
3. Service company name, address and phone number(s).
C. No change can be made in the use or occupancy of any building or
structure, or any space within a building, structure, or space of a
building or structure either in a different division of the same
occupancy group or in a different occupancy group, unless the building
or structure complies with this chapter's requirements for the new
division of occupancies, as these requirements exist. This subsection
does not apply to an approved temporary use or to a new use that will
be less hazardous, based on life and/or fire risk, than the existing use.
D. An inspection by the Fire Department shall be required for any new or
change of occupancy.
A. The AHJ shall determine the time frame within which the temporary use
is permitted, based on the extent hazards are created by the temporary
use.
B. The AHJ shall determine maximum occupancy load.
C. The AHJ shall determine any fire protection and/or control devices and
life safety provisions that may be needed.
§ 7.01.130 CODE ADOPTION § 7.01.150
1.01:155
DEFINITIONS
§ 7.02.010. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the meanings indicated in this section.
Additional definitions applicable to this chapter are contained in the
applicable NFPA codes and/or standards.
ACCESS BOX — A steel vault, listed in accordance with UL 1037, mounted
on the exterior of a building, which contains keys, floor plans, maps or other
items as required by the AHJ, for access to all portions of the building.
ADULT DAY-CARE — Any place that receives at any time for compensation
four or more adults for care and supervision for less than 24 hours a day.
ADULT FAMILY HOME — Similar to a CBRF except that it is licensed for
five or fewer tenants.
ALARM — An automatic or manual alarm notification summoning the Fire
Department to the location of an alarm indicating fire.
ANNUNCIATOR — A unit containing one or more indicator lamps,
alphanumeric displays, or other equivalent means in which each indication
provides status information about a circuit, condition, or location.
APPROVED — Acceptable to the AHJ.
APPROVED AGENCY — An agency accepted or acceptable to the AHJ, which
may include the following: Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., the National
Institute of Standards and Technology, the American Gas Association
laboratories or other nationally recognized testing authorities.
ASSEMBLY GROUP A — Group A occupancies include, among others, the
use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, for the gathering
together of persons for purposes such as civic, social or religious functions,
recreation, food or drink consumption or awaiting transportation. A room or
space used for assembly purposes by fewer than 50 persons and accessory
to another occupant shall be included as a part of that occupancy. Assembly
occupancies shall include the following:
A-1: assembly uses, usually with fixed seating, intended for the
production and viewing of performing arts or motion pictures.
A.
B. A-2: assembly uses intended for food and/or drink consumption.
A-3: assembly uses intended for worship, recreation or amusement and
other assembly uses not classified elsewhere in Group A.
C.
A-4: assembly uses intended for viewing of indoor sporting events and
activities with spectator seating.
D.
A-5: assembly uses intended for participation in or viewing outdoor
activities.
E.
§ 7.01.150 GRAFTON CODE § 7.02.010
1.01:156
AUDIBLE NOTIFICATION APPLIANCE — A notification appliance that
alerts by the sense of hearing.
AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION (AHJ) — The Fire Chief of the Village
of Grafton Fire Department, or any designee of the Fire Chief, to enforce
this chapter and the laws of the State of Wisconsin, as designated in Ch.
SPS. 314, Wis. Admin. Code, pertaining to the prevention of fires and
public safety, and/or conditionally approving equipment installation, and/
or procedures as outlined in NFPA standards, codes and/or recommended
practices.
AUTOMATIC CLOSING DEVICE — A device which functions without human
intervention and is actuated as a result of predetermined temperature rise,
rate of rise of temperature, combustion products or smoke density.
AUTOMATIC FIRE ALARM SYSTEM — A system which automatically
detects a fire condition and actuates notification appliances throughout the
protected premises and actuates a fire alarm signal device to a U.L. listed
central station for fire service that is acceptable to the AHJ.
AUTOMATIC FIRE DETECTOR — A device designed to detect specific
products of fire: smoke, heat or both.
AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEM — An integrated system of
underground and/or overhead piping designed in accordance with fire
protection standards. The system includes a suitable water supply. The
portion of the system above ground is a network of specially sized or
hydraulically designed piping installed in a structure or area, generally
overhead, and to which automatic sprinklers are connected in a systematic
pattern. The system is usually activated by heat from a fire and discharges
water in the fire area.
AUTOMATIC FIRE-EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM — An approved system of
devices and equipment which automatically detects a fire and discharges an
approved fire-extinguishing agent onto or in the area of fire.
AVAILABLE WATER SUPPLY — The quantity of water at a specific pressure
that can be used by the Fire Department for firefighting purposes and/
or used by an automatic fire sprinkler, standpipe, fire control or fire
suppression system.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building that is partly or completely below
grade plane. A basement shall be considered as a story.
BOARDINGHOUSE — A building arranged or used as lodging for
compensation, with or without meals, not occupied as a single-family unit.
BONFIRE — A recreational fire larger than three feet in diameter or larger
than three feet tall, used to mark a public event, victory celebration or
similar occurrence.
BUSINESS GROUP B — Group B occupancy includes, among others, the use
of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, for office, professional or
service-type transactions, including storage of records and accounts.
§ 7.02.010 CODE ADOPTION § 7.02.010
1.01:157
CEILING — The upper surface of a space, regardless of height. Areas with
a suspended ceiling would have two ceilings, one visible from the floor, and
one above the suspended ceiling.
CODE — A standard that is an extensive compilation of provisions covering
a broad subject matter or that is suitable for adoption into law
independently of other codes and standards.
COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL — All materials not classified as
"noncombustible" are considered combustible. This property of a material
does not relate to its ability to structurally perform under fire exposure. The
degree of combustibility is not defined by standard fire test procedures.
COMMON AREA — Any area in a building that can be accessed by more
than one person at one time. This does not include areas within a dwelling
unit.
COMMUNITY-BASED RESIDENTIAL FACILITY (CBRF) — A community
facility where five or more adults who are not related to the operator or
administrator and who do not require care above intermediate-level nursing
care reside and receive care, treatment or services that are above the level
of room and board, but that include no more than three hours of nursing
care per week per resident.
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL — An approval of plans, calculations, submittals
and/or specifications by the AHJ based upon information provided to the
AHJ, including, but not limited to, any changes required by the AHJ to
the above-mentioned plans, submittals and/or specifications. Conditional
approval of any submittal and/or portion of any submittal does not grant
waiver to and/or modify of any requirements of this chapter, any other
applicable code, standard, regulation and/or law. The conditional approval
of any automatic fire sprinkler, suppression or fire alarm submittal by the
AHJ shall not be construed as an assumption of any design responsibility by
the AHJ, municipality, any individual employed by the municipality and/or
any agent(s) for the municipality.
CONSULTANT(S) — A company, individual or agency hired by the Fire
Department or municipality to provide advice to the Fire Department on
fire and/or life safety related issues. Consultants may provide services,
which could include, but are not limited to, plan reviews of fire sprinkler,
fire alarm, fire control, fire suppression, fire-extinguishing systems, witness
tests and/or conduct of inspections.
DAY-CARE CENTER — Any place which receives at any one time for
compensation four or more children under the age of seven years, for care
and supervision, for fewer than 24 hours a day or more than 10 days a
month, without the attendance of a parent, relative or legal guardian.
DIVISION OF FIRE PROTECTION — The Division of Fire Protection is made
up of the following personnel: the Fire Chief, the Division Chief and/or Fire
Inspectors, or any other designee of the Chief.
DSPS — The Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services.
§ 7.02.010 GRAFTON CODE § 7.02.010
1.01:158
DWELLING OR DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing living facilities
for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. For the purpose of this chapter,
"dwelling unit" includes apartments and condominiums but does not include
hotel and motel rooms, guest suites, dormitories, boarding rooms, or
sleeping rooms in nursing homes.
EDUCATIONAL GROUP E — Group E occupancy includes, among others,
the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, by six or more
persons at any one time for educational purposes through the 12th grade.
FACTORY INDUSTRIAL GROUP F — Group F occupancy includes, among
others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, for assembly,
disassembly, fabricating, finishing, manufacturing, packaging, repair or
processing operations that are not classified as Group H occupancy.
FALSE ALARM — The initiation or transmission of a signal, message or
other notification of an event of fire when no such danger exists. Further
defined as:
FAMILY UNIT — Two or more individuals who are related to each other
by blood, marriage, adoption or legal guardianship. For purposes of this
chapter, a group of not more than four persons, not necessarily related by
blood or marriage, living together in a single living unit, will be considered
equivalent to a single family.
FIRE ALARM — An automatic or manual alarm notification summoning the
Fire Department to the location of an alarm indicating fire.
FIRE ALARM ANNUNCIATION DEVICE — A device connected to a fire
alarm to signal either a fire or trouble condition. Fire alarm annunciation
devices include visible notification appliances, strobes, audible notification
appliances, horn/strobes, horns, bells, and/or annunciator panels.
FIRE ALARM INITIATING DEVICE — A device connected to a fire alarm
system that causes a trouble, supervisory and/or alarm signal to be
initiated. Fire alarm initiating devices could include: manual pull stations,
smoke, heat, flame, ionization, or photoelectric detectors, spark detectors,
water flow, low air, low temperature, low water, or supervisory switches.
A. F-1: moderate-hazard occupancy.
B. F-2: low-hazard occupancy.
MALICIOUS ALARM — A false alarm of fire deliberately sounded by
someone in order to inconvenience the Fire Department.
A.
ACCIDENTAL ALARM — An alarm set off and transmitted through
accidental operation of an automatic or manual fire alarm device.
B.
C. MALFUNCTION ALARM — An alarm that has activated with no cause.
GOOD INTENT FALSE ALARM — An alarm that turns out to be false
but was reported in good faith.
D.
§ 7.02.010 CODE ADOPTION § 7.02.010
1.01:159
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM — A system or portion of a combination system that
consists of components and circuits arranged to monitor and annunciate the
status of the fire alarm or supervisory signal-initiating devices to activate
notification appliances throughout the protected premises and to initiate
the appropriate response to those signals.
FIRE CONTROL SYSTEM — A system designed and constructed with the
intent of controlling or limiting a fire. Fire control systems may be
automatic or nonautomatic. Fire control systems could include automatic
fire sprinkler systems, standpipe systems, chemical agent systems, fire
hydrants and/or any other system acceptable to the AHJ.
FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTION (FDC) — A five-inch Stortz connection
with 30° downturn, part of a sprinkler, standpipe, deluge and/or
combination system to be used by the Fire Department to pump additional
water into the system(s) it is connected to.
FIRE DOOR ASSEMBLY — Any combination of a fire door, frame, hardware,
and other accessories that together provide a certain degree of fire
protection to the opening.
FIRE RESISTIVE — That property of materials of their assemblies that
prevents or retards the passage of excessive heat, hot gases or flame under
conditions of use. Materials are tested as prescribed in Section 703 of the
International Building Code (IBC), as adopted by Section SPS 361.05.
FIREWALL — A fire-resistance-rated wall having protected openings, which
restricts the spread of fire and extends continuously from the foundation to
or through the roof, with sufficient structural stability under fire conditions
to allow collapse of construction on either side without collapse of the wall.
FIREWORKS — Anything manufactured, processed or packaged for
exploding, emitting sparks or combustion which does not have any other
use and includes those items set forth in § 167.10(1)(m) and (n), Wis. Stats.
FLOOR AREA OR SQUARE FOOTAGE OF A BUILDING — The total square
footage of the sums of all basement, floor levels, balconies and mezzanines.
FLOOR, GROUND — That level of a building on a sloping or multilevel site
which has a floor line at or not more than three feet above exit discharge
grade for at least 1/2 of the required exit discharges.
FREQUENTER — Every person, other than an employee, who may go in
or be in a place of employment or public building under circumstances
which render such person other than a trespasser. Such term includes a
The area for basements and floor levels shall be measured from the
outside perimeter of the outside walls.
A.
The area for mezzanines shall be determined from the product of the
length of the mezzanine multiplied by the width of the mezzanine.
B.
For the purpose of determining square footage, fire division walls will
not be accepted as outside walls or area dividers.
C.
§ 7.02.010 GRAFTON CODE § 7.02.010
1.01:160
pupil or student when enrolled in or receiving instruction at an educational
institution.
GRADE PLANE — A reference plane representing the average of finished
ground level adjoining the building exterior walls. Where the finished
ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall
be established by the lowest points within the area between the building
and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than six feet from the building,
between the building and a point six feet from the building.
HAZARDOUS GROUP H — Group H occupancy includes, among others,
the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, that involves the
manufacturing, processing, generation or storage of materials that
constitute a physical or health hazard in quantities in excess of those found
in Tables 307.7(1) through 307.7(4) of the International Building Code.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL or INFECTIOUS AGENT — Any material or
combination of materials which may cause or significantly contribute to an
increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating
reversible illness or which may pose a substantial present or potential
hazard to human health or the environment because of its quantity,
concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics. This term
includes, but is not limited to, products that are explosive, toxic, corrosive,
or flammable, irritants, strong sensitizers, pesticides or a biological hazard.
HEIGHT, BUILDING — The vertical distance from the grade plane to the
average height of the highest roof surface.
HIGH-CHALLENGE FIRE HAZARD — A fire hazard typical of that produced
by fires in combustible high-piled storage, flammable/combustible liquid
storage, tire storage and other special occupancies.
INSTITUTIONAL GROUP I — Group I occupancy includes, among others,
the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, in which people
having physical limitations because of health or age are harbored for
medical treatment or other care or treatment, or in which people are
detained for penal or correctional purposes or in which the liberty of the
H-1: buildings and structures which contain materials that pose a
detonation hazard.
A.
H-2: buildings and structures which contain materials that pose a
deflagration hazard or a hazard from accelerated burning.
B.
H-3: buildings and structures which contain materials that readily
support combustion or pose a physical hazard.
C.
H-4: buildings and structures which contain materials that are health
hazards.
D.
H-5: semiconductor fabrication facilities and comparable research and
development areas in which hazardous production materials are used
and the aggregate quantity of materials is in excess of those listed in
Tables 307.7(1) and 307.7(2) of the International Building Code.
E.
§ 7.02.010 CODE ADOPTION § 7.02.010
1.01:161
occupants is restricted. Institutional occupancies are classified as I-1, I-2,
I-3 or I-4, as described in the International Building Code.
LISTED — Included in a list published by a nationally recognized testing
laboratory, inspection agency, or other organization concerned with product
evaluation, that maintains periodic inspection of production of listed
equipment or materials and whose listing states either that the equipment
or materials meet nationally recognized standards or have been tested and
found suitable for use in a specified manner.
MANUAL FIRE ALARM SYSTEM — A system or portion of a combination
system that consists of components and circuits arranged to initiate the
notification appliances and appropriate response to those signals only after
a person manually activates the fire alarm system.
MERCANTILE GROUP M — Group M occupancy includes, among others,
building and structures, or a portion thereof, for the display and sale of
merchandise, and involves stock of goods, wares or merchandise incidental
to such purposes and accessible to the public.
MEZZANINE or MEZZANINE FLOOR — An intermediate level or levels
between the floor and ceiling of any story with an aggregate floor area of
not more than one-third of the area of the room or space in which the level
or levels are located.
MISCELLANEOUS GROUP U — Buildings and structures of an accessory
character and miscellaneous structures not classified in any specific
occupancy shall be constructed, equipped and maintained to conform to the
requirements of this chapter commensurate with the fire and life hazard
incidental to their occupancy.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A building or portion thereof containing three
or more dwelling units, such as tenements, apartments or rooming houses.
Row houses with fire walls extending from the basement to the underside of
the roof separating each living unit are not considered multifamily for the
purpose of this chapter.
MUNICIPALITY — The Village of Grafton.
NFPA — The National Fire Protection Association.
NONACCESSIBLE AREA — A portion of a building or structure to which
people do not have access.
NONCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL — A material which, in the form in which it
is used, meets one of the requirements listed below. Materials used adjacent
to or in contact with heat-producing appliances, warm air ducts, plenums
and chimneys shall be classified as noncombustible only on the basis of
the requirement in Subsection A. "Noncombustible" does not apply to the
flame-spread characteristics of interior finish or trim materials. No material
shall be classified as noncombustible building construction material which
is subject to increase in combustibility or flame-spread classification (FSC)
beyond the limits herein established through the effects of age, moisture
or other atmospheric conditions. (See flame spread rating in the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.)
§ 7.02.010 GRAFTON CODE § 7.02.010
1.01:162
NORMAL ACCESS ROUTES — Pavement, sidewalks, streets, driveways and
paths leading to a building that are clear and maintained year round. The
normal access route does not include grass, parking stalls, ditches, hills,
shrubs, flower beds, fences, walls or any other area not typically used for
ingress to or egress from a building.
NOTIFICATION APPLIANCE — A fire alarm system component such as
a bell, horn, speaker, light, or text display that provides audible, tactile,
visible outputs or any combination thereof that is acceptable to the AHJ.
OCCUPANTS — The person or persons who physically reside, work or are
present anywhere in a facility, building and/or structure.
OCCUPIABLE AREA — The spaces of a facility that can be occupied or
used by the facility occupants as part of the building function or to support
building operations and maintenance. This includes, but is not limited to,
storage areas, mechanical and electrical equipment areas, walk-in closets
or janitor's rooms, restrooms, conference rooms, and individual offices.
OTHER TERMS — Terms not defined herein used in this chapter shall be as
defined in the International Fire Code Section 202 and/or NFPA codes and
standards that are adopted in this chapter by reference.
OWNER — Includes his or her duly sworn agent or attorney, a purchaser,
devisee, fiduciary or person having a vested or contingent interest in the
property in question.
OWNER'S CERTIFICATE — A form completed by the owner(s), or the
owner's authorized agent, of a building or structure where a fire sprinkler
system is going to be installed that provides the sprinkler contractor with
information required to properly design a fire sprinkler system.
PERMIT — A permit as specified and/or required by this chapter shall
constitute permission to maintain, store or handle materials or conduct
processes which produce conditions hazardous to life or property or install
equipment used in connection with such activities and/or for the installation
and/or alteration of any portion of a fire protection, fire alarm, fire control,
and/or fire suppression system. Such a permit shall not take the place of any
other license or permit required by law. A permit shall be valid for a stated
or indefinite period as may be specified thereon as Village of Grafton Fire
Prevention, Protection and Control Code - V1.2 determined by the AHJ to be
Materials which pass the test procedure of ASTM E-136 for
noncombustibility of elementary materials when exposed to a furnace
temperature of 1,382° F. for a minimum period of five minutes and do
not cause a temperature rise of the surface or interior thermocouple in
excess of 54° F. above the furnace air temperature at the beginning of
the test and which do not flame after exposure of 30 seconds.
A.
Materials having a structural base of noncombustible material as
defined in Subsection A, with a surfacing not more than 1/8 inch
thick which has a flame-spread classification (FSC) not greater than 50
when tested in accordance with the method of test for surface burning
characteristics of building materials (ASTM E-84).
B.
§ 7.02.010 CODE ADOPTION § 7.02.010
1.01:163
reasonably necessary to promote safety in the permitted activity. A permit
shall not be transferable. Any change in use or occupancy shall require a
new permit.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT — Includes every place, whether indoors or
out or underground, and the premises appurtenant thereto, where, either
temporarily or permanently, any industry, trade or business is carried on,
or where any process or operation, directly or indirectly related to any
industry, trade or business, is carried on, and where any person is, directly
or indirectly, employed by another for direct or indirect gain or profit,
but does not include any place where persons are employed in private
domestic service which does not involve the use of mechanical power or
in farming. "Farming" includes those activities specified in § 102.04(3) Wis.
Stats., and also includes the transportation of farm products, supplies or
equipment directly to the farm by the operator of said farm or employees
for use thereon, if such activities are directly or indirectly for the purpose of
producing commodities for market, or as an accessory to such production.
When used with relation to building codes, "place of employment" does not
include an adult family home, as defined in § 50.01(1) Wis. Stats., or, except
for the purposes of § 101.11, Wis. Stats., a previously constructed building
used as a community-based residential facility, as defined in § 50.01(1g),
Wis. Stats., which serves 20 or fewer residents who are not related to the
operator or administrator.
PROTECTED PREMISES — The physical location protected by a fire alarm
or automatic fire suppression system.
PUBLIC BUILDING — Any structure, including exterior parts of such
building, such as a porch, exterior platform or steps, providing means of
ingress or egress, used in whole or in part as a place of resort, assemblage,
lodging, trade, traffic, occupancy, or use by the public or by three or more
tenants.
RECOGNIZED SCALE — A scale commonly used by architects, engineers,
designers and others in the preparation of drawings that is acceptable to
the AHJ.
RECORD — Any form of written material that shows information pertaining
to a device, system, method or person. Written records are required
whenever tests and/or maintenance of any kind is performed on any fire
alarm, fire control, fire suppression or life safety system or device.
REMODEL — To remodel, alter, or both, means to change any building
or structure which affects the structural strength, fire hazard, internal
circulation, or exits of the existing building or structure. This definition
does not apply to maintenance, reroofing, or alterations to the heating and
ventilating or electrical system.
REMOTE FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTION (FDC) — A Fire Department
connection that is not attached to the building or structure that is protected
by the system the FDC supplies and is connected by piping usually installed
underground or a piping method that is acceptable to the AHJ.
§ 7.02.010 GRAFTON CODE § 7.02.010
1.01:164
RESIDENTIAL GROUP R — Group R occupancy includes, among others,
the use of a building or structure, or portion thereof, for sleeping
accommodations when not classed as an Institutional Group I.
ROOF SPACE — The space located above the finished ceiling(s) and below
the exterior roof of a structure. This includes but is not limited to any space
that could be defined as an attic.
ROOMING HOUSE — Any building which has a room or rooms for sleeping,
without permanent provisions for cooking. Rooming house rooms do not
include any room in a one- or two-family dwelling.
ROUGH INSPECTION — Visual observation from the floor and/or ground
level of any system and/or component thereof required by this chapter prior
to being concealed in any way by any means.
ROW HOUSE — A place of abode arranged to accommodate three or more
attached side-by-side or back-to-back living units.
SAFETY MARGIN — A specific measurement of pressure in pounds per
square inch (psi) at a specific rate of water flow that all fire sprinkler,
fire control and water-based fire suppression systems must maintain below
the anticipated available water supply as determined by a water flow test,
a municipality-specified flow and pressure or any other water supply
acceptable to the AHJ.
SHALL — Indicates a mandatory requirement.
SHOULD — Indicates a recommendation or that which is advised but not
required.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A detached building containing only one
dwelling unit and designed exclusively for use and occupancy by one family.
SPACING — A horizontally measured dimension relating to the allowable
coverage limits of fire detectors, automatic sprinkler systems, and fire
alarm visual notification devices.
R-1: residential occupancies where the occupants are primarily
transient in nature.
A.
R-2: residential occupancies containing more than two dwelling units
where occupants are primarily permanent in nature.
B.
R-3: residential occupancies where the occupants are primarily
permanent in nature and not classified R-1, R-2 or I, and where
buildings do not contain more than two dwelling units or adult and
child-care facilities, that provide accommodations for five or fewer
persons of any age for less than 24 hours.
C.
R-4: residential occupancies shall include buildings arranged for
occupancy as residential care/assisted-living facilities including five but
not more than 16 occupants, excluding staff.
D.
§ 7.02.010 CODE ADOPTION § 7.02.010
1.01:165
SPECIAL OCCUPANCY — Any area in which a high-challenge fire hazard
exists and any NFPA Codes and/or standards contain design criteria,
limitations or requirements that apply specifically to the occupancy.
STANDARD — A document, the main text of which contains only mandatory
provisions using the word "shall" to indicate mandatory requirements and
which is in a form generally suitable for reference by another standard or
code or for adoption into law.
STORAGE GROUP S — Group S occupancy includes, among others, the use
of a building or structure, or portion thereof, for storage that is not classed
as Hazardous Group H.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the upper surface of
a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above. To determine
the number of stories in a building, all floors will be counted, whether they
are above grade or below grade, including basements, sub-basements, and
ground floors, but not including penthouses or mezzanines less than 1/3 of
a story.
TACTILE NOTIFICATION APPLIANCE — A notification appliance that alerts
by the sense of touch or vibration.
TEMPORARY — Fewer than 90 days.
TEXTUAL AUDIBLE NOTIFICATION APPLIANCE — A notification appliance
that conveys a stream of audible information. An example of a textual
audible notification appliance is a speaker that reproduces a voice message.
THROUGHOUT — One of the following, depending on the circumstances:
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A detached building containing not more than
two individual dwelling units which are entirely separated by vertical walls
or horizontal floors, unpierced except for access to the outside or a common
basement.
S-1 (moderate-hazard storage): buildings occupied for storage uses
which are not classified as S-2.
A.
S-2 (low-hazard storage): buildings used for storage of noncombustible
material such as products on wood pallets or in paper cartons with or
without single-thickness divisions or in paper wrappings. Such products
may have a negligible amount of plastic trim such as knobs, handles, or
film wrapping.
B.
Throughout, for automatic fire sprinkler systems, means providing fire
sprinkler protection in all areas of a structure as required by NFPA 13.
A.
Throughout, for automatic fire alarm systems, means installing
detection, audible and visual notification devices in all areas of the
protected premises installed in accordance with NFPA 72.
B.
Throughout, for manual fire alarm systems, means installing audible
and visual notification devices in all areas of the protected premises
installed in accordance with NFPA 72.
C.
§ 7.02.010 GRAFTON CODE § 7.02.010
1.01:166
VEHICLE — Any self-propelled device fueled by flammable or combustible
liquid, or compressed gas, used to transport people or goods.
VISIBLE NOTIFICATION APPLIANCE — A notification appliance that alerts
by the sense of sight.
WATER FLOW TEST — A test of an available water supply that indicates the
quantity of water flowing out of a specific orifice, at a specific pressure, at
a specific point in time.
WELFARE — Includes comfort, decency and moral well-being.
WISCONSIN STATUTES — All references to "Wisconsin Statutes" or "Wis.
Stats." shall mean the State of Wisconsin statutes as of the adoption of this
chapter or as they may be amended or renumbered from time to time.
Chapter 7.03
ADOPTION OF CODES
§ 7.03.010. Adoption of Wisconsin department of safety and
professional services codes.
A. The following Wisconsin Administrative Codes in effect on the date of
adoption of this chapter, or as they may be amended or renumbered
from time to time, are adopted by reference, enforced and incorporated
into this chapter as if fully set forth herein:
Reference Subject Matter
SPS 303 Administrative procedures
SPS 305 Licenses, certifications and
registrations
SPS 309 Explosives and fireworks
SPS 308 Mine, pits and quarries
SPS 309 Anchoring and securing of
movable soccer goals
SPS 314 Fire prevention
SPS 316 Electrical
SPS 318 Elevators, escalators and lift
devices
SPS 326 Manufactured home communities
SPS 328 Smoke detectors and carbon
monoxide detectors
SPS 333 Passenger ropeways
SPS 334 Amusement rides
SPS 335 Infectious agents
SPS 340 Gas systems
§ 7.02.010 CODE ADOPTION § 7.03.010
1.01:167
§ 7.03.020. Adoption of International Code Council Codes.
The latest International Code Council (ICC) publication(s) listed below and
published on or before the effective date of this chapter are adopted by
reference, enforced and incorporated into this chapter as if fully set forth
herein:
§ 7.03.030. Adoption by reference of NFPA publications.
Reference Subject Matter
SPS 341 Boilers and pressure vessels
SPS 343 Anhydrous ammonia
SPS 345 Mechanical refrigeration
SPS 361-66 Wisconsin commercial building
code
SPS 371 Solar energy systems
B. Any violation of the incorporated provisions of any State of Wisconsin
code, law, regulation, standard or any other requirements constitutes a
violation of this chapter.
C. In cases of conflict between local and State of Wisconsin codes, the
most restrictive provisions, as determined by the AHJ, shall govern.
D. Copies of the Wisconsin Department of Commerce codes are available
from:
Wisconsin Department of Administration
Document Sales and Distribution Section
P.O. Box 7840
Madison, WI 53707
1-608-266-3358
A. International Fire Code (IFC), 2015 edition (applies only to sections
specifically referenced in this chapter).
A. The latest National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) codes and
publications published on or before the effective date of this chapter
are adopted by reference, enforced and incorporated into this chapter
as if fully set forth herein:
NFPA 1 Fire Code, 2012 edition
NFPA 10 Standard for Portable Fire
Extinguishers, 2010 edition
§ 7.03.010 GRAFTON CODE § 7.03.030
1.01:168
NFPA 11 Standard for Low-, Medium-, and
High-Expansion Foam, 2010
edition
NFPA 12 Standard on Carbon Dioxide
Extinguishing Systems, 2011
edition
NFPA 12A Standard on Halon 1301 Fire
Extinguishing Systems, 2009
edition
NFPA 13 Standard for the Installation of
Sprinkler Systems, 2010 edition
NFPA 13D Standard for the Installation of
Sprinkler Systems in One- and
Two-Family Dwellings and
Manufactured Homes, 2010
edition
NFPA 13R Standard for the Installation of
Sprinkler Systems in Residential
Occupancies up to and Including
Four Stories in Height, 2010
edition
NFPA 14 Standard for the Installation of
Standpipe and Hose Systems,
2010 edition
NFPA 15 Standard for Water Spray Fixed
Systems for Fire Protection, 2012
edition
NFPA 16 Standard for the Installation of
Foam-Water Sprinkler and Foam-
Water Spray Systems, 2011
edition
NFPA 17 Standard for Dry Chemical
Extinguishing Systems, 2009
edition
NFPA 17A Standard for Wet Chemical
Extinguishing Systems, 2009
edition
NFPA 20 Standard for the Installation of
Stationary Pumps for Fire
Protection, 2010 edition
NFPA 22 Standard for Water Tanks for
Private Fire Protection, 2008
edition
§ 7.03.030 CODE ADOPTION § 7.03.030
1.01:169
NFPA 24 Standard for the Installation of
Private Fire Service Mains and
Their Appurtenances, 2010 edition
NFPA 25 Standard for the Inspection,
Testing, and Maintenance of
Water-Based Fire Protection
Systems, 2011 edition
NFPA 30 Flammable and Combustible
Liquids Code, 2012 edition
NFPA 30A Code for Motor Fuel Dispensing
Facilities and Repair Garages,
2012 edition
NFPA 30B Code for the Manufacture and
Storage of Aerosol Products, 2011
edition
NFPA 31 Standard for the Installation of
Oil-Burning Equipment, 2011
edition
NFPA 32 Standard for Dry Cleaning Plants,
2011 edition
NFPA 33 Standard for Spray Application
Using Flammable or Combustible
Materials, 2011 edition
NFPA 34 Standard for Dipping, Coating,
and Printing Processes Using
Flammable or Combustible
Liquids, 2011 edition
NFPA 35 Standard for the Manufacture of
Organic Coatings, 2011 edition
NFPA 36 Standard for Solvent Extraction
Plants, 2009 edition
NFPA 37 Standard for the Installation and
Use of Stationary Combustion
Engines and Gas Turbines, 2010
edition
NFPA 40 Standard for the Storage and
Handling of Cellulose Nitrate
Film, 2011 edition
NFPA 45 Standard on Fire Protection for
Laboratories Using Chemicals,
2011 edition
§ 7.03.030 GRAFTON CODE § 7.03.030
1.01:170
NFPA 51 Standard for the Design and
Installation of Oxygen-Fuel Gas
Systems for Welding, Cutting, and
Allied Processes, 2007 edition
NFPA 51A Standard for Acetylene Cylinder
Charging Plants, 2012 edition
NFPA 51B Standard for Fire Prevention
During Welding, Cutting, and
Other Hot Work, 2009 edition
NFPA 52 Vehicular Gaseous Fuel Systems
Code, 2010 edition
NFPA 54 National Fuel Gas Code, 2012
edition
NFPA 55 Compressed Gases and Cryogenic
Fluids Code, 2010 edition
NFPA 58 Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code,
2011 edition
NFPA 59 Utility LP-Gas Plant Code, 2012
edition
NFPA 59A Standard for the Production,
Storage, and Handling of
Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG),
2009 edition
NFPA 61 Standard for the Prevention of
Fires and Dust Explosions in
Agricultural and Food Processing
Facilities, 2008 edition
NFPA 68 Standard on Explosion Protection
by Deflagration Venting, 2007
edition
NFPA 69 Standard on Explosion Prevention
Systems, 2008 edition
NFPA 70® National Electrical Code®, 2011
edition
NFPA 72® National Fire Alarm and Signaling
Code, 2010 edition
NFPA 75 Standard for the Protection of
Information Technology
Equipment, 2009 edition
NFPA 76 Standard for the Fire Protection of
Telecommunications Facilities,
2009 edition
§ 7.03.030 CODE ADOPTION § 7.03.030
1.01:171
NFPA 80 Standard for Fire Doors and Other
Opening Protectives, 2010 edition
NFPA 82 Standard on Incinerators and
Waste and Linen Handling
Systems and Equipment, 2009
edition
NFPA 85 Boiler and Combustion Systems
Hazards Code, 2011 edition
NFPA 86 Standard for Ovens and Furnaces,
2011 edition
NFPA 88A Standard for Parking Structures,
2011 edition
NFPA 90A Standard for the Installation of
Air-Conditioning and Ventilating
Systems, 2012 edition
NFPA 90B Standard for the Installation of
Warm Air Heating and Air-
Conditioning Systems, 2012
edition
NFPA 91 Standard for Exhaust Systems for
Air Conveying of Vapors, Gases,
Mists, and Noncombustible
Particulate Solids, 2010 edition
NFPA 92 Standard for Smoke Control
Systems, 2012 edition
NFPA 96 Standard for Ventilation Control
and Fire Protection of Commercial
Cooking Operations, 2011 edition
NFPA 99 Health Care Facilities Code, 2012
edition
NFPA 101® Life Safety Code®, 2012 edition
NFPA 102 Standard for Grandstands, Folding
and Telescopic Seating, Tents, and
Membrane Structures, 2011
edition
NFPA 105 Standard for Smoke Door
Assemblies and Other Opening
Protectives, 2010 edition
NFPA 110 Standard for Emergency and
Standby Power Systems, 2010
edition
NFPA 111 Standard on Stored Electrical
Energy Emergency and Standby
Power Systems, 2010 edition
§ 7.03.030 GRAFTON CODE § 7.03.030
1.01:172
NFPA 120 Standard for Fire Prevention and
Control in Coal Mines, 2010
edition
NFPA 122 Standard for Fire Prevention and
Control in Metal/Nonmetal Mining
and Metal Mineral Processing
Facilities, 2010 edition
NFPA 130 Standard for Fixed Guideway
Transit and Passenger Rail
Systems, 2010 edition
NFPA 140 Standard on Motion Picture and
Television Production Studio
Soundstages, Approved
Production Facilities, and
Production Locations, 2008
edition
NFPA 150 Standard on Fire and Life Safety
in Animal Housing Facilities, 2009
edition
NFPA 160 Standard for the Use of Flame
Effects Before an Audience, 2011
edition
NFPA 170 Standard for Fire Safety and
Emergency Symbols, 2009 edition
NFPA 204 Standard for Smoke and Heat
Venting, 2012 edition
NFPA 211 Standard for Chimneys,
Fireplaces, Vents, and Solid Fuel-
Burning Appliances, 2010 edition
NFPA 220 Standard on Types of Building
Construction, 2012 edition
NFPA 221 Standard for High Challenge Fire
Walls, Fire Walls, and Fire Barrier
Walls, 2012 edition
NFPA 232 Standard for the Protection of
Records, 2012 edition
NFPA 241 Standard for Safeguarding
Construction, Alteration, and
Demolition Operations, 2009
edition
NFPA 251 Standard Methods of Tests of Fire
Resistance of Building
Construction and Materials, 2006
edition
§ 7.03.030 CODE ADOPTION § 7.03.030
1.01:173
NFPA 252 Standard Methods of Fire Tests of
Door Assemblies, 2008 edition
NFPA 253 Standard Method of Test for
Critical Radiant Flux of Floor
Covering Systems Using a Radiant
Heat Energy Source, 2011 edition
NFPA 255 Standard Method of Test of
Surface Burning Characteristics of
Building Materials, 2006 edition
NFPA 256 Standard Methods of Fire Tests of
Roof Covering, 2003 edition
NFPA 257 Standard on Fire Test for Window
and Glass Block Assemblies, 2007
edition
NFPA 259 Standard Test Method for
Potential Heat of Building
Materials, 2008 edition
NFPA 260 Standard Methods of Tests and
Classification System for Cigarette
Ignition Resistance of
Components of Upholstered
Furniture, 2009 edition
NFPA 261 Standard Method of Test for
Determining Resistance of Mock-
Up Upholstered Furniture
Material Assemblies to Ignition by
Smoldering Cigarettes, 2009
edition
NFPA 265 Standard Methods of Fire Tests
for Evaluating Room Fire Growth
Contribution of Textile or
Expanded Vinyl Wall Coverings on
Full Height Panels and Walls,
2011 edition
NFPA 271 Standard Method of Test for Heat
and Visible Smoke Release Rates
for Materials and Products Using
an Oxygen Consumption
Calorimeter, 2009 edition
NFPA 286 Standard Methods of Fire Tests
for Evaluating Contribution of
Wall and Ceiling Interior Finish to
Room Fire Growth, 2011 edition
§ 7.03.030 GRAFTON CODE § 7.03.030
1.01:174
NFPA 288 Standard Methods of Fire Tests of
Floor Fire Door Assemblies
Installed Horizontally in Fire
Resistance-Rated Floor Systems,
2007 edition
NFPA 289 Standard Method of Fire Test for
Individual Fuel Packages, 2009
edition
NFPA 302 Fire Protection Standard for
Pleasure and Commercial Motor
Craft, 2010 edition
NFPA 303 Fire Protection Standard for
Marinas and Boatyards, 2011
edition
NFPA 307 Standard for the Construction and
Fire Protection of Marine
Terminals, Piers, and Wharves,
2011 edition
NFPA 312 Standard for Fire Protection of
Vessels During Construction,
Conversion, Repair, and Lay-Up,
2011 edition
NFPA 318 Standard for the Protection of
Semiconductor Fabrication
Facilities, 2012 edition
NFPA 326 Standard for the Safeguarding of
Tanks and Containers for Entry,
Cleaning, or Repair, 2010 edition
NFPA 385 Standard for Tank Vehicles for
Flammable and Combustible
Liquids, 2007 edition
NFPA 400 Hazardous Materials Code, 2010
edition
NFPA 407 Standard for Aircraft Fuel
Servicing, 2012 edition
NFPA 408 Standard for Aircraft Hand
Portable Fire Extinguishers, 2010
edition
NFPA 409 Standard on Aircraft Hangars,
2011 edition
NFPA 410 Standard on Aircraft
Maintenance, 2010 edition
§ 7.03.030 CODE ADOPTION § 7.03.030
1.01:175
NFPA 415 Standard on Airport Terminal
Buildings, Fueling Ramp
Drainage, and Loading Walkways,
2008 edition
NFPA 418 Standard for Heliports, 2011
edition
NFPA 430 Code for the Storage of Liquid and
Solid Oxidizers, 2004 edition
NFPA 432 Code for the Storage of Organic
Peroxide Formulations, 2002
edition
NFPA 434 Code for the Storage of Pesticides,
2002 edition
NFPA 472 Standard for Competence of
Responders to Hazardous
Materials/Weapons of Mass
Destruction Incidents, 2008
edition
NFPA 484 Standard for Combustible Metals,
2012 edition
NFPA 490 Code for the Storage of
Ammonium Nitrate, 2002 edition
NFPA 495 Explosive Materials Code, 2010
edition
NFPA 498 Standard for Safe Havens and
Interchange Lots for Vehicles
Transporting Explosives, 2010
edition
NFPA 501 Standard on Manufactured
Housing, 2010 edition
NFPA 501A Standard for Fire Safety Criteria
for Manufactured Home
Installations, Sites, and
Communities, 2009 edition
NFPA 505 Fire Safety Standard for Powered
Industrial Trucks Including Type
Designations, Areas of Use,
Conversions, Maintenance, and
Operations, 2011 edition
NFPA 560 Standard for the Storage,
Handling, and Use of Ethylene
Oxide for Sterilization and
Fumigation, 2007 edition
§ 7.03.030 GRAFTON CODE § 7.03.030
1.01:176
NFPA 601 Standard for Security Services in
Fire Loss Prevention, 2010 edition
NFPA 654 Standard for the Prevention of
Fire and Dust Explosions from the
Manufacturing, Processing, and
Handling of Combustible
Particulate Solids, 2006 edition
NFPA 655 Standard for Prevention of Sulfur
Fires and Explosions, 2007 edition
NFPA 664 Standard for the Prevention of
Fires and Explosions in Wood
Processing and Woodworking
Facilities, 2012 edition
NFPA 701 Standard Methods of Fire Tests
for Flame Propagation of Textiles
and Films, 2010 edition
NFPA 703 Standard for Fire Retardant-
Treated Wood and Fire-Retardant
Coatings for Building Materials,
2012 edition
NFPA 704 Standard System for the
Identification of the Hazards of
Materials for Emergency
Response, 2012 edition
NFPA 750 Standard on Water Mist Fire
Protection Systems, 2010 edition
NFPA 801 Standard for Fire Protection for
Facilities Handling Radioactive
Materials, 2008 edition
NFPA 909 Code for the Protection of Cultural
Resource Properties — Museums,
Libraries, and Places of Worship,
2010 edition
NFPA 914 Code for Fire Protection of
Historic Structures, 2010 edition
NFPA 1031 Standard for Professional
Qualifications for Fire Inspector
and Plan Examiner, 2009 edition
NFPA 1122 Code for Model Rocketry, 2008
edition
NFPA 1123 Code for Fireworks Display, 2010
edition
§ 7.03.030 CODE ADOPTION § 7.03.030
1.01:177
NFPA 1124 Code for the Manufacture,
Transportation, Storage, and
Retail Sales of Fireworks and
Pyrotechnic Articles, 2006 edition
NFPA 1125 Code for the Manufacture of
Model Rocket and High Power
Rocket Motors, 2012 edition
NFPA 1126 Standard for the Use of
Pyrotechnics Before a Proximate
Audience, 2011 edition
NFPA 1127 Code for High Power Rocketry,
2008 edition
NFPA 1142 Standard on Water Supplies for
Suburban and Rural Fire Fighting,
2012 edition
NFPA 1144 Standard for Reducing Structure
Ignition Hazards from Wildland
Fire, 2008 edition.
NFPA 1192 Standard on Recreational
Vehicles, 2011 edition.
NFPA 1194 Standard for Recreational Vehicle
Parks and Campgrounds, 2011
edition.
NFPA 1600® Standard on Disaster/Emergency
Management and Business
Continuity Programs, 2010
edition.
NFPA 1963 Standard for Fire Hose
Connections, 2009 edition.
NFPA 2001 Standard on Clean Agent Fire
Extinguishing Systems, 2012
edition.
NFPA 5000® Building Construction and Safety
Code®, 2012 edition.
B. Copies of the National Fire Prevention Association codes and
publications are available from:
§ 7.03.030 GRAFTON CODE § 7.03.030
1.01:178
Chapter 7.04
FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS
§ 7.04.010. Fire alarm systems.
National Fire Protection Association
1 Batterymarch Park
Quincy, Massachusetts 02169-7471
Tel: 617-770-3000
Sales/Member Services: 800-344-3555 or 617-770-3000
Fax: 617-770-0700
A. Intent. The intent of this section is to provide a means for automatic
detection of fire conditions and/or to provide warning notification
throughout all buildings and occupancies built hereinafter, structurally
altered, and/or added to. Fire alarm systems are intended to provide
additional life safety and help reduce property loss through early
detection of fires, providing warning to occupants and automatically
notifying the Fire Department of fire.
B. Code compliance. All fire alarm systems installed, modified, altered
and/or repaired shall comply with this chapter and all of the applicable
NFPA codes and/or standards.
C. Minimum system requirements. Minimum system requirements shall
include:
1. Audible notification appliances shall be installed throughout
protected premises.
2. Visible notification appliances shall be installed throughout
protected premises, except for the following:
a. Closets and/or other similar small storage rooms that do not
exceed 50 square feet in floor area and are not normally
occupied.
b. Normally unoccupied crawl spaces.
c. Normally unoccupied attic spaces.
d. Any nonaccessible area.
e. Any area for which the AHJ deems visible notification
appliances are not required.
§ 7.03.030 CODE ADOPTION § 7.04.010
1.01:179
3. Manual initiating devices (pull stations) shall be located at all
points of egress, including all exit doors on every floor and/or
building level.
4. Water flow detection devices shall be connected to the fire alarm
system to specifically activate the notification appliances upon
water flow.
5. Fire suppression system activation alarms shall be connected to the
protected premises' fire alarm system to specifically activate the
notification appliances upon system activation. This includes but is
not limited to wet chemical, CO2, clean agent, water mist and dry
chemical systems.
6. Fire control and/or suppression systems' supervisory condition
indicators shall be connected to and monitored by the fire alarm
system. This specifically includes but is not limited to valve
supervisory switches (tamper switches), high air switches, low air
switches, high water level switches, low water switches, low
temperature switches, low water temperature switches, fire pump
condition indicators and/or any other situation or condition deemed
necessary by the AHJ.
7. Fire alarm systems shall be addressable and capable of indicating
the status of all specific components connected to the system.
8. All fire alarm systems shall be monitored by a service acceptable to
the AHJ.
9. Fire alarm annunciators shall be installed in all protected premises.
The number and locations of the fire alarm annunciators installed
shall be acceptable to the AHJ.
10. As determined by the AHJ, any additional notification and/or
initiation appliances/devices may be required due to size,
occupancy hazards, building construction, and/or occupancy use.
11. The wiring class and style must be acceptable to the AHJ.
12. The wiring class and style required will vary depending on the type
of construction, occupancy, building height and/or building size.
D. Any components that are added to, monitored by or integrated in any
fashion to an approved fire alarm system, shall be approved by the AHJ.
These items would include, but not limited to:
1. Panic or duress alarms.
2. Area of rescue phones.
3. Building lockdown alarms.
E. Permit required. Any modification as described in § 7.04.010 requires a
fire protection permit.
§ 7.04.010 GRAFTON CODE § 7.04.010
1.01:180
§ 7.04.020. Automatic fire sprinkler, fire control and/or fire
suppression system protection.
F. Submittals for fire alarm systems. Submittals for fire alarm systems are
intended to provide basic information consistent with the objective of
installing a fully operational, code-compliant fire alarm system and to
provide the basis for the record drawings required by NFPA 72.
Conditional approval of a fire alarm system submittal and/or any
portion thereof is not intended to imply waiver or modification of any
requirements of any code or any other applicable criteria.
G. The quantity of each fire alarm submittal shall be designated on the
Village of Grafton "Fire Protection Plan Review Submittal Notice and
FAQ's" document, available from the Village of Grafton Building
Inspection Department. The municipality may retain two copies of each
submittal, and the remaining copies will be returned to the installing
contractor.
A. Intent. The intent of this section is to require the installation of
automatic fire sprinkler, fire control and/or fire suppression systems to
improve the protection of life and property within the municipality. It
will establish a minimum standard for fire safety through the
standardization of the design, installation, testing and maintenance
requirements for automatic fire sprinkler suppression.
B. Code compliance. All automatic fire sprinkler fire control and/or fire
suppression systems installed, modified, altered and/or repaired shall
comply with this chapter and all of the applicable NFPA codes and/or
standards.
C. Code conflicts. If any conflicts exist between this chapter and any NFPA
code and/or standard, the most restrictive, as determined by the AHJ,
shall be enforced by the AHJ.
D. Working plans. Working plans shall be submitted to the AHJ for review
and conditional approval before any equipment is installed, modified or
remodeled.
E. Deviation from conditionally approved plans shall require permission of
the AHJ.
F. All working plans submitted for conditional approval must be signed
and sealed by at least one of the following:
1. An architect registered in the State of Wisconsin.
2. An engineer registered in the State of Wisconsin.
3. A person who holds a designer of engineering systems permit in the
State of Wisconsin.
4. The individual who holds a valid automatic fire sprinkler
contractor's license and is responsible for the system installation.
§ 7.04.010 CODE ADOPTION § 7.04.020
1.01:181
G. Working plans shall be drawn to an indicated scale, on sheets of
uniform size, with a plan of each floor, and shall show those items from
the following list that pertain to the design of the system and any that
NFPA 13 and/or the AHJ may require:
1. Name of owner.
2. Name of occupant.
3. Location, including street address.
4. Point of compass.
5. Occupant load of all areas
6. Full height cross section, or schematic diagram, including
structural member information.
7. Ceiling construction.
8. Elevation of the sprinklers relative to the ceiling.
9. Method of protection for nonmetallic piping.
10. Minimum clearance required from the sprinkler deflectors to the
top of storage.
11. Location of partitions.
12. Location of firewalls.
13. Occupancy class of each area or room.
14. All storage information, limits and exact configurations shall be on
the working drawings prepared by the automatic fire sprinkler
contractor.
15. Hazard classification for each protected area.
16. All special occupancy protection areas.
17. All storage limits based on the sprinkler system design criteria,
including the following:
a. The storage high limit for each different commodity class.
b. The storage arrangement for each different commodity class
and/or special occupancy hazard arrangements, including the
following:
1. Storage method (solid pile, shelf, rack or other).
2. Minimum aisle widths for all rack storage and where
required.
§ 7.04.020 GRAFTON CODE § 7.04.020
1.01:182
3. Minimum required clearance from overhead fire sprinkler
deflectors.
4. Minimum required clearance from in-rack fire sprinkler
deflectors.
5. Minimum required transverse flue space.
6. Minimum required longitudinal flue space.
7. Pile stability.
8. Storage array.
9. Any other information the AHJ deems necessary to
determine compliance with the applicable NFPA code and/
or standard.
c. All special occupancy restrictions and/or limits contained in
the applicable NFPA code and/or standard.
18. Location and size of concealed spaces.
19. Location and size of combustible concealed spaces.
20. Closets.
21. Attics.
22. Bathrooms.
23. Any small enclosures in which no sprinklers are to be installed.
24. Size of Village main in street.
25. Whether Village main in street is dead end or circulating.
26. Direction and distance to nearest circulating main.
27. Village main water flow test results.
28. System elevation relative to test hydrant.
29. Other sources of water supply, with pressure or elevation.
30. Make, type, model, and nominal K-factor of sprinklers, including
sprinkler identification number.
31. Temperature rating of all sprinklers.
32. Total area protected by each system.
33. Total area protected by each system on each floor.
34. Number of sprinklers on each riser per floor.
35. Total number of sprinklers on each wet system.
§ 7.04.020 CODE ADOPTION § 7.04.020
1.01:183
36. Total number of sprinklers on each dry pipe system.
37. Total number of sprinklers on each preaction system.
38. Total number of sprinklers on each combined dry pipe-preaction
system.
39. Total number of sprinklers on each deluge system.
40. Approximate capacity in gallons of each dry pipe system.
41. Approximate capacity in gallons of each preaction system.
42. Pipe type and inside diameter.
43. Nominal pipe size and cutting lengths of pipe (or center-to-center
dimensions).
44. Location and size of riser nipples.
45. Type of fittings and joints.
46. Location of all welds and bends.
47. The contractor shall specify on drawings any sections to be shop
welded and the type of fittings or formations to be used.
48. Type and locations of hangers.
49. Locations of sleeves.
50. Locations of braces, and methods of securing sprinklers.
51. All control valves.
52. All check valves.
53. All drain valves and pipes.
54. All test connections.
55. Make, type, model, and size of alarm valve.
56. Make, type, model, and size of dry pipe valve.
57. Make, type, model, and size of preaction.
58. Make, type, model, and size of deluge valve.
59. Type and location of alarm bells.
60. Size and location of standpipe risers.
61. Size and location of hose outlets.
62. Size and location of hand hose.
63. Size and location of monitor nozzles, and related equipment.
§ 7.04.020 GRAFTON CODE § 7.04.020
1.01:184
64. Private fire service main sizes, lengths, locations, materials, point
of connection to Village main; the sizes, types and locations of
valves, valve indicators, regulators, meters, and valve pits; and the
depth of cover.
65. Piping provisions for flushing.
66. Where the equipment is to be installed as an addition to an existing
system, enough of the existing system indicated on the plans to
make all conditions clear to the AHJ.
67. For hydraulically designed systems, the information on the
hydraulic data nameplate, including the following:
a. System design requirements, including hazard and/or
occupancy classification.
b. Design area of water application in square feet or minimum
number of sprinklers designed to operate at one time.
c. Minimum rate of water application (density), gpm/square foot
or minimum flow rate per sprinkler in gpm.
d. Area per sprinkler in square feet.
e. Total water demand requirements as calculated, including
allowance for inside hose, outside hydrants, in-rack sprinklers,
water curtains and exposure sprinklers in gpm.
f. Limitations (spacing, flow, and pressure) on extended coverage
or other listed special sprinklers.
68. A graphic representation of the scale used on all plans.
69. Name and address of installing fire sprinkler contractor.
70. Phone number of installing fire sprinkler contractor.
71. State of Wisconsin automatic fire sprinkler contractor's license
number.
72. Hydraulic reference points shown on the plan that correspond with
comparable reference points on the hydraulic calculation sheets.
73. The minimum rate of water application (density), the design area of
water application, in-rack sprinkler demand, and the water
required for hose streams both inside and outside.
74. The total quantity of water and the pressure required noted at a
common reference point for each system.
75. Who determined the design criteria.
76. Relative elevations of sprinklers, junction points, and water supply
or reference points.
§ 7.04.020 CODE ADOPTION § 7.04.020
1.01:185
77. If the room design method is used, all unprotected wall openings
throughout the floor protected.
78. Calculation of loads for sizing and details of sway bracing.
79. The setting for pressure-reducing valves.
80. Information about backflow preventers (manufacturer, size, type).
81. Information about antifreeze solution used (type and amount).
82. Size and location of hydrants, showing size and number of outlets
and if outlets are to be equipped with independent gate valves.
Whether hose houses and equipment are to be provided, and by
whom, shall be indicated.
83. Static and residual hydrants that were used in flow tests shall be
shown.
84. Size, location, and piping arrangement of Fire Department
connections.
85. The working plan submittal shall include the manufacturer's
installation instructions for any specially listed equipment,
including descriptions, applications, and limitations for any
sprinklers, devices, piping, or fittings.
86. The maximum spacing allowed for each type of sprinkler being
used based on the square footage used to determine the minimum
flow rate for the hydraulic calculations.
87. The size, make, type and model of the backflow device.
88. Any other information the AHJ deems necessary to be on the
working plans.
89. The working plan(s) for all specific occupancies shall include the
following:
a. The specific hazard the system is intended to protect.
b. The specific NFPA standard and/or code the system design
criterian is contained in.
c. The specific NFPA standard and/or code section the system
design criteria is contained in.
d. The maximum storage height of the commodity being
protected.
e. The method of storage rack, solid pile, shelf or other.
f. The maximum ceiling height in the building and/or structure.
g. All aisles in the storage area.
§ 7.04.020 GRAFTON CODE § 7.04.020
1.01:186
h. All required flue spaces, transverse, longitudinal, and/or
between piles.
i. Any minimum clearance requirements between commodities.
j. Any minimum clearance requirements between incompatible
commodities and/or materials.
k. The required minimum clearance between the sprinkler
deflectors and the top of storage.
l. All storage information, limits and exact configurations shall be
on the working drawings prepared by the automatic fire
sprinkler contractor.
90. Water supply capacity information. The following information shall
be included:
a. Location and elevation of static and residual test gauge with
relation to the riser reference point.
b. Flow location.
c. Static pressure, psi (bar).
d. Residual pressure, psi (bar).
e. Flow, gpm (L/min).
f. Date.
g. Time.
h. Test conducted by or information supplied by.
i. Other sources of water supply, with pressure or elevation.
H. All automatic fire sprinkler, fire control and/or fire suppression systems
shall comply with the following:
1. Be designed in accordance with the appropriate NFPA standards
and/or codes.
2. Be designed after a complete and correct owner's certificate, using
a form acceptable to the AHJ, has been obtained from the building
owner.
3. Be designed to protect the highest hazard present at any time in
the protected area.
4. Be monitored by a UL-listed central station for fire service that is
acceptable to the AHJ.
5. Have sprinkler control rooms located with adequate access for Fire
Department, sprinkler maintenance and inspection personnel, and
§ 7.04.020 CODE ADOPTION § 7.04.020
1.01:187
shall not be located within private dwellings with the exception of
NFPA 13D systems.
6. Have direct access from the exterior to the sprinkler control valve
acceptable to the AHJ.
7. Have a horn and strobe installed, located above the FDC.
8. The FDC must be located at least 40 feet from all gas meters,
electrical meters and transformers or as designated by the AHJ.
9. The FDC must be installed in a location acceptable to the AHJ, and
must be within 150 feet of a fire hydrant, unless otherwise
designated by the AHJ.
10. Be designed for the hazard being protected or as specifically
specified in this chapter and/or as acceptable to the AHJ.
11. All automatic fire sprinkler systems' hydraulic designs are to be
based on a maximum of 90% of the available water supply. (A
minimum of a 10% safety margin shall be maintained.)
12. All sprinkler systems designed shall be based on the most current
water flow test conducted in accordance with NFPA 291 that is
acceptable to the AHJ.
13. The AHJ must witness all water flow tests.
14. Have all working drawings with all required hydraulic calculations
prepared by the installing contractor and submitted to the AHJ for
review and conditional approval.
15. Include a complete and correct owner's certificate with the
approval submittal.
16. The owner's certificate must contain all information required by the
AHJ.
17. All storage information, limits and exact configurations shall be on
the working drawings prepared by the automatic fire sprinkler
contractor.
18. Be conditionally approved prior to any portion of the system being
installed.
I. Maintenance of equipment.
1. Sprinkler systems which have been installed in compliance with a
permit or order, or because of any law or code, or have been
installed for any other reason, shall be maintained in operative
condition at all times. No owner or occupant shall reduce the
effectiveness of the protection so required; except this provision
shall not prohibit the owner or occupant from temporarily reducing
or disconnecting the protection system when making necessary
§ 7.04.020 GRAFTON CODE § 7.04.020
1.01:188
repairs, alterations or additions when a permit has been issued or
permission has been granted by the AHJ.
2. The AHJ shall be notified before repairs, alterations or additions
are started and shall be notified again when the system has been
restored to service.
3. The AHJ shall determine if a permit and/or a submittal and review
are required for any modifications and/or additions to any system.
4. The AHJ shall issue a permit and a conditional approval prior to any
modifications and/or additions to any system.
5. Inspections and maintenance of all systems shall be performed by
an approved agent, pursuant to the NFPA procedures and
requirements listed within this code. The property owner/occupant
and sprinkler inspector shall immediately notify the Fire
Department of any deficiencies found.
6. A service contract is required for annual service of the sprinkler
system according to NFPA 25. This will be required prior to
obtaining an occupancy permit on all newly constructed and
existing buildings.
7. A service contract is required for the monitoring of systems where
monitoring is required.
8. The latest annual test report must be posted at the riser or a
location acceptable to the AHJ.
J. Application to existing buildings.
1. Where the AHJ finds that an existing building, because of current
occupancy or a change in occupancy, constitutes a hazard to its
occupants or adjoining property, the AHJ may order compliance
with the provisions of this section. A hazard shall be determined by
the existence of one or more of the following conditions:
a. Any building which by reason of its construction or highly
combustible occupancy involves a hazard to its occupants or, in
the judgment of the AHJ, constitutes a fire menace, e.g., paint
shop and other occupancies involving processing, mixing,
storing, and dispensing of volatile liquids or solids.
b. Non-fire-resistive characteristics of a structure.
c. Accumulation of flammable or combustible materials.
d. Lack of accessibility to the premises for firefighting equipment.
e. Substantial number of fire calls or complaints on the premises.
f. Traffic patterns for pedestrian ingress and egress which
require protection under this section.
§ 7.04.020 CODE ADOPTION § 7.04.020
1.01:189
§ 7.04.030. Standpipes.
g. Insufficient ventilation system.
h. Lack of an internal communication system, or due to the size or
type of building making regular Fire Department radio
communication inoperable, the building owner is required to
install a repeater system or something comparable to assist
radio communications.
i. Number, characteristics and movement of employees which
require protection under this section.
2. Installation of an automatic sprinkler system must be started
within one year from the service of such orders and shall be
completed within 180 days after construction has started.
K. Exemptions. At any location where the installation of sprinklers may
cause or increase an occupational hazard as determined by any
governmental authority having jurisdiction over such location or
occupation, the AHJ may waive any requirement to install an automatic
fire sprinkler system or any portion thereof.
L. Remote Fire Department connections.
1. The AHJ is authorized to require a remote Fire Department
connection (FDC) to be installed for any system and facility for
which the AHJ deems it necessary.
2. All remote FDCs must be installed in a location that is acceptable to
the AHJ.
3. All remote FDCs must be installed in a manner that is acceptable to
the AHJ.
4. All remote FDCs, including all piping, must be tested
hydrostatically and flushed in a manner that is acceptable to the
AHJ.
M. Inspections and acceptance testing.
1. The AHJ or the AHJ's authorized representative shall conduct rough
and final inspections of all systems.
2. The AHJ or the AHJ's authorized representative shall witness all
acceptance testing of all systems and portions thereof.
A. Intent. The intent of this section is to require Fire Department
standpipe systems to be installed in structures to help firefighters
effectively extinguish a fire and help reduce property damage and
losses.
B. Installation requirements. Fire Department standpipes shall be
designed and installed in accordance with this section. Where any
§ 7.04.020 GRAFTON CODE § 7.04.030
1.01:190
requirement in this section is more restrictive than any NFPA standard
and/or code and/or state code, the requirements in this section must be
complied with.
1. The installation of standpipes shall be in accordance with this
section and NFPA 14.
2. The class and location of standpipes and Fire Department
connections shall be acceptable to the AHJ.
3. All standpipe systems' hydraulic designs are to be based on a
maximum of 90% of the available water supply. (A minimum of a
10% safety margin shall be maintained.)
4. The location of standpipe hose connections shall be accessible and
shall be located so that all portions of the building are within 100
feet of hose attached to a hose valve. This distance must be
measured using the normal aisles or the path a hose would be laid
as determined by the AHJ.
5. The locations of all hose valves shall be acceptable to the AHJ.
6. The AHJ may require additional standpipes and/or hose valves to be
installed.
7. When required by the AHJ, an approved standpipe shall be installed
as construction progresses to make it available for Fire Department
use in the topmost floors constructed. Temporary standpipes shall
be provided in place of permanent standpipes when required
during the period of construction on buildings required by this
chapter.
8. The location of all Fire Department connections for standpipes
shall be approved by the AHJ.
9. The Fire Department connections shall be located at least 40 feet
from all electrical transformers, gas meters, or propane storage,
unless otherwise approved by the AHJ.
10. Temporary standpipes are required on buildings over two stories in
height.
11. All manual wet and all automatic standpipes must have water-flow
switches and alarm test connections.
C. Approval requirements. Complete plans and calculations for all
standpipes must be submitted to the Fire Department and conditionally
approved prior to installation of any standpipe.
D. Permit requirement. The Fire Department must issue a permit to install
all standpipes prior to installation.
E. Remote Fire Department connections.
§ 7.04.030 CODE ADOPTION § 7.04.030
1.01:191
§ 7.04.040. Fire hydrants.
1. The AHJ is authorized to require a remote Fire Department
connection (FDC) to be installed for any system and facility for
which the AHJ deems it necessary.
2. All remote FDCs must be installed in a location that is acceptable to
the AHJ.
3. All remote FDCs must be installed in a manner that is acceptable to
the AHJ.
4. All remote FDCs, including all piping, must be tested
hydrostatically and flushed in a manner that is acceptable to the
AHJ.
F. Inspections and acceptance testing.
1. The AHJ or the AHJ's authorized representative shall conduct rough
and final inspections of all systems.
2. The AHJ or the AHJ's authorized representative shall witness all
acceptance testing of all systems and portions thereof.
A. Location. Any tank farm, lumberyard, commercial or industrial
complex, any structure or building now existing or hereafter erected, or
structurally altered to increase the floor area by 50% or more, shall
provide, at the owner's expense, an approved water hydrant when such
building is set back 250 feet or more from any street or highway or is
located more than 300 feet from a Village water hydrant. Required
hydrants shall be freestanding and shall be located not more than 50
feet or less than 25 feet from the building. Additional hydrants shall be
provided around the perimeter of the building so that no water hydrant
is more than 300 feet from any other approved hydrant by normal
access routes. All water hydrants shall be located within 10 feet of an
all-weather road and be accessible at all times to the Fire Department.
The water pipe serving the hydrant shall not be less than six inches in
diameter.
B. Access to hydrants. The Village, or its employees, agents or assigns,
shall have access, without advance notice to the owner, manager, or
tenant of the property upon which a hydrant is located, to any fire
hydrant located on private property for inspections, maintenance, and/
or repairs. No person or entity shall impede or refuse the Village's
access to a fire hydrant on private property.
C. Inspections and routine maintenance. Such maintenance, repairs, or
inspections of hydrants on private property shall include, but not be
limited to, performing a minimum of two hydrant flushings and valve
exercising inspections per year, painting, inspections, investigation of
citizen complaints, investigation of any other deficiency, and to ensure
§ 7.04.030 GRAFTON CODE § 7.04.040
1.01:192
Chapter 7.05
INVESTIGATION OF FIRES; POLICE POWERS
§ 7.05.010. Investigation of fires; police powers.
each fire hydrant is maintained and operated in accordance with all
applicable laws, rules and regulations.
D. Additional repairs. Upon determination by the Village of any issue with
a fire hydrant on private property that requires correction to ensure the
proper working order of the hydrant, the Village shall provide the
property owner copies of the inspection findings and a directive to take
specified corrective action within a specified, reasonable time frame as
determined by the Village Engineer. If the property owner does not
complete the specified corrective action by the deadline specified by
the Village Engineer, such corrective action shall be undertaken by the
Village. If the corrective action is undertaken by the Village, the owner
of the private property on which the fire hydrant is located shall be
liable for all costs and expenses incurred by the Village for the
corrective action, including but not limited to the cost of any materials
and the actual labor cost incurred by the Village, through its employees,
agents, or subcontractors.
E. Emergency repairs. Upon determination by the Village of any issue with
a fire hydrant located on private property, which requires immediate
correction due to an immediate adverse effect on property owners,
public safety, or public health, the corrective action shall be undertaken
by the Village without advance notice to the property owner, and the
property owner shall be liable for all costs and expenses incurred by the
Village for the corrective action.
F. Multiple property owners. If a fire hydrant is located on an out lot
owned collectively by multiple owners or an owners' association, or if
the private fire hydrant serves multiple owners of real estate within the
private property, any charges incurred under this section may be
charged to each owner or member of the owners association according
to the ownership interest in the fire hydrant located on the property.
G. Nonpayment by owner. In addition to, and not to the exclusion or
prejudice of other remedies available to the Village, if the property
owner fails to pay the Village for any costs of repairs, maintenance or
corrective action performed by the Village, all or any portion of the cost
of such work shall be charged against the property as a special charge
pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes Section 66.0627.
A. The Fire Department shall investigate the cause and origin, and
circumstances, of fires occurring within their jurisdiction to determine
if the fire was caused by carelessness or design. Such investigations
may begin immediately upon the occurrence of such a fire. The AHJ
§ 7.04.040 CODE ADOPTION § 7.05.010
1.01:193
§ 7.05.020. Citation authority.
shall notify the proper authorities designated by law to pursue the
investigation of such matters and shall further cooperate with the
authorities in the collection of evidence and in the prosecution of
the case. A member of the fire investigation team shall file a written
report of damage associated with every fire in a timely manner. It shall
contain a statement of all facts relating to the cause and origin and
circumstances of such fire and other information as may be required.
B. The Municipal Attorney and any other department of the municipality,
upon the request of the Fire Chief, shall assist in the investigation of
any fire that, in the Chief's opinion, is of suspicious origin.
C. Any officer of the Fire Department may cause the arrest of any person
failing to give the right-of-way to the Fire Department in responding to
or investigating an incident.
D. The Fire Chief or officers in command may prescribe certain limits in
the vicinity of any incident within which no persons, excepting
firefighters and police officers and those admitted by order of any
officer of the Fire Department, shall be permitted to enter.
E. The Fire Chief or officers in command shall have the power to cause the
removal of any property whenever it is deemed necessary and prudent
for the preservation of such property. During the progress of any fire,
they shall have the power to cause the removal of all wires or other
facilities and the turning off of all electricity or other services where the
same impedes work of the Fire Department during the progress of fire.
F. It shall be lawful for any Fire Department personnel, while acting under
the direction of the Fire Chief or officer in command, to enter premises
adjacent to or in the vicinity of a building or other property that is on
fire for the purpose of extinguishing, containing, or searching for
extension of such fire or other exigent circumstances.
G. During the progress of fire, the Fire Chief or officers in command shall
have the power to order the removal or destruction of any property
necessary to prevent the further spread of fire or to ensure that the fire
has not extended to other areas, providing that it is likely that, unless
such property is removed, other property is in danger of being
destroyed by fire.
H. No person shall hinder, resist or obstruct any firefighter in the
discharge of his duties as provided in this section. The person so
offending shall be deemed guilty of resisting firefighters in the
discharge of their duties.
A. Any Fire Department officer, Fire Inspector or Village official charged
with the responsibility for enforcement of this chapter is authorized to
issue citations for a violation of this chapter pursuant to Chapter 1.12 of
this Municipal Code.
§ 7.05.010 GRAFTON CODE § 7.05.020
1.01:194
Chapter 7.06
BUILDING ACCESS AND SAFETY
§ 7.06.010. Placement of addresses; door; floor and stairway
identification.
B. Citations may be issued to a property owner, contractor, occupant, or
any or all of them, as appropriate under the circumstances.
A. Placement of addresses. Addresses shall be placed on all structures or
property, including all one- and two-family dwellings, supporting the
same as follows:
1. Posting during and after construction.
a. During construction. The address of a building under
construction shall be prominently posted on the property.
b. The address of a completed building shall be permanently
affixed to the building as provided in this section.
c. The address tiles shall be continuously maintained to be clearly
readable, and in the event that replacement is required, the
owner may obtain duplicate address tiles from the Building
Inspector.
2. Description of numbers and letters.
a. Numbers and letters shall be of contrasting colors (e.g., black
and white) and readable from the road or highway. Arabic
numbers shall be used; script and roman numerals cannot be
used alone, but may be used as an addition to the requirements
of this section.
b. Numbers and letters shall be visible from the roadway, of
which the building is addressed, at all times of the year.
c. Numbers and letters shall be a minimum of 3 1/2 inches by 2 1/
4 inches in size. The size shall be increased if the requirements
of § 7.06.010A2b are not met.
3. Multifamily requirements. All multifamily buildings shall have
street numbers placed on the exterior of the principal building that
faces the street, service drive or parking lot and located adjacent to
the individual unit entrances to the buildings.
a. If the Fire Department determines additional signage is
required to guide Emergency Services to the building, those
signs shall be approved by the Fire Department and installed in
a location approved by the Fire Department.
4. Commercial and industrial requirements.
§ 7.05.020 CODE ADOPTION § 7.06.010
1.01:195
§ 7.06.020. Fire department access roads and fire lanes.
a. All suite numbers that identify each individual unit shall be
placed on the primary entrance to each business or occupancy.
b. All commercial or industrial structures that have a rear service
door shall identify the occupant and the street address
conspicuously on said rear door in contrasting and reflective
letters and/or numbers not less than six inches in height, and
shall continually maintain the same.
B. Door, floor and stairway identification. Any occupancy having more
than five exterior means of egress and/or more than two floors in height
shall number the individual egress areas according to this section:
1. An identifying number shall be placed on the interior and exterior
of each means of egress doorway not less than four inches high in
contrasting color and light reflective. The main entrance or means
of egress shall be numbered one, with each additional means of
egress progressing clockwise around the exterior of the structure
to reflect its relationship to the main entrance. All means of egress
leading into the structure shall be numbered, not just the required
exit egresses.
2. Each interior door providing access to an enclosed stairway that is
considered part of an accessible means of egress shall be identified
with numbers and letters not less than 3 1/2 inches high in the
following manner:
a. Have a sign indicating floor level posted on both sides of the
egress door in a location acceptable to the AHJ.
b. Have a sign indicating the exterior exit door egress assigned in
compliance with § 07.06.010B2 located on both sides of the
egress door in a location acceptable to the AHJ.
A. Unobstructed fire lanes that are accessible from a public road shall be
provided for every building or portion of a building in accordance with
this chapter and Ch. SPS 362, Wis. Adm. Code.
B. Fire lanes shall have an unobstructed width of 20 feet with the road
edge closest to the building at least 10 feet from the building and a
vertical clearance of not less than 13 feet six inches.
C. It shall be unlawful for any persons to park motor vehicles on, or
otherwise obstruct, any fire lane.
D. Designated fire access roads and fire lanes must be submitted and
conditionally approved prior to issuance of building permits.
E. The Fire Chief or Fire Inspector shall establish fire lanes at any
building, other than one- and two family dwellings, unless those
dwellings are established on private roads.
§ 7.06.010 GRAFTON CODE § 7.06.020
1.01:196
§ 7.06.030. Elevator cars.
F. Fire lanes shall be provided such that any portion of the facility or any
portion of an exterior wall of the first story of the building is located not
more than 150 feet from fire department lane as measured by an
approved route around the exterior of the building or facility. For
buildings over 200 feet long, fire lanes shall be provided for access to
all four sides of the building or group of buildings.
G. Any dead-end fire lane more than 150 feet long shall be provided with a
turnaround area to accommodate the largest vehicle in the Fire
Department's fleet.
H. Vertical clearances or widths shall be increased when vertical
clearances or widths are not adequate to accommodate fire apparatus.
I. All fire lanes shall be marked with freestanding signs, marked curbs,
sidewalks and traffic surfaces with the words "Fire Lane No Parking"
painted in contrasting colors at a size and spacing acceptable to the
Fire Department.
J. Fire department access roads/lanes shall be designed and maintained
to support the imposed loads of fire apparatus and shall be provided
with an all-weather driving surface.
K. Fire access roads and fire lane violations.
1. In any area designated as a fire lane, parking shall be prohibited
and shall result in the issuance of citations pursuant to the Code of
the Village of Grafton.
2. Any vehicle parked in a fire lane shall be towed at the owner's
expense.
3. Any commercially licensed vehicle actively engaged in delivery or
pickup shall be excluded from this subsection.
4. All fire access roads and fire lanes must be maintained by the
owner or occupants at all times.
5. All fire access roads and fire lanes must have snow removed by the
owner or occupants at all times.
A. All required passenger and freight elevators in all buildings and
structures hereinafter constructed, except one- and two-family
residential occupancies, shall:
1. Provide at least one elevator to all floors of such a size and
arrangement to accommodate a twenty-four-inch by eighty-fiveinch
ambulance stretcher in the horizontal, open position.
2. The elevator arranged to accommodate an ambulance stretcher
shall be identified by the star of life. This symbol shall not be less
§ 7.06.020 CODE ADOPTION § 7.06.030
1.01:197
§ 7.06.040. Access box system and other access system components.
than three inches in height and shall be placed on both sides of the
hoistway door frame.
A. An access box system has been adopted for use by the Village of Grafton
Fire Department. The approved access box system is the Knox-Box®.
Approved products for use are available at www.Knox-Box®.com or:
Knox Company
1601 W. Deer Valley Road
Phoenix, AZ 85027
Tel: 800.552.5669
Fax: 623.687.2290
B. The following structures shall be equipped with an access box at or
near the main entrance or in any additional location as required by the
AHJ:
1. Commercial or industrial structures protected by a fire alarm
system, fire control system, fire extinguishing system or fire
suppression system.
2. Any structures that are secured in a way that restricts access
during an emergency.
3. Multifamily residential structures that have restricted access
through locked doors and have any common areas.
4. Nursing homes, CBRFs, child day-care and other health facilities.
5. All educational occupancies.
6. Any location where entry to the property is secured in whole or part
by a fence, gate, wall or connected buildings, or as otherwise
directed by this Department. Entry key override switches shall be
required on any exit door at any location which uses a card reader
entry system and/or a magnetic door lock security system.
7. The AHJ shall have the authority to require any structure or facility
to have an access box installed and maintained.
8. The AHJ shall have the authority to require any structure or facility
to have additional access boxes installed and maintained.
C. All newly constructed structures subject to this section shall have the
access box installed and operational prior to the issuance of an
occupancy permit. All structures in existence on the effective date of
this section and which are subject to this section shall have one year
from the date of being ordered by the AHJ to have an access box
installed to complete installation.
§ 7.06.030 GRAFTON CODE § 7.06.040
1.01:198
§ 7.06.050. Closing and vacating buildings.
D. The owner or agent of a structure required to have an access box shall
keep the following inside the box:
1. A master key or keys to locked points of ingress and egress,
whether on the interior or exterior.
2. The keys to locked mechanical equipment, electrical, and elevator
control rooms.
3. The keys needed to open any alarm panels or other emergency
equipment.
4. Keys to elevator controls.
5. Floor plans or maps as required by the AHJ.
6. The keys to other areas as directed by the AHJ.
E. All items required to be kept in the access box shall be the most
currently used and must be continually updated.
F. The access box shall be installed at the owner's expense.
G. The size and type of access box will be determined by the AHJ.
H. Access gates. All access gates shall have an approved Knox keyed
switch installed to override all controls of the access gate and open the
gate.
I. Compliance. All newly constructed buildings, not yet occupied buildings
currently under construction and all buildings or businesses applying
for a certificate of occupancy that are subject to this section shall
comply immediately.
J. Ordering. Property owners shall be responsible for all costs of
purchasing and installation of any access box required herein. The
Village of Grafton Fire Department shall not be responsible for ordering
any access box or key override switch or other device required by this
chapter.
K. Maintenance. Property owners shall be responsible for the maintenance
of all access boxes.
A. The AHJ may order compliance with this section and all other lawful
orders or laws relating to fire prevention and fire protection in existing
building and structures.
B. Where the public is exposed to immediate danger, the AHJ shall order
the closing and vacating of the building at once.
§ 7.06.040 CODE ADOPTION § 7.06.060
1.01:199
§ 7.06.060. Securing fire-damaged buildings.
All dwellings and buildings within the municipality damaged from fire shall
be secured within 24 hours of release of the property by the AHJ. The owner
of the damaged property shall assume the liability for the protection of the
public until the property is secured.
Chapter 7.07
REGULATED ACTIVITIES
§ 7.07.010. Careless smoking prohibited.
§ 7.07.020. Fireworks.
A. No person shall smoke or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette, or pipe, or
light a match or other flame-producing device in any retail mercantile
establishment, except in areas approved for such purposes by the AHJ.
It shall be the duty of the person in charge of such an establishment to
enforce the regulations of this section.
B. Smoking shall be prohibited in all rooms or parts of buildings which
contain flammable liquids in open containers or in which flammable
liquids are used in any manufacturing process or where vapors from the
flammable liquids are present or sold.
C. A plainly printed notice of the provisions of this chapter shall be posted
in a conspicuous place in all occupancies. Such printed notice shall also
be posted in any place of public assembly where smoking is prohibited.
D. Smoking or use of flame-producing devices in schools or public
libraries:
1. No person shall light a match or other flame-producing device,
smoke, or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette, or pipe in any school
building or public library except in areas approved for such
purpose by the AHJ. It shall be the duty of the person(s) in charge of
such buildings to post and maintain approved signs bearing the
words "No SMOKING" in locations designated by the AHJ.
2. Sections 101.025(1) and 101.123, Wis. Stats., are hereby adopted
by reference as if fully set forth herein.
A. It is unlawful within the limits of the Village for any person to sell,
expose or offer for sale, use, keep or discharge, or to explode any
firecracker, bottle rocket, cherry bomb, colored smoke bomb, blank
cartridge toy pistol or cannon in which explosives are used,
contrivances using explosive caps or cartridges, display wheels, the
type of balloon which requires fire underneath to propel the same,
firecrackers, torpedoes, sky rockets, roman candles, aerial salutes,
American or Chinese bombs or other fireworks containing any
§ 7.06.060 GRAFTON CODE § 7.07.020
1.01:200
§ 7.07.030. Blasting
explosives of flammable compound, or any tablets or other device
commonly used and sold as fireworks containing nitrates, chlorates,
oxylates, sulphides of lead, barium, antimony, arsenic, mercury,
nitroglycerine, phosphorus, or any compound containing any of the
same or other explosives.
B. Permit required. Fireworks, other than those prohibited by the laws of
the state, may be used and displayed in open fields, public parks,
private parks or rivers, lakes and ponds by public authorities, fair
associations, amusement parks, park boards, civic organizations and
groups of individuals that have been granted permits for such displays
by the Village President. Application for permits shall be filed in writing
with the Village Clerk, who shall refer such applications to the Fire
Chief for review and compliance with applicable codes. Once approved
by the Fire Chief, the application shall refer such application to the
Village President.
C. Permit; bond required. Before any permit for the use or display of
fireworks shall be granted to any applicant, the applicant shall file with
the Village Clerk an indemnity bond in the name of the Village in the
amount of $2,000 with good and sufficient sureties for the payment of
all claims that may arise by reason of injury to persons or property from
the handling, use or discharge of fireworks under such permit.
D. Permit issuance. If the Village President determines that the applicant
will use the fireworks in a public exhibition and that all reasonable
precautions will be exercised with regard to the protection of the lives
and property of all persons, they may issue a permit for the use of
fireworks at the time and place set out in the application.
A. Blasting permit required. All persons or entities who perform blasting
in the Village shall obtain a permit from the Fire Department prior to
storage or use of blasting agents or explosives.
B. Application for a permit may be obtained at the Village Clerks Office.
Applications shall be submitted not less than seven days prior to the
date of such blasting project. No accumulating of blasting agents or
explosives shall be allowed prior to the issuance of the permit. After
review of the application and inspection of the site, a permit shall be
issued or denied at the discretion of the AHJ upon due consideration of
the provisions of this chapter, promotion of public safety and security of
adjoining property. The AHJ reserves the right to reinspect the project
site at any time to ensure public safety.
C. Exemptions from permit requirement. Persons or entities engaged in
the active operation of quarrying activities as a legal, nonconforming,
permissive or special use of land prior to the effective date of this
chapter shall be exempt from the permit requirement hereunder.
§ 7.07.020 CODE ADOPTION § 7.07.040
1.01:201
§ 7.07.040. Burning.
A. Burning restricted. Burning of any kind is restricted as provided in this
section. Bonfires, fire pits, and recreational fires shall comply with the
requirements of NFPA 1.
B. Grills.
1. For other than one- and two-family dwellings, no hibachi, gas-fired
grill, charcoal grill or similar device used for cooking, heating, or
any other purpose shall be used or kindled on any balcony or under
any overhanging portion of a building or within 10 feet of any
structure. Grilling on ground level is permissible, provided that the
grill is at least 10 feet away from any structure. Smoke must not be
a nuisance to neighbors or public roadways.
2. Barbecue grills of any type, kettles, outdoor hibachis, other types of
gas-fueled cooking devices, other than household kitchen
appliances, including, but not limited to, deep fryers (turkey fryers)
and camping stoves. It shall be unlawful to ignite or burn inside any
occupancy, including any residential occupancy or portion thereof,
any type of barbecue grill, kettle, outdoor hibachi, or other type of
gas-fueled cooking device, other than household kitchen
appliances, including, but not limited to, deep fryers and camping
stoves.
3. No flame shall at any time exceed one foot in height over the source
fuel.
C. Portable fire pits.
1. Portable fire pits shall not be used or kindled on any balcony or
under any overhanging portion of a structure or within 25 feet of
any structure unless such fire is contained in an approved manner
which is tested and approved via a nationally recognized testing
organization.
2. Portable fire pits shall be listed by a nationally recognized testing
organization or acceptable to the AHJ.
3. Portable fire pits must be placed on a noncombustible surface.
4. Burning of yard waste, construction waste or other refuse is
prohibited; only clean, dry wood can be used.
5. Flammable or combustible liquids shall not be used to ignite the
fire.
6. Smoke shall be limited and shall not become a nuisance to
neighbors or public roads.
7. No flame shall at any time exceed one foot in height over the source
fuel.
§ 7.07.040 GRAFTON CODE § 7.07.040
1.01:202
§ 7.07.050. Sky lanterns.
Use prohibited. The use of unmanned, free-floating sky lanterns and similar
devices utilizing an open flame shall be prohibited.
§ 7.07.060. Regulation of grass fires.
§ 7.07.070. Tents.
D. Open burning. Open burning is prohibited within the limits of the
Village of Grafton.
1. Exemption: The Fire Department, by the order of the Fire Chief,
may open burn.
E. Bonfires. Bonfires are prohibited within the limits of the Village of
Grafton.
1. Exemption: The Fire Department, by the order of the Fire Chief,
may kindle a bonfire.
F. All fires must be supervised at all times by a competent person who is at
least 18 years of age.
G. A garden hose connected to the water supply or other fire-extinguishing
equipment shall be readily available for use.
H. No fire shall be left unattended.
I. The AHJ shall be authorized to require any fire to be immediately
discontinued if the fire is determined to constitute a hazardous
condition or nuisance.
J. Fire Chief or their designee, authorized to prohibit fires and other
activities. In the event conditions exist within the Village, including but
not limited to excessive dryness, the Fire Chief or their designee, of the
Village of Grafton may, by order issued without notice, prohibit all
burning, fires, fireworks or other activities that may cause a fire to be
kindled or started. Upon the issuance of such order by the Fire Chief or
their designee, it shall be published in the official newspaper and
posted as necessary to give adequate notice to all residents of the
Village. Upon the cessation of said conditions, the Fire Chief or their
designee shall cancel the order.
A. No person shall kindle any grass fire within the limits of the Village of
Grafton.
1. Exemption. The Fire Department, by the order of the Fire Chief,
may kindle a grass fire.
A. No tent or membrane structures exceeding 1,200 square feet in area
shall be erected, maintained or used without a permit within the limits
of the Village of Grafton.
§ 7.07.040 CODE ADOPTION § 7.07.070
1.01:203
§ 7.07.080. Appeals.
Chapter 7.08
FIRE EMERGENCIES
§ 7.08.010. Reporting of fires and other emergencies.
B. All tents or membrane structures shall comply with NFPA 102.
C. All tents or membrane structures that require a permit, require an
inspection by the Fire Department and Building Inspection Department
prior to the use.
A. Whenever the AHJ disapproves an application or refuses to grant a
permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of this
chapter do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of this chapter
has been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may
appeal the decision of the AHJ.
B. Appeals shall be submitted in writing to the Chief of the Fire
Department for a review of the initial determination within 30 days
from the date of the decision of the AHJ.
C. All appeals shall proceed pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes Chapter 68,
Municipal Administrative Procedure.
A. The person discovering any unwanted fire, regardless of magnitude,
shall immediately notify the Fire Department.
B. The owner, manager, occupant, or any person in control of such
building or premises, upon discovery of an unwanted fire or evidence of
a previous unwanted fire that had apparently been extinguished, shall
immediately notify the Fire Department.
C. Persons shall not make, issue, post, or maintain any regulation or order,
written or verbal, that would require any person to take any
unnecessary delaying action prior to reporting a fire to the fire
department.
D. Persons shall not deliberately or maliciously turn in an alarm of fire
when in fact that person knows that no fire exists.
E. Notification of unauthorized discharge of hazardous materials shall be
made to the Fire Department and shall be made immediately when an
unauthorized release becomes reportable under state, federal, or local
regulations.
F. Any person who willfully makes any false, fraudulent, misleading, or
unfounded report or statement or willfully misrepresents any fact with
the intention of misleading any Fire Department personnel or who
§ 7.07.070 GRAFTON CODE § 7.08.010
1.01:204
§ 7.08.020. Building evacuation.
§ 7.08.030. Tampering with fire safety equipment.
§ 7.08.040. Entering premises during emergency.
It shall be lawful for any firefighter, while acting under the direction of
the Fire Chief or other officer in charge, to enter the premises adjacent
to or in the vicinity of any building or other property then on fire for the
purpose of extinguishing such fire. In the event any person shall hinder,
resist or obstruct any firefighter in the discharge of his duty as provided
in this section, the person so offending shall be deemed guilty of resisting
firefighters in the discharge of their duty.
§ 7.08.050. Rendering assistance to Fire Department.
interferes with the operation of the fire department shall be in violation
of this Code.
A. Persons shall not fail to leave a building when notified to do so or when
directed by the AHJ as a result of a known or perceived emergency.
B. Persons shall not fail to leave any overcrowded premises when ordered
to do so by the AHJ.
C. Persons shall not fail to leave a building when a fire alarm system is
activated, unless otherwise provided for in an approved building fire
evacuation plan or during routine testing or maintenance.
A. Persons shall not render any portable or fixed fire-extinguishing system
or device or any fire-warning system or device inoperative or
inaccessible.
B. Persons shall not render a fire protection system or device inoperative
during an emergency unless by direction of the Fire Chief or the
incident commander.
C. Persons shall not reset any activated fire alarms without the approval of
the Fire Chief or their designee, unless said alarm was activated for
scheduled maintenance or a scheduled fire drill.
1. All fire alarm and fire protection equipment shall be secured in a
manner approved by the AHJ.
2. Instructions of how to operate a fire alarm and fire protection
systems shall not be posted in a conspicuous location unless
required by other portions of the Code.
D. Persons, except a person authorized by the AHJ, shall not remove,
unlock, destroy, or tamper with in any manner any locked gate, door, or
barricade; chain; enclosure; sign; tag; or seal that has been required by
the AHJ pursuant to this Code.
§ 7.08.010 CODE ADOPTION § 7.08.050
1.01:205
§ 7.08.060. Damaging fire apparatus.
No person shall willfully damage in any manner any hose, hydrant or fire
apparatus belonging to the Fire Department of the Village, and no vehicle
shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the Fire Department when laid
down on any street, private driveway, tract or other place to be used at any
fire or alarm of fire without the consent of the Fire Department official in
charge.
Chapter 7.09
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
§ 7.09.010. Violations and penalties.
A. Every person who shall be present at a fire shall be subject to the orders
of the Fire Chief or other officer in charge, and such person may be
required to render assistance in fighting the fire or removing or
guarding property.
B. Such officer shall have the power to cause the arrest of any person or
persons refusing to obey the orders.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person found to be in
violation of this chapter or any rule or order promulgated hereunder, or
who builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or
plans submitted and conditionally approved hereunder, shall be subject
to a penalty. Each and every 24 hours a violation continues is a separate
offense.
B. Imposition of a penalty for a violation under this chapter shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and such violations or
defects shall be corrected or remedied within the time stated in an
order.
C. Penalty designated. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction of such violation, be subject to a
penalty, which shall be as follows:
1. First offense. Any person who violates any provisions of this
chapter subject to a penalty shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit
not less than $25 nor more than $200, together with the cost of
prosecution. In the event of a failure to pay such forfeiture, where
no showing of indigence is made, the defendant may be imprisoned
for no more than 90 days, as the court deems fit, or until such
judgment is sooner paid.
2. Second offense. Any person found guilty of violating any ordinance
or part of an ordinance codified in this chapter who has previously
been convicted of a violation of the same ordinance within one year
shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $50 nor more
§ 7.08.050 GRAFTON CODE § 7.09.010
1.01:206
Title 8: Health and Safety
Chapter 8.08
DEPUTY HEALTH INSPECTOR
§ 8.08.010. Duties in general.
The Village Deputy Health Inspector shall be the Building Inspector. The
Deputy Health Inspector shall:
than $250 per day for each such offense together with the costs of
prosecution. In the event of a failure to pay such forfeiture, where
no showing of indigence is made, the defendant may be imprisoned
for no more than 90 days, as the court deems fit, or until judgment
is sooner paid.
D. Execution against defendant's property. Whenever any person fails to
pay any forfeiture and costs of prosecution upon the order of the court
for violation of any ordinance of the Village, the court may, in lieu of
ordering imprisonment of the defendant or after the defendant has
been released from custody, issue an execution against the property of
the defendant for such forfeiture and cost.
E. In addition to penalties imposed pursuant to Subsection 1:
1. False alarms. If the Fire Department responds to three or more
false alarms, as defined in § 7.02.010 of this title, in one calendar
year, in addition to the penalties provided in § 7.09.010C of this
Municipal Code, the Fire Department may require that the fire
alarm be serviced, upgraded, or replaced to bring the alarm system
into compliance with current code, solely at the owner's cost, in
order to prevent future false alarms.
2. Failure to apply for permit. Any owner or contractor that begins
installation and/or alteration of any system and/or portion thereof
regulated by this chapter, or proceeds without a permit required
for any other activity, prior to obtaining the required permit, will be
charged a triple fee.
3. Assembly occupancies found over occupant load capacity. Every
person, in any assembly occupancy, found to be over the posted
approved occupant load capacity, shall be considered a separate
violation of this chapter and the occupancy shall be evacuated and
not occupied for a minimum of eight hours.
4. In addition to or as a complete alternative to the penalties set forth
in this section, the Village Board, the Fire Chief, or any person who
would be specifically damaged by a violation of this chapter may
institute appropriate action or proceeding to enjoin a violation of
this chapter.
§ 7.09.010 CODE ADOPTION § 8.08.010
1.01:207
§ 8.08.020. Authority to enter premises; penalties. [Amended by
Ord. No. A-528-89 1989; Ord. No. 012, Series 1994]
The Deputy Health Inspector may, at any reasonable times upon duly
executed written complaint of any person showing reasonable cause, enter
into or inspect any place or vehicle to ascertain health conditions and to
carry out the provisions of this title. Anyone who refuses to allow such
entrance, examination or inspection shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit
not less than $50 nor more than $200, together with the costs of
prosecution. In the event of a failure to pay such forfeiture, where no
showing of indigency is made, the defendant may be imprisoned for no
more than 90 days, as the court deems fit or until such judgment is sooner
paid. The use of residential disposal units installed in accordance with
the requirements of the Plumbing Code and approved by the Plumbing
Inspector shall not be considered a violation of this chapter.
Chapter 8.12
WEED CONTROL
§ 8.12.010. Mowing required.
No person owning, occupying or controlling property within the Village
shall plant or permit to grow or pollinate upon his premises any nuisance
weeds or grasses, as defined in § 23.235, Wis. Stats., or noxious weeds or
grasses, as defined in § 66.0407, Wis. Stats., nor shall such person allow any
grass, weeds or other vegetation, excluding shrubs and trees, to grow to a
height exceeding one foot. In order to prevent such growth and pollination,
it shall be the duty of every property owner or tenant to mow or cause to be
mowed upon the premises which he owns, occupies or controls, all grasses
or weeds exceeding one foot in height, excepting natural lawns as defined
in § 8.12.015.
§ 8.12.015. Natural lawn defined.
For the purpose of § 8.12.010, a natural lawn shall include common species
of grass and wildflowers common to North America, which are designed
and purposely cultivated to be greater than eight inches in height from
the ground. Specifically excluded in natural lawns are noxious grasses and
weeds, as defined in § 23.235, Wis. Stats., or noxious weeds or grasses, as
defined in § 66.0407, Wis. Stats. Natural lawns shall not contain litter or
debris and shall not harbor undesirable wildlife.
A. Enforce the health laws and the rules and regulations of the state and
Village.
B. Keep and deliver to his successor a record of all his official acts.
[Amended by Ord. No. 012, Series 1997]
§ 8.08.010 GRAFTON CODE § 8.12.020
1.01:208
§ 8.12.020. Mowing by Village.
It shall be the duty of the Weed Commissioner to enforce this chapter, and
if any person fails to comply with this chapter he shall be notified by the
Weed Commissioner in writing. Upon failure of such person to comply with
the orders of the Weed Commissioner within 10 days of the date of such
notice, the Weed Commissioner shall cause the premises to be mowed or
cause the weeds to be destroyed above the surface of the ground by use
of chemicals, cutting, or both, at a time and in a manner as will effectually
eliminate the weeds or prevent the weeds from maturing to the bloom
or flower stage. The Weed Commissioner shall report the cost thereof in
writing to the Village Director of Administrative Services in the manner
provided in § 66.0517, Wis. Stats. Such charge shall be placed on the next
tax roll as a tax on the land upon which the grass was mowed or weeds
were destroyed and shall be collected as a real property tax or as a personal
property tax under Chs. 74 and 75, Wis. Stats. In addition to any other
method provided by law, such amount may be imposed as a special charge
for current services against the land pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
Written notice of such special charge shall be mailed to the landowner. A
special charge is not payable in installments. If a special charge is not paid
within 30 days of the date of such notice, the special charge is delinquent
and shall become a lien on the land against which it is imposed as of the
date of the delinquency. A delinquent special charge shall be included in
the current or next tax roll for collection and settlement under Ch. 74, Wis.
Stats.
Chapter 8.16
HAZARDOUS OR INFECTED TREES, PLANTS OR SHRUBS
§ 8.16.010. Removal of hazardous trees, plants, or shrubs.
[Amended 2-18-2019 by Ord. No. 004-201918]
Any tree or part thereof, whether growing upon public or private premises,
which the Director of Public Works determines to be at threat of
endangering the safety, health or welfare of any person while on public
property, shall be removed by the owner of the property upon which such
tree is located. If any trees, plants or shrubs growing within the Village on
private property are found to be detrimental to sewers, sidewalks or other
public improvements, they shall be removed or treated by the owner of the
property upon which such trees, plants or shrubs are located. If the owner
fails to remedy any of the above noted situations within 30 days of written
notice from the Director of Public Works, the Director shall cause any such
trees, plants or shrubs to be removed and shall report the cost of the same
to the Village Clerk, who shall thereupon enter such cost as an assessment
against the property. If the Director of Public Works determines the tree to
be an immediate risk, the property owner shall remove the tree within 24
18.Editor's Note: This ordinance also changed the title of this chapter from "Hazardous or
Infected Trees," to "Hazardous or Infected Trees, Plants or Shrubs."
§ 8.12.020 CODE ADOPTION § 8.16.010
1.01:209
hours of written notice, or the Director shall cause the tree to be removed.
The property owner shall be responsible for such assessment that would
include all costs and expenses incurred by the Village including but not
limited to the cost of any materials, equipment, and actual labor incurred
by the Village, through its employees, agents, or subcontractors. If at any
time an issue of concern is noticed with any tree, plant, or shrub on public
property, the Department of Public Works shall be immediately notified.
Chapter 8.20
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
§ 8.20.010. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. No. 003, Series 1995;
Ord. No. 018, Series 1999]
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
SINGLE-DWELLING CONDOMINIUM — A condominium unit in a
development in which each unit is individually titled and bought and sold on
an individual basis.
SOLID WASTE — Has the meaning specified in § 289.01(33) Wis.
Stats.[Amended by Ord. No. 012, Series 2009]
§ 8.20.020. Depositing refuse prohibited.
No person shall deposit, throw, scatter or place any garbage or other refuse
on or within any public street, alley, park, sidewalk or other public place
or within or upon any private property or premises, whether owned, kept
or controlled by such person or not, except in the manner provided in this
chapter or as directed by the Police Department for the health, safety and
welfare of the Village.
§ 8.20.030. Garbage containers. [Amended by Ord. No. A-473-85,
1985; Ord. No. A-025-91, 1991; Ord. No. 003, Series 1995; Ord. No.
018, Series 1999; Ord. No. 015, Series 2003; Ord. No. 017, Series
2006; Ord. No. 012, Series 2009]
A. All waste shall be placed in the Village-provided refuse cart and placed
at the curb for collection on the designated collection day.
B. Village collection. The Village will provide curbside collection of solid
waste for the following classifications of property:
1. One-, two-, three- and four-family residential buildings.
2. Single-dwelling condominium units.
3. Nonresidential properties, regardless of the number of tenants
(business and/or residential), that generate no more than two
refuse carts per week.
§ 8.16.010 GRAFTON CODE § 8.20.030
1.01:210
§ 8.20.040. Dumpsters. [Amended by Ord. No. 015, Series 2003]
Dumpsters shall be kept closed with covers (except when being filled or
emptied) and shall be kept in a sanitary condition.
§ 8.20.060. Container placement for collection. [Amended by Ord.
No. 015, Series 2003; Ord. No. 012, Series 2009; 10-17-2011 by Ord.
No. 031-2011]
All refuse carts shall be placed adjacent to the street, three feet away from
any other object, adjoining the property, by 7:00 a.m. of the pickup day, but
not more than 12 hours prior to collection. Containers must be removed
from the curb within 12 hours after collection.
§ 8.20.070. Supervision of collection.
The collection and disposal of garbage and refuse shall be conducted under
the supervision, direction and control of the Director of Public Works,
subject to the provisions of this chapter and such additional rules and
regulations as may be made from time to time by the Village Board.
§ 8.20.080. Collection schedule.
Garbage and refuse shall be collected once each week in the residential,
industrial and commercial districts.
§ 8.20.090. Collection costs.
The cost of collection shall be borne by the Village and charged to the
general fund.
§ 8.20.100. Refusal to collect.
The Director of Public Works or his employees or agents may refuse to
collect any garbage or refuse improperly prepared or deposited for pickup
as provided by this chapter.
4. Where the placement of appropriate containers on site is
impractical, the Village may, upon request, provide curbside
collection to four-family or larger apartment buildings. The cost of
said collection for four-family or larger apartment buildings shall
be paid by the property owner on an annual basis. The rate charged
shall be the Village's actual contract cost for solid waste and
recycling collection.
C. All four-family and larger apartments, condominium developments, and
nonresidential properties initially occupied after January 1, 1995, shall
provide for on-site storage of solid waste in appropriate containers to
be approved by the Plan Commission at the time of site plan approval.
§ 8.20.030 CODE ADOPTION § 8.20.110
1.01:211
§ 8.20.110. Approval of collection equipment.
All collection equipment shall be as approved by the Village Board, and
garbage collection trucks must be completely enclosed and kept clean and
sanitary.
§ 8.20.120. Enforcement. [Amended by Ord. No. 012, Series 2009]
It shall be the duty of the Village Police Chief to strictly enforce the
provisions of this chapter and see that all violations thereof are promptly
abated and violations prosecuted, and it shall be the duty of the Director of
Public Works and all police officers to give attention throughout the Village
to any case of violation of this chapter and promptly report the same to the
Village Health Inspector.
§ 8.20.130. Violations and penalties. [Amended by Ord. No.
A-528-89, 1989; Ord. No. 015, Series 2003; Ord. No. 012, Series
2009]
Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit
not less than $200 nor more than $500, together with the costs of
prosecution. In the event of a failure to pay such forfeiture, where no
showing of indigence is made, the defendant may be imprisoned for no more
than 90 days, as the court deems fit or until such judgment is sooner paid.
§ 8.20.140. Village yard violations and penalties. [Amended by Ord.
No. A-528-89, 1989; Ord. No. 015, Series 2003]
Any person who dumps or disposes of any garbage, as defined by § 8.20.010,
rubbish, brush, refuse or other such material at the Village yard in violation
of this chapter, or causes the same to be done, unless authorized by the
Director of Public Works, shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than
$200 nor more than $500, together with the costs of prosecution. In the
event of a failure to pay such forfeiture, where no showing of indigence is
made, the defendant may be imprisoned for no more than 90 days, as the
court deems fit or until such judgment is sooner paid.
Chapter 8.21
RECYCLING
§ 8.21.010. Purpose. [Amended by Ord. No. 008, Series 2006]
The purpose of this chapter is to promote recycling, composting and
resource recovery through the administration of an effective recycling
program, as provided in § 287.11, Wis. Stats., and Ch. NR 544, Wis. Adm.
Code.
§ 8.20.110 GRAFTON CODE § 8.21.020
1.01:212
§ 8.21.020. Statutory authority. [Amended by Ord. No. 008, Series
2006]
This chapter is adopted as authorized under § 287.09(3)(b), Wis. Stats.
§ 8.21.030. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or
interfere with any existing rules, regulations, ordinances or permits
previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, whenever this
chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall
apply.
§ 8.21.040. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be the minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other power granted by the Wisconsin Statutes.
Where any terms or requirements of this chapter may be inconsistent or
conflicting, the more restrictive requirements or interpretation shall apply.
Where a provision of this chapter is required by Wisconsin Statutes or by a
standard in Ch. NR 544, Wis. Adm. Code, and where the ordinance provision
is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the Wisconsin
Statutes and the Ch. NR 544 standards in effect on the date of the adoption
of this chapter or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment
of this chapter.
§ 8.21.044. Applicability. [Amended by Ord. No. 008, Series 2006]
The requirements of this chapter apply to all persons within the Village of
Grafton.
§ 8.21.050. Administration.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the Director of
Public Works.
§ 8.21.060. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BIMETAL CONTAINER — A container for carbonated or malt beverages that
is made primarily of a combination of steel and aluminum.
CONTAINER BOARD — Corrugated paperboard used in the manufacture of
shipping containers and related products.
FOAM POLYSTYRENE PACKAGING — Packaging made primarily from foam
polystyrene that satisfies one of the following criteria:
A. Is designed for serving food or beverages.
§ 8.21.020 CODE ADOPTION § 8.21.060
1.01:213
HDPE — High-density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code #2.
LDPE — Low-density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code #4.
MAGAZINES — Magazines and other materials printed on similar paper.
MAJOR APPLIANCE — A residential or commercial air conditioner, clothes
dryer, clothes washer, dishwasher, freezer, microwave oven, residential or
commercial furnace, boiler, dehumidifier, water heater, oven, refrigerator or
stove.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A property containing four or more
residential units, including those which are occupied seasonally.
NEWSPAPER — Newspaper and other materials printed on newsprint.
NONRESIDENTIAL FACILITIES AND PROPERTIES — Commercial, retail,
industrial, institutional and governmental facilities and properties. It
includes any location at which goods or services are provided or
manufactured, including locations under construction, demolition or
remodeling, or used for special events, such as but not limited to fairs,
festivals, sport venues, conferences and exhibits.[Amended by Ord. No.
008, Series 2006]
OFFICE PAPER — High-grade printing and writing papers from offices in
nonresidential facilities and properties. Printed white ledger and computer
printout are examples of office paper generally accepted as high grade. This
term does not include industrial process waste.
OTHER RESINS or MULTIPLE RESINS — Plastic resins labeled by the SPI
code #7.
PERSON — Includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association,
local governmental unit, as defined in § 287.01(5m), Wis. Stats., state
agency or authority or federal agency.[Amended by Ord. No. 008, Series
2006]
PETE — Polyethylene terephthalate, labeled by the SPI code #1.
PLASTIC CONTAINER — An individual, separate, rigid plastic bottle, can,
jar or carton, except for a blister pack, that is originally used to contain a
product that is the subject of a retail sale.
POST-CONSUMER WASTE — Solid waste other than solid waste generated
in the production of goods, hazardous waste, as defined in § 287.01(7),
Wis. Stats., waste from construction and demolition of structures, scrap
automobiles, or high-volume industrial waste, as defined in § 289.01(17),
Wis. Stats.[Amended by Ord. No. 008, Series 2006]
PP — Polypropylene, labeled by the SPI code #5.
PS — Polystyrene, labeled by the SPI code #6.
Consists of loose particles intended to fill space and cushion the
packaged article in a shipping container.
B.
Consists of rigid materials shaped to hold and cushion the packaged
article in a shipping container.
C.
§ 8.21.060 GRAFTON CODE § 8.21.060
1.01:214
PVC — Polyvinyl chloride, labeled by the SPI code #3.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Includes lead acid batteries; major
appliances; waste oil; yard waste; aluminum containers; corrugated paper
or other container board; foam polystyrene packaging; glass containers;
magazines; newspaper; office paper; rigid plastic containers, including
those made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS, and other resins or multiple
resins; steel containers, waste tires; and bimetal containers.
SOLID WASTE — Has the meaning specified in § 289.01(33), Wis.
Stats.[Amended by Ord. No. 008, Series 2006]
SOLID WASTE FACILITY — Has the meaning specified in § 289.01(3), Wis.
Stats.[Amended by Ord. No. 008, Series 2006]
SOLID WASTE TREATMENT — Any method, technique or process which
is designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or
composition of solid waste. "Treatment" includes incineration.
WASTE TIRE — A tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose
because of wear, damage or defect.
YARD WASTE — Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris and brush,
including clean woody vegetative material no greater than six inches in
diameter. This term does not include stumps, roots or shrubs with intact
root balls.
§ 8.21.070. Separation of recyclable materials. [Amended by Ord.
No. 016, Series 2006]
Occupants of single-family and two- to four-unit residences, multiple-family
dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties shall separate the
following materials from post-consumer waste:
A. Lead acid batteries.
B. Major appliances.
C. Waste oil.
D. Yard waste.
E. Aluminum containers.
F. Bimetal containers.
G. Foam polystyrene packaging.
H. Glass containers.
I. Magazines.
J. Newspapers.
K. Office paper.
L. Steel containers.
§ 8.21.060 CODE ADOPTION § 8.21.070
1.01:215
§ 8.21.080. Separation requirements exempted.
The separation requirements of § 8.21.070 do not apply to the following:
§ 8.21.090. Care of separated recyclable materials. [Amended by
Ord. No. 008, Series 2006]
To the greatest extent practicable, the recyclable materials separated in
accordance with § 8.21.070 shall be clean and kept free of contaminants
such as food or products residue, oil or grease, or other nonrecyclable
materials, including but not limited to household hazardous waste, medical
waste, and agricultural chemical containers. Recyclable materials shall
be stored in a manner which protects them from wind, rain and other
conditions that could reduce the marketability of the recyclable materials.
§ 8.21.100. Management of lead acid batteries, major appliances,
waste oil and yard waste. [Amended by Ord. No. 016, Series 2006]
Occupants of single-family and two- to four-unit residences, multiple-family
dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties shall manage lead
acid batteries, major appliances, waste oil, and yard waste as follows:
M. Waste tires.
N. Corrugated paper or other container board.
O. Rigid plastic containers made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS, and
other resins or multiple resins.
A. Occupants of single-family and two- to four-unit residences, multiplefamily
dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties that send
their post-consumer waste to a processing facility licensed by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources that recovers the
materials specified in § 8-21-070 from solid waste in as pure a form as is
technically feasible. [Amended by Ord. No. 016, Series 2006]
B. If less than 30% of the heat input to the facility is derived from the solid
waste which is burned as supplemental fuel at that facility in
accordance with § 287.07(7)(bg), Wis. Stats. [Amended by Ord. No.
008, Series 2006]
C. Foam polystyrene packaging and rigid plastic containers made of PVC
(#3), LDPE (#4), PP (#5), PS (#6), and other resins or multiple resins
(#7). These items have been granted a separation variance by the
Department of Natural Resources, § 287.907(7)(h), Wis. Stats.
A. Lead acid batteries shall be taken to a local authorized dealer accepting
this product.
B. Major appliances shall be taken to a local authorized dealer accepting
this product.
§ 8.21.070 GRAFTON CODE § 8.21.100
1.01:216
§ 8.21.110. Preparation and collection of recyclable materials.
[Amended by Ord. No. 012, Series 2009]
Except as otherwise directed by the Director of Public Works, occupants of
single-family and two- to four-unit residences and qualifying nonresidential
properties shall place all recyclable materials into the Village-provided cart
and place the cart at the curb on the designated collection day at least three
feet away from any object adjoining the property by 7:00 a.m. of the pickup
day, but not more than 12 hours prior to collection. Containers must be
removed from the curb within 12 hours after collection.
§ 8.21.120. Responsibilities of owners or designated agents of
multiple-family dwellings.
C. Waste oil shall be taken to a location determined by the Director of
Public Works.
D. Yard waste shall be taken to a location determined by the Director of
Public Works.
A. Owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings shall do all of
the following to recycle the materials specified in § 8.21.070:
1. Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials.
2. Notify tenants in writing at the time of renting or leasing the
dwelling and at least semiannually thereafter about the established
recycling program.
3. Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid
waste by the tenants and the delivery of the materials to a recycling
facility.
4. Notify tenants of reasons to reduce and recycle solid waste, which
materials are collected, how to prepare the materials in order to
meet the processing requirements, collection methods or sites,
locations and hours of operation, and a contact person or company,
including a name, address and telephone number.
B. The requirements specified in Subsection A do not apply to the owners
or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings, if:
1. The post-consumer waste generated within the dwelling is treated
at a processing facility licensed by the Department of Natural
Resources that recovers for recycling the materials specified in
§ 8.21.070 from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically
feasible.
2. Less than 30% of the heat input to a facility is derived from the
solid waste which is burned as a supplemental fuel at the facility in
accordance with § 287.07(7)(bg), Wis. Stats. [Amended by Ord.
No. 008, Series 2006]
§ 8.21.100 CODE ADOPTION § 8.21.120
1.01:217
§ 8.21.130. Responsibilities of owners or designated agents of
nonresidential facilities and properties.
3. Items have been granted a separation variance by the Department
of Natural Resources under § 298.07(7)(h), Wis. Stats. Currently
items which need not be separated from solid waste are foam
polystyrene packaging and rigid plastic containers made from PVC
(#3), LDPE (#4), PP, (#5), PS (#6), and other resins or multiple
resins (#7). [Amended by Ord. No. 008, Series 2006]
C. All multiple-family dwellings, as defined in § 8.21.060, shall be charged
a fee for recycling pickup. The fee for said service shall be equal to the
fee charged to the Village of Grafton by the service provider.
[Amended by Ord. No. 016, Series 2006]
A. Owners or designated agents of nonresidential facilities and properties
shall do all of the following to recycle the materials specified in
§ 8.21.070:
1. For a new building or a building that is remodeled or expanded by
50% or more in floor area, provide a designated area for
separation, temporary storage, and collection of solid waste and
recyclables either within or adjacent to the building.
2. Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials.
3. Notify in writing, at least semiannually, all users, tenants and
occupants of the properties about the established recycling
program.
4. Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid
waste by the users, tenants and occupants and the delivery of the
materials to a recycling facility.
5. Notify users, tenants and occupants of reasons to reduce and
recycle, which materials are collected, how to prepare the
materials in order to meet the processing requirements, collection
methods or sites, locations and hours of operation, and a contact
person or company, including a name, address and telephone
number.
B. The requirements specified in Subsection A do not apply to the owners
or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings, if:
1. The post-consumer waste generated within the facility or property
is treated at a processing facility licensed by the Department of
Natural Resources that recovers for recycling the materials
specified in § 8.21.070 from solid waste in as pure a form as is
technically feasible.
2. Less than 30% of the heat input to a facility is derived from the
solid waste which is burned as a supplemental fuel at the facility in
§ 8.21.120 GRAFTON CODE § 8.21.130
1.01:218
§ 8.21.140. Prohibitions on disposal of recyclable materials
separated for recycling.
No person may dispose of in a solid waste disposal facility or burn in a solid
waste treatment facility any of the materials specified in § 8.21.070 which
have been separated for recycling, except waste tires may be burned with
energy recovery in a solid waste treatment facility.
§ 8.21.150. Enforcement.
For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this
chapter, the Director of Public Works or his designee may inspect recyclable
materials separated for recycling, post-consumer waste intended for
disposal, recycling collection sites and facilities, collection vehicles,
collection areas of multiple-family dwellings and nonresidential facilities
and properties, and any records relating to recycling activities, which shall
be kept confidential when necessary to protect proprietary information. No
person may refuse access to any authorized officer, employee or authorized
representative of the Village of Grafton who requests access for purpose
of inspection and who presents appropriate credentials. No person may
obstruct, hamper or interfere with such an inspection.
§ 8.21.160. Violations and penalties.
accordance with § 287.07(7)(bg), Wis. Stats. [Amended by Ord.
No. 008, Series 2006]
3. Items have been granted a separation variance by the Department
of Natural Resources under § 287.07(7)(h), Wis. Stats. Currently
items which need not be separated from solid waste are foam
polystyrene packaging and rigid plastic containers made from PVC
(#3), LDPE (#4), PP (#5), PS (#6), and other resins or multiple
resins (#7). [Amended by Ord. No. 008, Series 2006]
A. Any person who violates a provision of this chapter may be issued a
citation by the Village of Grafton Police Department to collect
forfeitures. The issuance of a citation shall not preclude proceeding
under any other ordinance or law relating to the same or any other
matter. [Amended by Ord. No. 008, Series 2006]
B. Penalties for violating this chapter may be assessed as follows:
1. Any person who violates § 8.21.140 may be required to forfeit $50
for the first violation, $200 for a second violation, and not more
than $2,000 for a third or subsequent violation.
2. Any person who violates a provision of this chapter, except
§ 8.21.140 may be required to forfeit not less than $10 nor more
than $1,000 for each violation.
§ 8.21.130 CODE ADOPTION § 8.21.170
1.01:219
§ 8.21.170. Effective date.
The provisions of this chapter shall take effect on January 1, 2007.
Chapter 8.24
SWIMMING PROHIBITIONS
§ 8.24.010. Swimming prohibition.
No person shall bathe, swim or enter the Milwaukee River within or
adjacent to any public park in the Village; nor shall any person bathe, swim
or enter the Milwaukee River from any public bridge or dam located in the
Village; nor shall any person bathe, swim or enter the Milwaukee River from
any public dump or public grounds in the Village.
Chapter 8.25
MISUSE OF E911 SYSTEM
§ 8.25.010. Prohibited misuse of E911. [Added by Ord. No.
A-004-92, 1992]
Chapter 8.28
PUBLIC NUISANCES GENERALLY
§ 8.28.010. Public nuisance defined.
A public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation or use of property which shall
continue for a sufficient length of time so as to:
A. No person shall utilize the E911 emergency telephone number system
for any purpose other than to report an emergency.
B. It shall be unlawful to report an alleged emergency knowing that the
situation which he or she reports does not exist.
C. An "emergency" under this section exists when the person reasonably
believes that immediate response by public safety personnel is essential
due to the risk or actual occurrence of:
1. Death or great bodily harm;
2. Property damage;
3. Any other situation which mandates the immediate response of
public safety personnel.
§ 8.21.170 GRAFTON CODE § 8.28.010
1.01:220
§ 8.28.020. Public nuisances prohibited.
No person shall, within the Village, cause or create a public nuisance or
permit a public nuisance to remain on premises owned or occupied by him.
Chapter 8.32
PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH
§ 8.32.010. Public nuisances affecting health.
The following are specifically declared to be nuisances affecting the public
health:
A. Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the safety, health, comfort or
repose of the public and property owner(s); [Amended by Ord. No.
023, Series 1995]
B. Greatly offend public morals or decency;
C. Unlawfully interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render
dangerous for passage a lake, navigable river, bay, stream, canal or
basin, or a public park, square, street, alley or highway;
D. In any way render the public substantially insecure in the use of
property.
A. All decayed, spoiled, tainted, unwholesome or harmfully adulterated
food, drink or drugs offered for sale to the public.
B. All ponds or pools of stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other
insects can multiply.
C. Carcasses of animals or fowl not buried, destroyed or otherwise
disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death.
D. Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash, manure,
rubbish, rotting lumber or other debris to which are attracted flies,
mosquitoes, insects or other vermin.
E. Privy vaults.
F. Garbage cans which are not flytight.
G. Pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of
water by sewage, creamery or industrial waste, or other substances.
H. All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation.
I. Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot, cinders, fly ash or industrial
dust in such quantities as to render the occupancy of property
dangerous or uncomfortable to a person of ordinary sensibilities.
§ 8.28.010 CODE ADOPTION § 8.32.010
1.01:221
§ 8.32.020. Creating and permitting health nuisances prohibited.
No person shall, within the Village, cause or create any public health
nuisance or permit any public health nuisance to remain on premises owned
or occupied by him.
§ 8.32.030. Abatement. [Amended 11-17-2014 by Ord. No.
018-2014]
Whenever any condition or thing dangerous to human health or life, or
which is any source of filth or cause of sickness, or which renders soil,
water or air, or any food or drink impure or unwholesome, is found on any
premises within the Village, the Village Health Inspector is authorized in his
discretion to cause the same to be summarily abated in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 8.36 of this Code. The Village Board shall have and
exercise the powers as provided in that chapter.
Chapter 8.36
ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES
§ 8.36.010. Inspection of premises; reports.
Whenever complaint is made to the Village President by a private citizen or
any official or employee of the Village that a public nuisance exists within
the Village, he shall promptly notify the Village Health Inspector and the
Chief of Police, who shall inspect or cause to be inspected the premises
upon which such nuisance is alleged to exist and shall make a written report
of their findings to the Village President.
§ 8.36.020. Summary abatement procedure; notice.
If the inspecting officials determine that a public nuisance exists on private
property and that there is great and immediate danger to the public health,
safety, morals, decency or peace, the Village President shall direct the Chief
of Police to serve notice on the owner or upon the occupant if the owner is
a nonresident or cannot be found and to post a copy of the notice on the
premises. Such notice shall direct the owner or occupant, as the case may
be, to abate or remove such nuisance within a reasonable time of not less
than 24 hours and shall state that, unless such nuisance is so abated, the
Village will cause the same to be abated and will charge the cost thereof to
the owner or occupant, as the case may be.
J. All nuisances including sick and diseased animals; all animals causing
personal or property damage. [Amended by Ord. No. 012, Series
1997]
§ 8.32.010 GRAFTON CODE § 8.36.030
1.01:222
§ 8.36.030. Summary abatement procedure; abatement by Village.
If the owner or occupant fails to comply with the notice described in
§ 8.36.020 within the time limit, or if he cannot be found, the Village Health
Inspector, in the case of health nuisances, and the Chief of Police, in all
other cases, shall cause the abatement or removal of such public nuisance.
§ 8.36.040. Summary abatement exemptions.
Public nuisances as described in § 9.32.010C of this Code19 shall not be
subject to the summary abatement procedure set forth in §§ 18.36.020 and
18.36.030.
§ 8.36.050. Abatement in other cases; notice.
If the inspecting officials determine that a public nuisance exists on private
premises but that the nature of such nuisance is not such as to threaten
great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, morals, decency
or peace, they shall file written reports of their findings with the Village
President, who shall forthwith direct the Village Clerk to issue a notice to
the owner or occupant of the premises requiring him to appear before the
Village Board at a regular or special meeting thereof on the day and time
appointed by the President and then and there show cause, if there is any,
why the nuisance should not be abated and removed at the cost and expense
of the owner or occupant, as the case may be. A copy of the notice shall be
served upon the owner or occupant of the premises by the Chief of Police
at least 10 days prior to the date set for hearing, or if the owner of the
premises is a nonresident or cannot be found, a copy of such notice shall
be published in the official newspaper and a like copy mailed to the owner
directed to his last known address, as shown by the records of the Village
Clerk, at least 15 days before the date set for hearing.
§ 8.36.060. Hearing.
At the time set for hearing, the Village Board shall hear testimony relative
to the facts and shall enter written findings thereon. If the Board finds that
a public nuisance exists on the premises or is kept or maintained or allowed
by the owner or occupant, it shall order the owner or occupant, as the case
may be, to abate the same.
§ 8.36.070. Abatement by Village.
In the event that the owner or occupant fails to comply with the order of
abatement of the Village Board, the Board shall, without further notice,
order the Chief of Police to comply therewith and to make return of the cost
and expense of abating or removing such nuisance to the Village Director of
Administrative Services.
19.Editor's Note: See Ch. 9.32, Public Nuisances Affecting Morals and Decency.
§ 8.36.030 CODE ADOPTION § 8.36.080
1.01:223
§ 8.36.080. Cost of abating nuisances.
In addition to any other penalty imposed under this chapter for the
maintenance of a nuisance, the cost of abating or removing a nuisance by
the Village shall be collected from the owner or occupant or person causing,
permitting or maintaining the nuisance or, if notice to abate such nuisance
has been given to the owner, such cost may be charged against the premises
and assessed against the real estate as other special taxes.
§ 8.36.090. Remedies not exclusive.
In addition to the methods of abatement of public nuisances specified in this
chapter, the Village President or Village Board may also institute an action
in the Municipal Court for abatement of any public nuisance existing within
the limits of the Village in accordance with the provisions of Ch. 823, Wis.
Stats.
Chapter 8.40
NUISANCES PENALTY
§ 8.40.010. Penalty for creating nuisances. [Amended by Ord. No.
A-528-89, 1989; Ord. No. 005, Series 2011]
Any person who violates this Code by causing or creating any public
nuisance or permitting any public nuisance, as defined in Chapter 8.28 of
this title, to be created, placed upon or remain upon any premises owned
or occupied by him shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $500
for a first offense, $750 for a second offense and $2,000 for a third or
successive offenses, together with the costs of prosecution. In the event of
a failure to pay such forfeiture, where no showing of indigency is made, the
defendant may be imprisoned for no more than 90 days, as the court deems
fit or until such judgment is sooner paid.
Title 9: Public Peace, Morals and Welfare
Chapter 9.01
OFFENSES AGAINST STATE LAWS
§ 9.01.010. Offenses against state laws subject to forfeiture.
A. By the authority of §§ 66.0107, 134.66(5), and 254.92(4), Wis. Stats.,
the following provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes, as updated and
revised from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference, excluding
the penalty provisions contained therein: §§ 134.66; 254.92; 939.05;
939.30, 939.31, Chs. 941 through 948, inclusive, but not including
§ 944.21; Ch. 951; §§ 961.573(1)-(2); 961.574(1)-(2); and 961.575(1)-
(2).
§ 8.36.080 GRAFTON CODE § 9.01.010
1.01:224
§ 9.01.020. Definitions.
§ 9.01.030. Attempt; penalty for attempt. [Amended by Ord. No.
013, Series 2010]
An attempt to commit an offense under this chapter requires that the actor
have an intent to perform acts and attain a result which, if accomplished,
would constitute such offense and that the actor does acts towards the
commission of the offense which demonstrate unequivocally, under all the
circumstances, that he or she formed that intent and would commit the
offense except for the intervention of another person or some extraneous
factor. Whoever attempts to commit an offense under this chapter shall
forfeit an amount not to exceed 1/2 the maximum penalty for the completed
offense.
§ 9.01.040. Code section numbering. [Amended by Ord. No. 022,
Series 2010]
All violations of § 9.01.010 shall be cited using that Code section number,
except for the following offenses, which shall adopt the same terms and
definitions of this chapter but maintain a separate chapter and/or section
number under this Code for recordkeeping purposes: resisting or
obstructing an officer; drug paraphernalia possession, manufacture,
delivery, or delivery to a minor; damage to property; theft; fraud on hotel or
restaurant keeper, recreational attraction, taxicab operator, or gas station;
retail theft; removal of shopping cart; issuance of worthless checks;
carrying concealed weapons; facsimile firearms; purchase or possession of
cigarettes or tobacco products by persons under 18; restrictions on sale or
gift of cigarette or tobacco products.
Chapter 9.04
B. This chapter shall not apply to circumstances under which the actor
could be charged with a felony, as described and classified by §§ 939.50
and 939.60, Wis. Stats., unless the matter is referred to the district
attorney and the district attorney declines to prosecute the matter.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the definitions of words and phrases
contained in §§ 134.66; 254.92; 939.22; Chs. 941 through 948,
inclusive; Ch. 951; and Ch. 961, Wis. Stats. as updated and revised from
time to time, are hereby adopted by reference.
B. In any state statute adopted by reference by this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply:
1. The word "crime" shall mean "offense."
2. The phrase "criminal intent" shall mean "intent."
3. The word "court" shall mean "municipal court."
4. The phrase "district attorney" shall mean "Village Attorney."
§ 9.01.010 CODE ADOPTION § 9.01.040
1.01:225
CROSSING POLICE LINES
§ 9.04.010. Obedience to police officers.
At a time of any public parade, accident, riot, public peril or other
circumstance causing people to congregate or assemble, it is unlawful for
any person to enter, break through or remain within the danger lines or
other bounds established by the Police Department or by or under the
direction of any authorized Village official or employee for the preservation
of public safety, peace and order, unless such person is duly authorized by
an officer there in charge.
Chapter 9.06
RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING AN OFFICER
§ 9.06.010. Resisting or obstructing an officer; state statute
adopted.
A violation of § 946.41, Wis. Stats., adopted by § 9.01.010 of the Grafton
Code, shall be cited using this section number. The terms and definitions of
Chapter 9.01 of this Code shall remain applicable to any such offense.
Chapter 9.08
AIDING ESCAPE OF PRISONERS
§ 9.08.010. Assisting escape of prisoner.
No person shall intentionally aid any prisoner or person to escape from the
lawful custody of a police officer or peace officer of the Village.
Chapter 9.22
POSSESSION OF MALT BEVERAGES AND INTOXICATING
LIQUOR
§ 9.22.010. Public possession of alcohol beverages prohibited.
No person shall purchase any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt
beverage in any glass or open container except for consumption on a
licensed premises, and no person shall be in possession of any open glass
or other open container containing intoxicating liquor or fermented malt
beverage, or drink from the same, on any public way, public street, public
park, public baseball playing field operated by the Village within leased
property or Village property, sidewalk, boulevard, parkway, safety zone,
alley or public lot, or in any motor vehicle parked on a public way, street,
alley or public parking lot or public school property or upon any private
§ 9.01.040 GRAFTON CODE § 9.22.010
1.01:226
parking lot or other private areas that are open to public use, unless a lawful
permit has been issued.
Chapter 9.24
GAMBLING, LOTTERIES AND FRAUDULENT DEVICES
§ 9.24.010. Gambling, lotteries and fraudulent devices prohibited.
All forms of gambling, lotteries and fraudulent devices and practices are
prohibited within the limits of the Village. Any peace or police officer of the
Village is empowered to seize anything devised solely for gambling or found
in actual use for gambling within the limits of the Village and to dispose
thereof or commence an action against such device in accordance with the
provisions of § 66.0107, Wis. Stats., which is adopted and made a part of
this chapter by reference.
Chapter 9.26
OBSCENE LANGUAGE
§ 9.26.010. Obscene language prohibited.
No person shall use any obscene language or conduct himself in any
indecent, lewd, lascivious or obscene manner within the Village.
Chapter 9.32
PUBLIC NUISANCES OFFENDING MORALS AND DECENCY
§ 9.32.010. Nuisances enumerated.
The following are specifically declared to be public nuisances offending
public morals and decency:
§ 9.32.020. Nuisances prohibited.
No person shall, within the Village, cause or create a public morals or
decency nuisance or permit such nuisance to remain on premises owned or
occupied by him.
A. All gambling devices, slot machines and punchboards;
B. All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual
intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses;
C. All indecent or obscene pictures, books, pamphlets, magazines and
newspapers, except such items which are kept for personal use in the
privacy of such person's home.
§ 9.22.010 CODE ADOPTION § 9.32.020
1.01:227
Chapter 9.33
POSSESSION OF 25 GRAMS OR LESS OF MARIJUANA
§ 9.33.010. Authority. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
This chapter is adopted under the authority granted by Ch. 961, Wis. Stats.,
as amended.
§ 9.33.020. Definitions.
"Marijuana" and "practitioner," as used in this chapter, shall be defined
according to § 961.01(14) and (19), Wis. Stats., respectively
§ 9.33.030. Possession of marijuana. [Amended by Ord. No. 011,
Series 1996; Ord. No. 012, Series 2010]
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry, possess or use 25 grams or less
of marijuana, unless such substance was obtained directly from, or pursuant
to, a valid prescription or order of a practitioner filled out in the course of
his professional practice, or except as otherwise authorized by Ch. 961, Wis.
Stats. Any person who is charged with possession of more than 25 grams
of marijuana or who is charged with possession of any amount of marijuana
following a conviction for possession of marijuana in this state shall not be
prosecuted under this section.
Chapter 9.34
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
§ 9.34.010. State drug statutes adopted.
A. Possession of drug paraphernalia. A violation of § 961.573(1)-(2), Wis.
Stats., adopted by reference in § 9.01.010 of the Grafton Code, shall be
cited using this Code section number. The terms and definitions of
Chapter 9.01 of this Code shall remain applicable to any such offense.
B. Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia. A violation of
§ 961.574(1)-(2), Wis. Stats., adopted by reference by § 9.01.010 of the
Grafton Code, shall be cited using this Code section number. The terms
and definitions of Chapter 9.01 of this Code shall remain applicable to
any such offense.
C. Delivery of drug paraphernalia to a minor. A violation of § 961.575(1)-
(2), Wis. Stats., adopted by reference by § 9.01.010 of the Grafton Code,
shall be cited using this Code section number. The terms and definitions
of Chapter 9.01 of this Code shall remain applicable to any such
offense.
§ 9.32.020 GRAFTON CODE § 9.34.010
1.01:228
Chapter 9.35
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
§ 9.35.010. Purpose and findings.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented
businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of citizens of the Village of Grafton, and to establish reasonable
and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and
concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the Village of
Grafton. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor
effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials.
Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or
deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the
First Amendment or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it
the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the
distribution of obscene material.
B. Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects
of adult uses on the community, presented in hearings and in reports
made available to the Village, and on findings incorporated in the cases
of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v.
American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976); FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of
Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc. 501 U.S. 560
(1991); City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 120 S. Ct. 1382 (2000); East of the
River Enterprises II v. City of Hudson, 2000 Wisc. App. Lexis 734 (Ct.
App. Aug. 1, 2000); Ben's Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset, 316 F.3d 702
(7th Cir. 2003), and on studies in other communities, including but not
limited to Phoenix, Arizona; Houston, Texas; Minneapolis, Minnesota;
St. Paul, Minnesota; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden
Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California; Austin,
Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio;
Beaumont, Texas; Dallas, Texas; Newport News, Virginia; Bellevue,
Washington; New York, New York; and St. Croix County, Wisconsin; and
the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group on Regulation of
Sexually Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), and
statistics obtained from the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Village Board
finds that:
1. Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary and
unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled
by the operators of the establishments. Further, there is presently
no mechanism to make the owners of these establishments
responsible for the activities that occur on their premises.
§ 9.34.010 CODE ADOPTION § 9.35.010
1.01:229
2. Employees of certain sexually oriented businesses, defined in this
chapter as adult theaters and adult cabarets, engage in higher
incidences of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees
of other establishments. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
3. Sexual acts, including masturbation and oral and anal sex, occur at
sexually oriented business, especially those which provide private
or semiprivate booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos or live
sex shows.
4. Offering and providing such space encourages such activities,
which creates unhealthy conditions.
5. Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other
sexually oriented businesses for the purposes of engaging in sex
within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses.
6. At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities
occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including but not limited
to syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection
(HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non A and Non B,
amebiasis, salmonella infections and shigella infections.
7. Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an increasing
cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS (acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome) caused by the HIV virus in the United
States: 600 in 1982; 2,200 in 1983, 4,600 in 1984; 8,555 in 1985,
and 253,448 through December 31, 1992.
8. The State of Wisconsin Division of Health indicated that on July 25,
1986, there were 96 cases of AIDS reported in the state, including
54 cases that resulted in death and that a ten-fold increase in
reported cases was expected between 1986 and 1991.
9. The number of cases of early (less than one year) syphilis in the
United States reported annually has risen, with 33,613 cases
reported in 1982, and 45,200 through November 1990.
10. The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported
annually remains at a high level, with over 1/2 million cases being
reported in 1990.
11. In his report of October 22, 1986, the Surgeon General of the
United States has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV
infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous
drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood components and
from an infected mother to her newborn.
12. According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection,
as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by
sexual acts.
§ 9.35.010 GRAFTON CODE § 9.35.010
1.01:230
13. Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are
unhealthy, in part because the activities conducted there are
unhealthy, and in part because of the unregulated nature of the
activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the
facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those
facilities.
14. Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is
found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons
view adult-oriented films.
15. Crime statistics show that all types of crimes, especially sex-related
crimes, occur with more frequency in neighborhoods where
sexually oriented businesses are located.
16. Studies of the relationship between sexually oriented business and
neighborhood property values have found a negative impact on
both residential and commercial property values.
17. There is an increase in the potential for infiltration by organized
crime for the purpose of unlawful conduct.
18. The consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of sexually
oriented businesses exacerbated the deleterious secondary effects
of such businesses on the community. In fact, the Supreme Court
has gone so far as to assert that "common sense indicates that any
form of nudity coupled with alcohol begets undesirable behavior."
Ben's Bar, 2003 WI 132541.
19. Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics
which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect the
substantial government concerns addressed in the above
subsections.
20. A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to
place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and
the operators of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a
licensing procedure will place an incentive on the operators to see
that the sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent
with the health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as
well as the citizens of the Village. It is appropriate to require
reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of
the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of
the premises and activities occurring therein.
21. The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately
responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the
sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially
related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of
such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted
diseases.
§ 9.35.010 CODE ADOPTION § 9.35.010
1.01:231
§ 9.35.020. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited,
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other
image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five
or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images
so displayed are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon
matters exhibiting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas."
ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE —
22. In the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases, it is
desirable to obtain a limited amount of information regarding
certain employees who may engage in the conduct which this
chapter is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to
such conduct.
23. The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the
Village of Grafton will be promoted by the enactment of this
chapter.
A commercial establishment that has as a significant or substantial
portion of its stock-in-trade, or derives a significant or substantial
portion of its revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion of
its interior business or advertising, or maintains a substantial section
of its sales or display space for the sale or rental, for any form of
consideration, of any one or more of the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, compact discs,
slides or other visual representations which are characterized by
their emphasis upon the exhibition or display of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; or
1.
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use
or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or
for sadomasochistic use or abuse of the user or others.
2.
A.
A commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas and still be categorized as "adult bookstore" or "adult
video store" so long as one of its principal business purposes is the
offering for sale or rental for consideration of the specified materials
that depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas. A principal business purpose need not be a primary
use of an establishment so long as it is a significant use based upon the
visible inventory or commercial activity of the establishment.
B.
§ 9.35.010 GRAFTON CODE § 9.35.020
1.01:232
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, dance hall, bar, restaurant or similar
commercial establishment, which regularly features:
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment,
which:
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes,
slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas. This definition shall expressly exclude films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other similar photographic
reproductions given an "R" rating by the Motion Picture Association of
America.
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear
nude or seminude or live performances, which are characterized by the
exposure of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
BOARD — The Village Board for the Village of Grafton, Ozaukee County,
Wisconsin.
This definition shall expressly exclude films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides or other similar photographic reproductions
given an "R" rating by the Motion Picture Association of America.
C.
A. Persons who appear seminude; or
Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
B.
Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the exhibition or display of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
C.
This definition shall expressly exclude films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides or other similar photographic reproductions
given an "R" rating by the Motion Picture Association of America.
D.
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions, which are characterized by the depiction of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and has a sign visible
from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this
adult type of photographic reproductions; or
A.
Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than 10
hours; or
B.
Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for
a period of time that is less than 10 hours.
C.
§ 9.35.020 CODE ADOPTION § 9.35.020
1.01:233
DIRECTLY — To require physical contact. For instance, when this chapter
prohibits an employee to receive a gratuity "directly" from a patron, it
prohibits the direct touching of skin, other body parts or clothing.
DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY — The dominant or principal
theme of the object referenced. For instance, when the phrase refers to
films "which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the
exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas," the films so described are those whose dominant or principal
character and theme are the exhibition or display of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
EMPLOYEE, EMPLOY AND EMPLOYMENT — Describe and pertain to any
person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented
business on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis, regardless of whether
the person is denominated as an employee, independent contractor, agent
or by another status. "Employee" does not include a person exclusively on
the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery
of goods to the premises.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration and for another person, agrees
or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who or which
furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its
primary business purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
ESTABLISH or ESTABLISHMENT — Includes any of the following:
LICENSEE — A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually
oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an
applicant on the application for a license.
NUDE, NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY — The showing of the human male
or female genitals, pubic area, vulva or anus with less than a fully opaque
covering; the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque
covering of any part of the nipple or areola; or the showing of the covered
male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.[Amended by Ord. No. 025,
Series 2004]
OPERATE or CAUSE TO BE OPERATED — To cause to function or to put
or keep in a state of doing business. "Operator" means any person on
the premises of a sexually oriented business who is authorized to exercise
operational control of the business or who causes to function or who puts or
The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business;
A.
The conversion of any existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
B.
The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business; or
C.
D. The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
§ 9.35.020 GRAFTON CODE § 9.35.020
1.01:234
keeps in operation the business. A person may be found to be operating or
causing to be operated a sexually oriented business regardless of whether
that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.
PREMISES — The real property upon which the sexually oriented business
is located, and all appurtenance thereto and buildings thereon, including
but not limited to the sexually oriented business, the grounds, the private
walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto under
the ownership, control or supervision of the owner or operator of the
business.
REGULARLY FEATURES or REGULARLY SHOWS — A consistent or
substantial course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited
constitute a substantial portion of the films or performances offered as part
of the ongoing business of the sexually oriented business.
SEMINUDE or SEMINUDE CONDITION — The showing of the human male
or female genitals, pubic area, vulva or anus with not more than a complete
opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with not more than a
complete opaque covering of any part of the nipple or areola.[Amended by
Ord. No. 025, Series 2004]
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial establishment
that as one of its principal business purposes offers for any form of
consideration a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate
or consort for the purpose of specified sexual activities. The definition of
"sexual encounter center" or any "sexually oriented business" shall not
include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in
medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore,
adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion-picture theater,
adult theater, escort agency, or sexual encounter center.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY —
The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered; or
A.
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, vulva, anus or the nipple and areola of the human female breast.
[Amended by Ord. No. 025, Series 2004]
B.
The fondling of another person's genitals, pubic region, anus, or female
breasts;
A.
Actual sex acts, normal or perverted, including intercourse, oral
copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or
B.
§ 9.35.020 CODE ADOPTION § 9.35.020
1.01:235
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS —
The increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25%, as
the floor areas exist on the date this chapter takes effect.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS — Includes any of the following:
§ 9.35.030. Classification.
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
§ 9.35.040. License.
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with, any of the activities
set forth in subsections A and B of this definition.
C.
A. The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
B.
The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.
C.
A. Adult arcades;
B. Adult bookstores or adult video stores;
C. Adult cabarets;
D. Adult motels;
E. Adult motion-picture theaters;
F. Adult theaters;
G. Escort agencies;
H. Sexual encounter centers.
A. Except as provided in Subsection D below, from and after the effective
date of this chapter no sexually oriented business shall be operated or
maintained in the Village of Grafton without first obtaining a license to
operate issued by the Village of Grafton.
B. A license may be issued only for one sexually oriented business located
at one fixed and certain place. Any person, partnership or corporation
which desires to operate more than one sexually oriented business must
have a license for each.
C. No licensee may transfer ownership or control of the sexually oriented
business to any other person, partnership or corporation.
§ 9.35.020 GRAFTON CODE § 9.35.040
1.01:236
§ 9.35.050. Application for license.
D. All sexually oriented businesses existing at the time of the passage of
this chapter must submit an application for a license within 60 days of
the passing of this chapter.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation desiring to secure a license
shall submit an application to the Village Clerk. The application shall be
filed in triplicate and dated by the Village Clerk. A copy of the
application shall be distributed promptly by the Village Clerk to the
Village of Grafton Police Department and to the applicant.
B. If the Village of Grafton Police Department is aware of any information
bearing on the applicant's qualifications, that information shall be filed
in writing with the Village Clerk.
C. An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the
Village of Grafton. All applicants must be qualified according to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. An application shall be considered complete if it includes the
information required in this section.
E. An applicant for a license shall furnish the following information under
oath:
1. Name and address.
2. Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age. Written
proof of age may be in the form of either:
a. A copy of a birth certificate and current photo;
b. A current driver's license with picture; or
c. Other picture identification document issued by a
governmental agency and demonstrating proof of age.
3. The name, business location, business mailing address and phone
number of the proposed sexually oriented business.
4. A statement as to whether the licensee of the sexually oriented
business intends to serve, sell, use or provide any intoxicating
liquor, cereal malt beverage or any type of alcoholic beverage on
the premises of the sexually oriented business.
5. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall specify the
name of the corporation, the date and state of incorporation, the
name, address and ages of all shareholders of the corporation
owning more than 5% of the stock in said corporation and all
officers and directors of the corporation, and the name and address
of the registered agents.
§ 9.35.040 CODE ADOPTION § 9.35.050
1.01:237
§ 9.35.060. Standards for issuance of license.
6. If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture, or any other type of
organization where two or more persons have a financial interest,
the application shall state the names, addresses and ages of all
persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture
or other type of organization.
F. A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business,
shall accompany the application for a sexually oriented business. The
sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be
drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.
G. If the person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, he or she shall sign the application for a license as applicant.
If the person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is
other than an individual (such as a corporation or partnership), each
officer, director, general partner, or other person identified in
Subsection E(5) and (6) shall sign the application for a license as the
applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under this section, and each
applicant shall be considered as a licensee if the license is granted.
H. Within 21 days of receiving an application for a license, the Village
Clerk shall notify the applicant whether the application is granted or
denied.
I. Whenever an application is denied, the Village Clerk shall advise the
applicant in writing of the reasons for such action. If the applicant
requests a hearing within 10 days of receipt of notification of denial, a
public hearing shall be held within 10 days thereafter, as hereinafter
provided.
J. Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant to
the application or his or her refusal to submit to or cooperate with
regard to any information required by this chapter shall constitute an
admission by the applicant that he or she is ineligible for such license
and shall be grounds for denial thereof by the Village Board.
A. The Village Board shall approve the issuance of a license unless one or
more of the following is found to be true:
1. An applicant (including all individuals, officers, directors,
shareholders, or persons with a financial interest in the
organization) is less than 18 years of age.
2. An applicant is delinquent in the payment owed to the Village of
Grafton of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or
imposed upon the applicant in relation to a sexually oriented
business.
§ 9.35.050 GRAFTON CODE § 9.35.060
1.01:238
§ 9.35.070. Fees.
A license fee of $250 shall be submitted with the application for a license.
If the application is denied, 1/2 of the fee shall be returned. The remainder
shall be applied toward processing and administrative costs.
§ 9.35.080. Display of license.
The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous public place, at or near the
entrance of the sexually oriented business, so that it may be easily read at
any time.
§ 9.35.090. Renewal of license.
3. An applicant has failed to provide information as required in
§ 9.35.050 for issuance of the license.
4. The license application fee required by this chapter has not been
paid.
5. An applicant has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form.
6. The proposed sexually oriented business is not in compliance with
the location restrictions established or physical layout restrictions
established for sexually oriented businesses in this chapter.
7. The applicant states or the Village Board subsequently discovers
that the applicant intends to serve, sell, use or provide any
intoxicating liquor, cereal malt beverages, or any type of alcoholic
beverages on the premises of the sexually oriented business.
B. The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or
persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to the
applicant, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented
business.
A. Every license issued pursuant to this chapter will terminate at the
expiration of one year from the date of issuance, unless sooner
suspended or revoked. A license must be renewed before operation is
allowed to continue. A license may be renewed only by making an
application as provided for in § 9.35.050. The application for renewal
must be filed not later than 60 days before the license expires. The
application for renewal shall be upon a form provided by the Village of
Grafton and shall contain such information and data, given under oath
or affirmation, as is required for an application for a new license.
B. A license renewal fee of $250 shall be submitted with the application for
renewal. In addition to the renewal fee, a late penalty in the amount of
$100 shall be assessed against any applicant who files for a renewal
less than 60 days before the license expires. If the application is denied,
1/2 of the total fees collected shall be returned.
§ 9.35.060 CODE ADOPTION § 9.35.090
1.01:239
§ 9.35.100. Inspection.
§ 9.35.110. Suspension.
§ 9.35.120. Revocation.
C. If the Village of Grafton Police Department is aware of any information
bearing on an applicant's qualifications, that information shall be filed
in writing with the Village Clerk.
A. For the purposes of ensuring compliance with this chapter, an
applicant, operator or licensee shall permit law enforcement officers
and any other federal, state, county or Village agency in the
performance of any function connected with the enforcement of this
chapter normally and regularly conducted by such agencies to inspect,
at any time the business is occupied or open for business, those
portions of the premises of a sexually oriented business which patrons
or customers are permitted to occupy.
B. The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel
which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent
or temporary habitation.
A. The Village Board shall issue a written intent to suspend a license for a
period not to exceed 30 days if it determines that a licensee, operator or
employee of a licensee has:
1. Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter; or
2. Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this chapter.
B. The Village Board shall give the licensee 10 days' written notice of the
charges against him and the opportunity for a public hearing before the
Board, as hereinafter provided.
A. The Village Board shall revoke by written notice a license for a sexually
oriented business if a cause for suspension in § 9.35.110 occurs and the
license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months.
B. The Village Board shall revoke by written notice a license if it
determines that any of the following reasons exist:
1. Discovery that false or misleading information or data was given on
any application or material facts were omitted from the application;
2. The licensee, operator or any employee of the licensee violates any
provisions of this chapter or any rules or regulation adopted by the
Village Board pursuant to this chapter; provided, however, that in
the case of a first offense by a licensee where the conduct was
solely that of an employee, the penalty shall not exceed a
suspension of 30 days if the Board shall find that the licensee had
§ 9.35.090 GRAFTON CODE § 9.35.120
1.01:240
§ 9.35.130. Administrative review procedure.
Chapter 68, Wis. Stats., concerning municipal administrative procedure,
shall govern the administrative procedure and review concerning the
granting, denial, renewal or nonrenewal of a permit or a license. A request
for an initial determination shall be made by an aggrieved person, pursuant
to the provisions contained in § 68.08, Wis. Stats., to the Village Clerk. An
administrative appeal pursuant to the provision contained in § 68.10, Wis.
Stats., may be made by an aggrieved person to the Board of Appeals, and
a hearing shall be held by the Board of Appeals pursuant to § 68.11, Wis.
Stats. Any party to a proceeding resulting in a final determination may seek
judicial review pursuant to the provisions contained in § 68.13, Wis. Stats.
no actual or constructive knowledge of such violation and could
not by the exercise of due diligence have had such actual or
constructive knowledge;
3. The licensee becomes ineligible to obtain a license or permit;
4. Any cost or fee required to be paid by this chapter is not paid;
5. Any intoxicating liquor, cereal malt beverage or other alcoholic
beverage is served or consumed on the premises of the sexually
oriented business;
6. A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of
controlled substances on the premises;
7. A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
8. A licensee has knowingly operated the sexually oriented business
during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
9. A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse,
sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sexual act to occur
in or on the licensed premises. This subsection will not apply to an
adult motel, unless the licensee knowingly allowed sexual activities
to occur either: (i) in exchange for money; or (ii) in a public place or
within public view.
C. The Village Board, before revoking any license, shall give the licensee
at least 10 days' written notice of the charges against him and the
opportunity for a public hearing as hereinafter provided.
D. The transfer of ownership or control of a license shall automatically and
immediately revoke the license.
E. Any licensee whose license is revoked shall not be eligible to receive a
license for one year from the date of revocation.
§ 9.35.120 CODE ADOPTION § 9.35.140
1.01:241
§ 9.35.140. Transfer of license.
A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a
licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a
license at any place other than the address designated in the application.
§ 9.35.150. Physical layout of sexually oriented business.
§ 9.35.160. Location.
A. Any sexually oriented business having available for customers, patrons
or members any booth, room or cubicle for the private viewing of any
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activity must comply with
the following requirements:
1. Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to
and from aisles and public areas of the sexually oriented business
and shall be unobstructed by any door, lock or other control-type
devices.
2. Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following
construction requirements:
a. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent
booths, rooms or cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall.
b. Each booth shall have at least one side totally open to the
public lighted aisle, which may be secured when the booth is in
use by a door which extends from a height of not less than two
feet above the floor.
c. All walls shall be solid and without any openings, extended
from the floor to a height of not less than six feet, and be lightcolored,
nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable.
d. The floor must be light-colored, nonabsorbent, smoothtextured
and easily cleanable.
e. The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle, when not in
use, shall be a minimum of five footcandles at all times, as
measured from the floor.
3. Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or
cubicle at any time. No occupant shall engage in any type of sexual
activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth. No
individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth.
A. No sexually oriented business shall be located:
1. Within 500 feet of an existing sexually oriented business.
2. Within 500 feet of any residential dwelling, including but not
limited to houses, apartments, condominiums or flats.
§ 9.35.140 GRAFTON CODE § 9.35.160
1.01:242
§ 9.35.170. Responsibilities of licensee.
3. Within 500 feet of any preexisting place of worship, including but
not limited to any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building
which is primarily used for religious worship and related religious
activities.
4. Within 500 feet of any public or private educational facility,
including but not limited to any child day-care establishments,
nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools,
junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational
schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education
schools, junior colleges and universities. "School" includes the
school grounds, but does not include facilities used primarily for
another purpose and only incidentally at a school.
5. Within 500 feet from any public park or recreational area which has
been designated for park or recreational activities, including but
not limited to a park, a playground, nature trails, swimming pool,
reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/
bicycle paths, wilderness areas, or other similar public land within
the Village which is under the control, operation or management of
the Village and recreational authorities.
6. Within 500 feet of any premises that in any manner sells or
dispenses alcohol or is licensed pursuant to the alcohol beverage
control regulations of the state.
B. For the purposes of this section, distances are to be measured in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from
the nearest portion of the building or structure used as the part of the
premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted to the
nearest property line of the premises of a use listed in Subsection A.
The presence of a city, county or other political subdivision boundary
shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the distance
requirements of this section.
A. Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the
licensee, if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization,
knowledge or approval of the licensee or as a result of the licensee's
negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the licensee
shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if
the licensee committed the act or caused the omission.
B. Any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the
licensee for the purposes of determining whether the licensee's license
shall be revoked, suspended or renewed.
§ 9.35.160 CODE ADOPTION § 9.35.170
1.01:243
§ 9.35.180. Additional regulations for escort agencies.
§ 9.35.190. Additional regulations concerning sexually oriented
businesses.
C. No employee of a sexually oriented business shall allow any minor to
loiter around or to frequent a sexually oriented business. It shall be the
duty of the licensee of each sexually oriented business to ensure that an
attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the sexually oriented
business at all times during such sexually oriented businesses' regular
business hours and to prevent any person under the age of 18 years of
age from entering the sexually oriented business. It shall be presumed
that an attendant knew a person was under the age of 18, unless such
attendant asked for and was furnished:
1. A valid operator's, commercial operator's or chauffeur's driver's
license; or
2. Personal identification card issued by the State of Wisconsin
reflecting that such person is 18 years of age or older.
D. The licensee shall maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary manner
at all times.
E. The licensee shall maintain at least five footcandles of light in the public
portions of the establishment, including aisles, at all times. However, if
a lesser level of illumination in the aisles is necessary to enable a patron
to view any activity in a booth, room or cubicle adjoining an aisle, a
lesser amount of illumination may be maintained in such aisle;
provided, however, at no time shall there be less than one footcandle of
illumination of said aisles, as measured from the floor.
F. The licensee shall ensure compliance of the sexually oriented business
and its patrons with the provisions of this chapter.
G. The licensee shall ensure that no alcohol beverages are sold, used or
consumed on the premises of a sexually oriented business.
A. An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years.
B. A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or agrees to
act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years.
A. It shall be prohibited in a sexually oriented business for a person to
appear in a state of nudity or engage in specified sexual activities.
B. It shall be prohibited in a sexually oriented business to appear in a
seminude condition, unless the person is an employee who, while
seminude, is at least five feet from any patron or customer and on a
stage at least two feet from the floor.
§ 9.35.170 GRAFTON CODE § 9.35.190
1.01:244
§ 9.35.200. Prohibition against children in sexually oriented
business.
It shall be prohibited for a person under the age of 18 years to be on the
premises of a sexually oriented business.
§ 9.35.210. Hours of operation.
§ 9.35.220. Exclusions.
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the following establishments:
theaters, performing arts centers, civic centers, and dinner theaters where
live dance, ballet, music and dramatic performances of serious artistic merit
are offered on a regular basis; and in which the predominant business or
attraction is not the offering of entertainment which is intended for sexual
interests or titillation of customers; and where the establishment is not
distinguished by an emphasis on or the advertising or promotion of nude
or seminude performances. While expressive live nudity may occur within
these establishments, this chapter seeks only to minimize and prevent
the secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses on the community.
Negative secondary effects have not been associated with the
establishments referenced in this section.
§ 9.35.230. Enforcement.
The Village of Grafton Police Department shall have the authority to enter
any sexually oriented business within the Village at all reasonable times to
inspect the premises and enforce this chapter.
§ 9.35.240. Violations and penalties; prosecutions.
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business without a valid license or in violation of this chapter is subject to a
C. It shall be prohibited for an employee, while seminude in a sexually
oriented business, to receive directly any pay or gratuity from any
patron or customer or for any patron or customer to pay or give any
gratuity directly to any employee while that employee is seminude in a
sexually oriented business.
D. It shall be prohibited in a sexually oriented business to serve, sell, use,
provide or consume any intoxicating liquor, cereal malt beverage or any
other alcohol beverage.
A. No sexually oriented business shall be open between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays or between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
12:00 noon on Sundays.
B. All sexually oriented businesses shall be open to inspection at all
reasonable times by the Grafton Police Department and the Building
Inspector.
§ 9.35.190 CODE ADOPTION § 9.35.240
1.01:245
suit for injunction as well as municipal prosecution. Such violation shall be
punishable by a fine of $500 plus court costs. Each day a sexually oriented
business so operates is a separate offense or violation.
§ 9.35.250. Severability.
Each section and provision of this chapter is hereby declared to be
independent divisions and subdivisions and, not withstanding any other
evidence of legislative intent, it is hereby declared to be the controlling
legislative intent that, if any provisions of this chapter, or the application
thereof to any person or circumstances is held to be invalid, the remaining
sections or provisions and the application of such sections and provisions to
any person or circumstances other than those to which is held to be invalid
shall not be affected thereby, and it is hereby declared that such sections
and provisions would have been passed independently of such section or
provision so known to be invalid.
§ 9.35.260. Conflicting ordinances repealed.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter are hereby repealed.
Chapter 9.36
REGULATION OF SMOKING BY MINORS AND POSSESSION
OF SMOKING MATERIALS ON SCHOOL PROPERTY
§ 9.36.010. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. No. A-018-92, 1992]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CIGARETTES — Any roll of tobacco wrapped in paper or other substance
other than tobacco.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Shall have the meaning given in
§ 30.50(4s), Wis. Stats.
RETAILER — Any person who sells, exposes for sale or possesses with intent
to sell to consumers any cigarettes.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS — Cigars, cheroots, stogies, periques, granulated,
plug cut, crimp cut, ready-rubbed and other smoking tobacco, snuff, snuff
flour, cavendish, plug and twisted tobacco, fine cut and other chewing
tobaccos, shorts, refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of
tobacco and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such a manner
as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or both for
chewing and smoking. "Tobacco products" does not include cigarettes, as
defined under § 139.30(1m), Wis. Stats.
§ 9.36.020. Regulation of cigarettes and tobacco products on school
premises. [Amended by Ord. No. A-018-92, 1992]
§ 9.35.240 GRAFTON CODE § 9.36.020
1.01:246
§ 9.36.030. Designation of smoking areas. [Amended by Ord. No.
A-018-92, 1992; Ord. No. 013, Series 2010]
§ 9.36.040. State smoking statutes adopted. [Amended by Ord. No.
022, Series 2010]
Chapter 9.37
CURFEW PROVISIONS
§ 9.37.010. General curfew requirements.
A. No person shall use cigarettes or tobacco products in any building used
principally for educational purposes, or in which a school is located or a
course of instruction or training program is offered, which program has
been approved or licensed by a state agency or board, and the grounds
or campus upon which the school is located.
B. The regulation of smoking in Subsection B of this section does not apply
to areas that have designated smoking areas under § 9.36.030 of this
chapter.
A. A person in charge or his or her agent may designate smoking areas in
places where smoking is permitted under Subsection B of this section
unless a fire marshal, law, ordinance or resolution prohibits smoking.
Entire rooms and buildings may be designated smoking areas.
B. If an entire room is designated a smoking area, the person in charge or
his or her agent shall post notice of the designation conspicuously on or
near all entrances to the room normally used by the public. If an entire
building is designated a smoking area, notice of the designation shall be
posted on or near all entrances to the building normally used by the
public, but posting notice of the designation on or near entrances to
rooms within the building is not required.
A. Purchase or possession of cigarette or tobacco by person under 18
years of age prohibited. A violation of § 254.92, Wis. Stats., adopted by
reference by § 9.01.010 of the Grafton Code, shall be cited using this
Code section number. The terms and definitions of Chapter 9.01 of this
Code shall remain applicable to any such offense.
B. Restrictions on sale or gift of cigarettes or tobacco products. A violation
of § 134.66, Wis. Stats., adopted by reference by § 9.01.010 of the
Grafton Code, shall be cited using this Code section number. The terms
and definitions of Chapter 9.01 of this Code shall remain applicable to
any such offense.
A. No minor, age 16 years or under, shall loiter, idle, wander, stroll or be
either on foot or in a vehicle of any nature in or upon the public streets,
highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds,
public places and public buildings, places of amusement and
§ 9.36.020 CODE ADOPTION § 9.37.010
1.01:247
§ 9.37.020. Parental responsibility.
No parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a
minor age 16 or under shall permit such minor to violate the provisions of
§ 9.37.010A.
§ 9.37.030. Violations by minors.
Any minor violating the provisions of § 9.37.010A shall be handled in
accordance with the juvenile court laws or procedure.
entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places in the Village
of Grafton between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the
following day, official Village time. [Amended by Ord. No. 010, Series
2004]
B. The provisions of this section do not apply to a minor accompanied by
his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and
custody of the minor, or where the minor is upon an emergency errand
or legitimate business permitted by his or her parent, guardian or other
adult person having the care and custody of the minor or is pursuing his
employment, or returning from an authorized public or parochial school
function or other organizational function which such function shall have
been duly registered with the Police Department by a responsible
officer of the organization. The prohibition provisions of this section
shall also not apply when a juvenile is exercising First Amendment
rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free
exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly. To
exercise the exception for protected First Amendment activities, the
juvenile and/or his or her parent, guardian or other person having the
care and custody of the minor shall deliver to the Village of Grafton
Police Department a written communication, signed by the juvenile and
countersigned, if practicable, by a parent, guardian or other adult
person having the care and custody of the minor, with their home
address and telephone number, specifying when, where and in what
manner the juvenile will be in a public place during hours when this
chapter is applicable.
C. Juveniles who fail to notify the Grafton Police Department of their intent
to exercise First Amendment activities between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 5:00 a.m. shall be given an opportunity to provide a reasonable
explanation of their presence in public when confronted by law
enforcement personnel. Juveniles shall not be cited for a violation of
this section if it is determined by law enforcement personnel that the
juvenile is exercising a protected First Amendment activity and prior
notification as required by this chapter was impossible or impractical.
D. Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 9.37.010 GRAFTON CODE § 9.37.040
1.01:248
§ 9.37.040. Violations and penalties. [Amended by Ord. No. 010,
Series 2004]
Any parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody
of a minor violating § 9.37.010A shall forfeit no less than $10 nor more
than $200 and, in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned until such
forfeiture and the costs of prosecution are paid, but not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 9.38
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
§ 9.38.010. Disorderly conduct; unreasonable noise. [Amended by
Ord. No. 005, Series 1995; Ord. No. 013, Series 2010]
§ 9.38.015. Possession of controlled substances. [Amended by Ord.
No. 468-85, 1985]
No person shall possess a controlled substance which is a narcotic drug,
as defined by Ch. 961, Wis. Stats., unless the substance was obtained
A. Any person who makes or assists in making any noise tending to
unreasonably disturb the peace and quiet of persons in the vicinity
thereof is guilty of disorderly conduct, unless the making of said noise
cannot be prevented and is necessary for the protection or preservation
of property or of the health, safety, life or limb of some person.
B. Factors to be considered. The following serve as a guideline and shall
be considered in determining whether a noise is unreasonable under
Subsection A:
1. The intensity of the noise;
2. Whether the noise is usual or unusual in the area;
3. The number of persons affected;
4. The proximity of the noise to residential dwellings;
5. The location of the operation or property from which the noise
emanates, and the nature and zoning of the property and the
surrounding area or neighborhood;
6. The density of habitation of the area that is impacted by the noise;
7. The reasonableness of the use of the property from which the noise
emanates;
8. The time of day or night that the noise occurs;
9. The duration of the noise;
10. Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant.
§ 9.37.040 CODE ADOPTION § 9.38.015
1.01:249
directly from or pursuant to a valid prescription or order of a practitioner
while acting in the course of his professional practice, except as otherwise
authorized by Ch. 961, Wis. Stats.
§ 9.38.020. Violations and penalties. [Amended by Ord. No.
A391-80, 1980; Ord. No. 468-85, 1985]
Any person who shall violate any provisions of § 9.38.010 shall, upon
conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $25 nor more than $100, together
with the costs of prosecution, and any person who shall violate § 9.38.015
shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $100 nor more than
$200, together with the costs of prosecution. In the event of a failure to pay
such forfeiture, where no showing of indigency is made, the defendant may
be imprisoned no more than 90 days, as the court deems fit or until such
judgment is sooner paid.
Chapter 9.39
REGULATION OF SMOKING IN MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS
§ 9.39.010. Smoking in municipal buildings.
The use of tobacco products has been shown to be hazardous to one's
health. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a safe and healthy
environment for members of the public and all employees of the Village of
Grafton by regulating the use of these products in municipal buildings.
§ 9.39.020. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
CIGARETTES — Shall be defined as indicated in § 139.30(1m), Wis. Stats.,
and shall mean any roll of tobacco wrapped in paper or other substance
other than tobacco.
SMOKING — To smoke or carry a lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette or a
tobacco product as outlined herein in any form.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS — Cigars, cheroots, stogies, periques, granulated,
plug cut, crimp cut, ready-rubbed and other smoking tobacco, cavendish
and twisted tobacco, fine cut and other tobaccos, shorts, refuse scraps,
clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco and other kinds and forms of
tobacco prepared in such a manner as to be suitable for smoking in a pipe or
otherwise. "Tobacco products" does not include cigarettes, as defined under
§ 139.30(1m), Wis. Stats.
§ 9.39.030. Smoking prohibited in certain public areas.
A. Smoking, as defined in § 9.36.020 of this chapter, shall be prohibited in
the following municipal facilities: [Amended by Ord. No. 005, Series
2008]
§ 9.38.015 GRAFTON CODE § 9.39.030
1.01:250
§ 9.39.040. Signs prohibiting smoking.
§ 9.39.050. Penalties for public.
Members of the public who violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $50 for the first offense and not
more than $100 for the second and subsequent offenses, together with the
costs of prosecution.
§ 9.39.060. Penalties for Village employees.
Chapter 9.40
1. Department of Public Works, 1300 Hickory Street.
2. Family Aquatic Center, 649 North Green Bay Road.
3. Multipurpose Senior Center, 1665 Seventh Avenue.
4. Police Department, 1981 Washington Street.
5. U.S.S. Liberty Memorial Public Library, 1620 Eleventh Avenue.
6. Village Hall, 1971 Washington Street.
7. Water and Wastewater Utility, 1900 Ninth Avenue.
8. Robert P. Zaun Pavilion, Lime Kiln Park, 2020 S. Green Bay Road.
B. The prohibition on smoking shall become effective on January 1, 2008,
and shall apply to the members of the public and all existing employees
of the Village of Grafton as well as all perspective employees upon their
application for employment.
A. Signs prohibiting smoking shall be prominently posted at or near the
entrance to the municipal facilities listed in § 9.36.030.
B. The person in charge of each building or structure shall be held
responsible for the enforcement of the regulations in this chapter.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, deface or destroy any
legally required "No Smoking" sign or to smoke in any place where a
"No Smoking" sign is posted.
A. Employees of the Village of Grafton who violate any provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to disciplinary action.
B. The employee's supervisor shall identify the violation and notify the
employee in writing of said violation.
C. The form of disciplinary action to be taken (oral warning or written
reprimand) and the penalty assigned (warning or suspension for
multiple violations) shall be at the discretion of the supervisor upon
consultation with the department head and Village Administrator.
§ 9.39.030 CODE ADOPTION § 9.39.060
1.01:251
NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY
§ 9.40.010. Nuisances affecting peace and safety.
The following are specifically declared to be nuisances disturbing the public
peace or endangering the public safety:
A. All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent
persons driving automobiles or other vehicles on the Village streets
from having a clear view of traffic approaching an intersection from
cross streets;
B. All loud, discordant or unnecessary noises and annoying vibrations.
Construction will be limited to between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:30
p.m. [Amended by Ord. No. 034, Series 1999]
C. All fences constructed wholly or in part of barbed wire which are
located within three feet of any public street, alley or sidewalk;
D. All open or unguarded wells, cisterns, pools or excavations so located as
to endanger public safety or the safety of children;
E. All buildings, walls and other structures which have been damaged by
fire, decay or otherwise to an extent exceeding 1/2 of their original
value, and which are so situated as to endanger the safety of the public;
F. All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of repair as to be
dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human use;
G. All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices which purport to
be or may be mistaken as an official traffic control device, placed or
maintained upon or in view of any public highway, street, alley or
railway crossing;
H. All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over the
streets, alleys or public ways of the Village or projecting more than six
feet over the sidewalks, or so situated or constructed as to endanger
the public safety;
I. All tree limbs which are less than 10 feet above the surface of any
public sidewalk or 14 feet above the surface of any street;
J. All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so situated
or operated on private property as to attract the public; and
K. The allowing of rainwater, ice or snow to fall from any building or
structure upon any street or sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk.
L. Junk and rubbish. No owner or operator shall cause or permit the
accumulation of rubbish, lumber, metal, junk, wood, brick, cement
block, old automobiles or parts thereof, trucks, tractors, refrigerators,
furnaces, washing machines, microwave ovens, stoves, machinery or
parts thereof, such as may tend to harbor rodents or vermin, may tend
§ 9.39.060 GRAFTON CODE § 9.40.010
1.01:252
§ 9.40.020. Nuisances prohibited.
No person shall, within the Village, cause or create a public peace or safety
nuisance or permit such nuisance to remain on premises owned or occupied
by him.
§ 9.40.030. Abatement of nuisances affecting peace and safety.
[Amended by Ord. No. 015-94, Series 1994]
The procedure for abating nuisances affecting peace and safety shall be that
procedure set forth in §§ 8.36.20 through 8.36.090 of the Code.
Chapter 9.42
OBSTRUCTION OF ENTRANCES
§ 9.42.010. Obstruction of entrances.
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct in any manner the entrance to any
place of public assembly or to obstruct any entrance or stairway to any
business building within the Village.
Chapter 9.44
VAGRANCY AND LOITERING
§ 9.44.010. Vagrancy prohibited.
No person shall loiter or prowl in a place, at a time, or in a manner not usual
for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the
safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which
to depreciate property values in the area or create a visual or other
nuisance or hazard on any premises within the corporate limits of the
Village, except as may be permitted by the Village Board. [Amended
by Ord. No. 010-94, Series 1994]
M. Compression brakes. [Amended by Ord. No. 012, Series 2002]
1. Definition. A compression brake, commonly referred to as a
"Jacobs" brake, "Jake" brake, engine brake or dynamic braking
device, means a device primarily on trucks for the conversion of the
engine from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for
the purpose of braking without the use of or in addition to wheel
brakes.
2. Use prohibited. No person shall use a motor vehicle within the
Village limits where the compression brake is in any way engaged
or activated on such motor vehicle or any unit a part thereof, except
for the aversion of imminent dangers. This section does not include
fire apparatus on emergency runs.
§ 9.40.010 CODE ADOPTION § 9.44.010
1.01:253
may be considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted is the
fact that the actor takes flight upon appearance of a police or peace officer,
refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or
any object. Unless flight by the actor or other circumstances makes it
impracticable, a police or peace officer shall, prior to any arrest for an
offense under this section, afford the actor an opportunity to dispel any
alarm which would otherwise be warranted by requesting him to identify
himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted
of an offense under this section if the police or peace officer did not comply
with the preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial that the explanation
given by the actor was true and, if believed by the police or peace officer at
the time, would have dispelled the alarm.
§ 9.44.020. Unauthorized presence on school property prohibited.
[Amended by Ord. No. A-420-82, 1982]
It shall be unlawful for any student who is under suspension, expulsion
or other discipline excluding him for attending any school under the
jurisdiction of the Grafton School Board, or for any person not a student
presently enrolled to attend such schools or not an employee of such
schools, or not a parent or guardian of a student so enrolled, or not an
otherwise authorized person, to be present within any school building or
upon any school grounds under the jurisdiction of the School Board without
first having secured authorization to be there from the principal or other
person in charge of the school building or grounds, except while in direct
route to secure said authorization. An authorized person shall include any
person who is present at any school building or school grounds for any
purpose previously authorized by the Grafton School Board or its designee.
A. Any person shall, upon request of the principal or other person in
charge of any school building or upon any school grounds under the
jurisdiction of the Grafton School Board, or upon the request of any
police officer, display any written authorization to be present, which he
or she may have in his or her possession, or otherwise explain his or her
presence or status as such student, employee, parent or guardian, or
authorized person.
B. All entrances to the school buildings referred to in Subsection A shall be
posted with a notice stating, "Entry into school building by
unauthorized persons prohibited."
C. Unauthorized presence shall include any vehicle that is found on school
property which has not received permission to be there, or whose
occupants or owners are not on school property for some legitimate
business or activity, or which is parked in an area that restricts parking
to certain authorized vehicles. Such vehicle may be issued a Village of
Grafton parking citation that regulates parking or may be towed away
at the direction of the school principal or person in charge. The Police
Department may also have any vehicle towed away which, because of
its location, creates a hazard to life or property.
§ 9.44.010 GRAFTON CODE § 9.44.020
1.01:254
§ 9.44.021. Truancy. [Amended by Ord. No. A-517-88, 1988;
3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 005-2015]
D. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the forfeiture of not less than $10 nor more
than $200 for each offense, together with the cost of prosecution, and in
the event of a failure to pay such forfeiture, where no showing of
indigency is made, the defendant may be imprisoned for no more than
90 days, as the court deems fit, or until such judgment is sooner paid.
E. This section shall only apply to property under the jurisdiction of the
Grafton School Board within its jurisdictional limits of the Village of
Grafton.
A. In this section, "truant" means a pupil who is absent from school
without an acceptable excuse under § 118.15, Wis. Stats., for part or all
of any day on which school is held during a school semester.
B. In this section, "habitual truant" means a pupil who is absent from
school without an acceptable excuse under § 118.15, Wis. Stats., for
part or all of five or more days on which school is held during a school
semester. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01,
Code Adoption)]
C. Truancy prohibited. No child shall be a truant or a habitual truant as
defined in Subsections A and B above. The following dispositions are
available to the court:
1. Suspension of the child's operating privileges, as defined in
§ 340.01(40), Wis. Stats., for not less than 30 days nor more than a
year. The court may take possession of any suspended license. If a
court takes possession of a license, it shall destroy the license. The
court shall forward to the Wisconsin Department of Transportation
a notice stating the reasons for and the duration of the suspension;
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code
Adoption)]
2. A municipal citation may be issued with a forfeiture of not more
than $500 plus costs. All or part of the forfeiture plus costs may be
assessed against the person, the parents or guardian of the person,
or both.
3. An order for the child to participate in counseling, community
service or a supervised work program, as provided in § 938.34(5g),
Wis. Stats.
4. An order for the child to remain at home except during hours in
which the child is attending religious worship or a school program,
including travel time required to get to and from the school
program or place of worship. The order may permit a child to leave
his home if the child is accompanied by a parent or guardian.
§ 9.44.020 CODE ADOPTION § 9.44.021
1.01:255
§ 9.44.030. Trespassing. [Amended by Ord. No. A-423-82, 1982]
No person shall enter upon the land or premises of another without the
permission of the owner or occupant of the land or premises.
§ 9.44.040. Loitering in places of public assembly or use. [Amended
by Ord. No. 045, Series 2000]
No person shall by loitering interfere with the free use of any public
assembly or public use by others using such place of public assembly. It
shall be an offense under this section for a person to refuse to discontinue
such loitering after a request to do so by a police officer or by the person in
charge of the place of public assembly.
§ 9.44.050. Loitering on private premises without invitation.
[Amended by Ord. No. 045, Series 2000]
No person shall loiter on private premises without invitation from the owner
or occupant. It shall be an offense under this section for a person to refuse
to discontinue such loitering after being requested to do so by a police
officer or by the owner or occupant.
§ 9.44.060. Loitering for illegal drug activity. [Added 9-19-2016 by
Ord. No. 014]
5. An order for the child to attend an educational program under
§ 938.34, Wis. Stats.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated herein:
ILLEGAL DRUG ACTIVITY — Unlawful conduct contrary to any
provision of Ch. 961, Wis. Stats., or any substantially similar federal
statute, statute of a foreign state, or ordinance of any political
subdivision.
KNOWN AREA OF ILLEGAL DRUG ACTIVITY — A public place where,
within three years previous to the date of arrest for violation of this
section, and within the collective knowledge of the Police Department,
a person has been arrested for a violation which led to a conviction in
any municipal, state or federal court of an offense involving illegal drug
activity.
KNOWN DRUG SELLER OR PURCHASER — A person who, within
three years previous to the date of arrest for violation of this section,
had within the collective knowledge of the Police Department been
convicted in any municipal, state or federal court of an offense involving
illegal drug activity.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any area generally visible to public view and
includes, but is not limited to, streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas,
parks, driveways, parking lots and buildings open to the general public,
including those which serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and
§ 9.44.021 GRAFTON CODE § 9.44.060
1.01:256
Chapter 9.45
LOITERING BY SEX OFFENDERS
§ 9.45.010. Definitions.
The definitions delineated in § 9.67.020 of the Village of Grafton Municipal
Code shall be applicable to this chapter. In addition, the term "child safety
zones" shall include any real property upon which there exists any route,
path, area or facility used for or which supports a use of:
the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the ground
surrounding them.
B. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining
whether any person who loiters or drives in any public place in a
manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of inducing,
enticing, soliciting or procuring another to engage in illegal drug
activity are:
1. The person frequents, either on foot or in a motor vehicle, a known
area of illegal drug activity; repeatedly beckons to stop or attempts
to stop known drug sellers or purchasers or engages known drug
sellers or purchasers in conversation;
2. Stops the motor vehicle the person is the operator of and sells or
purchases or attempts to sell or purchase illegal drugs to or from a
known drug seller or purchaser;
3. Transfers small objects or packages for currency in a furtive
fashion or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself, herself or any
object or package which reasonably could be involved in illegal
drug activity;
4. Takes flight upon appearance of a police officer.
C. The violator's conduct must be such as to demonstrate a specific intent
to induce, entice, solicit or procure another to engage in illegal drug
activity. No arrest may be made for a violation of this section unless the
arresting officer first affords the person an opportunity to explain the
person's presence and conduct, unless flight by the person or other
circumstances makes it impracticable to afford such an opportunity,
and no one shall be convicted of violating this section if it appears at
trial that the explanation given was true and disclosed a lawful purpose.
D. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the forfeiture of not less than $500 nor more
than $5,000 or, upon default of payment, be imprisoned for not more
than 90 days.
A. A public park, parkway, parkland, park facility;
§ 9.44.060 CODE ADOPTION § 9.45.010
1.01:257
§ 9.45.020. Prohibition.
B. A public swimming pool;
C. A public library;
D. A recreational trail;
E. A public playground;
F. A school for children;
G. Athletic fields used by children;
H. A day-care center;
I. Any specialized school for children, including, but not limited, to a
gymnastics academy, dance academy or music school;
J. Aquatic facilities open to the public; and
K. Any facility for children (which means a public or private school, a
group home, as defined in § 48.02(7), Wis. Stats., a residential care
center for children and youth, as defined in § 48.02(15d), Wis. Stats., a
shelter care facility, as defined in § 48.02(17), Wis. Stats., a foster home,
as defined in § 48.02(6), Wis. Stats., a day-care center licensed under
§ 48.65, Wis. Stats., a day-care program established under
§ 120.13(14), Wis. Stats., a day-care provider certified under § 48.651,
Wis. Stats., or a youth center, as defined in § 961.01(22), Wis. Stats.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code
Adoption)]
L. Designated walking zones for schools and schools districts.
M. Rehabilitative agencies for children and adults with developmental
disabilities (i.e., Portal Industries, Inc.).
A. It shall be unlawful for any offender to enter into, congregate, loiter,
wander, stroll, stand or play in or near a child safety zone under
circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons in the
vicinity.
B. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining
whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that the actor takes flight
upon appearance of a police or peace officer, refuses to identify himself
or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight
by the actor or other circumstances makes it impracticable, a police or
peace officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this chapter,
afford the actor an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would
otherwise be warranted by requesting him to identify himself and
explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an
offense under this subsection if the police or peace officer did not
comply with the preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial that the
§ 9.45.010 GRAFTON CODE § 9.45.020
1.01:258
§ 9.45.030. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall pay, upon
conviction, a forfeiture not to exceed $1,000 per violation, plus court costs.
Each day during which a violation of this chapter is permitted to exist shall
be deemed to be a separate violation.
Chapter 9.46
SKATEBOARDS AND PLAY VEHICLES
§ 9.46.010. Operation prohibited in certain locations. [Added by
Ord. No. A-554-90, 1990; amended by Ord. No. 012, Series 2010]
It is unlawful for any person to operate or ride a skateboard, roller skates,
roller skis or play vehicles as defined in § 340.01, Wis. Stats., in any of the
following locations:
§ 9.46.020. Conditions where operation lawful.
It is lawful for operators or riders of such skateboards, roller skates, roller
skis, or play vehicles to use this equipment on sidewalks or alleys not
located in a business district, provided that they yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians using city sidewalks, and further provided that the use does
not endanger or interfere with pedestrian traffic on said sidewalks. Further,
the operators or riders of such skateboards, roller skates, roller skis or
play vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles using alleys in any
nonbusiness district.
Chapter 9.47
CHRONIC NUISANCE PREMISES
explanation given by the actor was true and, if believed by the police or
peace officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm.
A. On any city street;
B. On any city sidewalk or alley in any business district as defined by
§ 340.01, Wis. Stats.;
C. On any privately or publicly owned parking lot or parking ramp without
the owner's written consent and where the owner or lessee posts a sign
on said property prohibiting the operation or riding of skateboards or
play vehicles as defined by § 340.01, Wis. Stats.;
D. On any public property where signs prohibit it;
E. On any private property other than a parking lot or ramp unless
permission has been received from the owner, lessee or person in
charge of that property.
§ 9.45.020 CODE ADOPTION § 9.47.010
1.01:259
§ 9.47.010. Introduction.
Notwithstanding other provisions of this Municipal Code with regard to
public nuisance prohibitions, penalties and enforcement, this chapter
establishes additional enforcement authority of the Village with regard to
"chronic nuisance premises," as defined herein.
§ 9.47.020. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
CHRONIC NUISANCE PREMISES — A premises that meets any of the
following criteria:
CHRONIC NUISANCE PREMISES NOTICE — The notice issued by the
Chief of Police or his/her designee and/or the Building Inspector or his/her
designee and referred to in § 9.47.030A of this chapter.
ENFORCEMENT ACTION — Any of the following: the physical arrest of an
individual(s); the issuance of a citation for a law violation; or the filing of a
civil or criminal action in a court of law by the Village Attorney or District
Attorney regarding nuisance activities.
NUISANCE ACTIVITIES — For purposes of establishing a chronic nuisance
premises, means any of the following activities, behaviors or conduct:
Is a premises which has generated three or more calls for police
services that have resulted in enforcement action for nuisance activities
on three separate days within a three-hundred-sixty-five-day period
and/or has generated five or more cases for nuisance activities from
at least five building inspections occurring within a one-year period,
with such calls resulting in enforcement action. Three or more calls for
police services resulting in enforcement action for nuisance activities
includes enforcement action taken against any person associated with
the premises while at or within 200 feet of the premises for a nuisance
activity; or
A.
Is a premises for which a court of law has determined that, pursuant
to a search warrant request, probable cause exists that manufacture,
distribution or delivery of a controlled substance has occurred on or in
association with the premises within 30 days prior to the date of the
search warrant application; or
B.
Is a premises which has had one enforcement action associated with
the premises resulting from the manufacture, delivery or distribution of
a controlled substance(s), as defined in Ch. 961, Wis. Stats.
C.
A. An act of harassment as defined in § 947.013, Wis. Stats.
B. Disorderly conduct as defined in § 947.01, Wis. Stats.
C. Crimes of violence as defined in Ch. 940, Wis. Stats.
D. Resisting or obstructing an officer as prohibited by § 946.41, Wis. Stats.
§ 9.47.010 GRAFTON CODE § 9.47.020
1.01:260
PERSON ASSOCIATED WITH — Any person who, whenever engaged in a
nuisance activity, has entered, patronized, visited, or attempted to enter,
patronize or visit, or waited to enter, patronize or visit a premises or person
present on a premises, including without limitation any officer, director,
customer, agent, employee or any independent contractor of a property,
Indecent exposure as prohibited by § 9.26.010 of the Municipal Code or
§ 944.20(1)(b), Wis. Stats.
E.
F. Damage to property as prohibited by § 943.01, Wis. Stats.
Discharge of a firearm as prohibited by § 9.74.010 of the Municipal
Code.
G.
Crimes involving illegal possession of firearms as defined in §§ 941.23,
941.26, 941.28, 941.29 and 948.60, Wis. Stats.
H.
Trespass to land as defined in § 943.13, Wis. Stats, or criminal trespass
to dwelling as defined in § 943.14, Wis. Stats.
I.
J. Theft as defined in § 943.20, Wis. Stats.
K. Arson as defined in § 943.02, Wis. Stats.
All nuisances enumerated in Chapters 8.25, 8.28, 8.32, 9.63 and
§ 9.40.010 of the Municipal Code. [Amended 3-19-2012 by Ord. No.
002-2012]
L.
M. Keeping a place of prostitution as defined in § 944.34, Wis. Stats.
N. Vagrancy as prohibited by § 9.44.010 of the Municipal Code.
O. Prostitution as prohibited by § 944.30, Wis. Stats.
P. Soliciting prostitutes as prohibited by § 944.32, Wis. Stats.
Q. Pandering as prohibited by § 944.33, Wis. Stats.
Selling, offering for sale or giving away of any intoxicating liquors or
fermented malt beverages without a license as provided in § 125.04(1),
Wis. Stats.
R.
Possession, manufacture, distribution or delivery of a controlled
substance or related offenses as defined in Ch. 961, Wis. Stats.
S.
T. Maintaining a drug dwelling as defined in § 961.42, Wis. Stats.
U. Illegal gambling as defined in § 945.02, Wis. Stats.
Owning, keeping or harboring a dangerous animal, as defined in
Chapter 6.04 of the Municipal Code.
V.
Violations regarding regulation of dogs, cats and other animals as
defined in Chapter 6.08 of the Municipal Code.
W.
§ 9.47.020 CODE ADOPTION § 9.47.020
1.01:261
person in charge, or owner of a premises. "Person" under this chapter
includes entities as well as individuals.
PERSON IN CHARGE — Any person in actual, as operator, or in
constructive possession of a premises, including but not limited to an owner
or occupant of premises under his or her ownership or control.
§ 9.47.030. Procedure.
A. Upon finding that a premises meets the definition of a chronic nuisance
premises, the Chief of Police or his/her designee may declare the
premises a chronic nuisance premises. The Chief of Police or his/her
designee shall provide written notice of his or her determination to the
premises owner identified by the Village Assessor's records for that
premises. The chronic nuisance premises notice ("CNP notice") shall be
deemed delivered if sent either by first class mail to the premises
owner's last known address or delivered in person to the premises
owner. If the premises owner cannot be located, the notice shall be
deemed to be properly delivered if a copy of it is left at the premises
owner's usual place of abode in the presence of some competent
member of the family at least 14 years of age or a competent adult
currently residing there and who shall be informed of the contents of
the CNP notice. If a current address cannot be located, it shall be
deemed sufficient if a copy of the CNP notice is sent by first class mail
to the last known address of the owner as identified by the records of
the Village Assessor.
B. The CNP notice shall contain the following information:
1. Street address, parcel number or a legal description sufficient to
identify the premises.
2. A concise statement, including a description of the relevant
activities supporting the determination that the premises is a
chronic nuisance premises.
3. A statement that the owner shall immediately notify the Chief of
Police or his/her designee of any change in address to ensure
receipt of future notices.
4. A statement that the cost of future enforcement may be assessed as
a special charge against the premises.
5. A statement that the owner shall, within 10 days of receipt of the
CNP notice, respond to the Chief of Police or his/her designee
either with an appeal or to propose a written course of action to
abate the nuisance activities. The statement shall direct the
premises owner to schedule a meeting with the Chief of Police or
his/her designee and/or Building Inspector or his/her designee to
discuss the nuisance activity and the premises owner's intent
regarding abatement.
§ 9.47.020 GRAFTON CODE § 9.47.030
1.01:262
6. A statement that the premises' owner may be subject to a forfeiture
action with a penalty of not less than $1,000 nor more than $5,000
per day for permitting a chronic nuisance premises and may be
subject to imprisonment for failure to pay such forfeiture.
C. In reaching a determination that a premises is a chronic nuisance
premises, activities that were reported to the police by the premises
owner or on-site premises manager shall not be included as nuisance
activities.
D. Section 968.075, Wis. Stats., broadly defines "domestic abuse."
Therefore, in reaching a determination that a premises is a chronic
nuisance premises, activities that are "domestic abuse" incidents
pursuant to § 968.075, Wis. Stats., shall not be included as nuisance
activities unless the incidents have been reviewed by the Chief of Police
or his/her designee and the Village Attorney and a determination is
made that, based upon the specific facts of each incident, the activities
should be deemed nuisance activities as identified under the definition
of "nuisance activities" in § 9.47.020. In determining whether to include
such activities, the Chief of Police or his/her designee and Village
Attorney shall consider the strong public policy in favor of domestic
victims reporting alleged abuses.
E. If the owner responds to the CNP notice pursuant to Subsection B.5 of
this section with a nuisance abatement proposal, the Chief of Police or
his/her designee may accept, reject or work with the owner to modify
the proposal. The plan is acceptable if it can reasonably be expected to
result in abatement of the nuisance activities described in the CNP
notice within 60 days.
F. Premises owners and operators shall be consulted if possible regarding
nuisance abatement methods and strategies and shall be encouraged to
submit a comprehensive nuisance abatement plan.
G. Premises owners and operators shall be consulted if possible regarding
use of available resources, including community service providers,
when nuisance activity associated with the premises is not caused or
contributed to by the direct actions of a tenant.
H. If the premises owner or operator meets with the Chief of Police or his/
her designee and presents an acceptable abatement plan and initiates
action to abate the nuisance activities occurring on the premises, the
Police Department may delay further enforcement of this chapter.
I. If the premises owner or operator ceases to cooperate with the efforts
to abate the nuisance activities, the Chief of Police or his/her designee
will reinstitute enforcement of this chapter, and the premises owner will
be sent a change-in-status letter. This letter will document Police
Department efforts to contact and/or obtain cooperation of the owner or
operator.
§ 9.47.030 CODE ADOPTION § 9.47.030
1.01:263
§ 9.47.040. Penalties and remedies.
J. Failure by the premises owner or operator to respond within 10 days as
directed in this chapter shall result in a forfeiture of $1,000 plus court
costs and fees.
K. The Village may charge the property owner for the cost of enforcement
whenever the Chief of Police or his/her designee determines that any of
the following have occurred:
1. A premises owner has failed to respond to the CNP notice in
Subsection A; or
2. Enforcement action for an additional nuisance activity has
occurred at a premises for which notice has been issued pursuant
to this chapter, and this enforcement action has occurred not less
than 15 days after the CNP notice has been issued; or
3. A course of action submitted pursuant to Subsection E has not been
completed.
L. To charge such costs of enforcement to the property owner, the Chief of
Police or his/her designee shall calculate the cost of enforcement to
abate this and any subsequent nuisance activities and refer such cost to
the Village Director of Administrative Services so that the cost may be
billed to the premises owner. The Chief of Police or his/her designee
shall notify the premises owner of the decision to refer the cost of
enforcement to the Village Director of Administrative Services. Delivery
of this notice, along with a copy of the Chief's referral letter to the
Village Director of Administrative Services, shall be made as set forth in
Subsection A. The notice shall contain:
1. The street address or legal description sufficient for identification
of the premises.
2. A statement that the Chief of Police or his/her designee has
referred the cost of enforcement to the Village Director of
Administrative Services with a concise description of the nuisance
activities and the relevant sections of the ordinances.
3. Notice of the premises owner's right to appeal pursuant to
§ 9.47.050.
M. Each subsequent incident of enforcement action for nuisance activity
shall be deemed a separate violation, and costs will continue to be
assessed pursuant to until the nuisance is abated.
A. Cost recovery. The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall keep an
accurate account of the cost of enforcement and shall report it to the
Village Director of Administrative Services. The Village Director of
Administrative Services shall establish a reasonable charge for the
costs of enforcement of this chapter. Upon receipt of a notice from the
§ 9.47.030 GRAFTON CODE § 9.47.040
1.01:264
§ 9.47.050. Appeal.
Appeal of the determination of the Chief of Police or his/her designee
pursuant to § 9.47.030 or the action of the Village Director of Administrative
Services imposing special charges pursuant to § 9.47.040 against the
premises may be submitted in writing to the Board of Appeals as an
administrative decision under Ch. 68, Wis. Stats.
§ 9.47.060. Eviction or retaliation prohibited.
Chief of Police or his/her designee, issued pursuant to § 9.47.030L, the
Village Director of Administrative Services shall charge any premises
owner found to be in violation of this chapter the costs of enforcement,
in full or in part. Such costs shall be billed to the premises owner by
invoice sent by regular mail and must be paid within 30 days of the
date on the invoice. Any unpaid invoice shall be a lien on such premises
and may be assessed and collected as a special charge pursuant to
§ 66.0627, Wis. Stats. A one-hundred-dollar administrative fee shall be
added to the cost of enforcement charged to the benefited premises any
time the premises is declared a chronic nuisance premises.
B. Suspension of cost recovery. If after the receipt of a billing notice from
the Village Director of Administrative Services the premises owner
develops an acceptable plan and initiates action to abate nuisance
activities occurring on the premises, the Chief of Police or his/her
designee will suspend further enforcement of this chapter. The
premises owner is still responsible for any enforcement costs incurred
prior to the premises owner submitting an abatement plan, including
the administrative fee. If the premises owner ceases to cooperate with
the efforts to abate the nuisance activities, the Chief of Police or his/her
designee will reinstitute enforcement of this chapter after sending the
premises owner a change-in-status letter.
C. Forfeiture. A forfeiture action may be commenced by the Village
Attorney for each enforcement action for nuisance activity occurring
after the premises has been declared a chronic nuisance premises. The
forfeiture shall be not less than $1,000 nor more than $5,000 for each
enforcement action. Upon default of payment, the premises owner may
be imprisoned in the county jail for a period of not more than 90 days.
A. It shall be unlawful for a landlord to terminate the lease agreement or
periodic tenancy of any tenant or otherwise retaliate against any tenant
because that tenant complained to the Chief of Police or his/her
designee about nuisance activities on the landlord's premises. It shall
be unlawful for a landlord or any person acting as an agent for the
landlord to intimidate or actively discourage a tenant and/or persons
associated with a tenant from calling the police to report nuisance
activity associated with a premises. It shall be presumed that any
attempt to increase charges, reduce services, or to otherwise harass or
retaliate against the tenant during the twelve-month period following
§ 9.47.040 CODE ADOPTION § 9.47.060
1.01:265
Chapter 9.50
PROPERTY CRIMES
§ 9.50.010. Property crimes; state statutes adopted.
Chapter 9.52
receipt of the complaint by the Chief of Police or his designee
constitutes unlawful retaliation under this section. Such presumption
shall be rebutted by the preponderance of evidence that the actions
taken by the landlord were based upon good cause. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, a tenant's lease agreement or periodic tenancy may be
terminated for a failure to pay rent; committing nuisance activity as
defined in § 9.47.020 for the commission of waste upon the premises;
violating the terms and conditions of the lease agreement or periodic
tenancy or as otherwise provided in Ch. 704, Wis. Stats. and Ch. ATCP
134, Wis. Adm. Code. A landlord's failure to renew a lease agreement or
periodic tenancy upon expiration of such lease agreement or periodic
tenancy shall not be deemed a violation of this section.
B. "Good cause," as used in this section, means that a landlord must show
good cause for his or her actions, other than one related to or caused by
the operation of this chapter.
C. Penalty. Any person violating this section shall be subject to a forfeiture
of not less than $100 or more than $2,000 per day for each violation
and, upon failure to pay said forfeiture, may be imprisoned in the
county jail for a period of not more than 90 days.
A. Damage to property. A violation of § 943.01, Wis. Stats., adopted by
reference in § 9.01.010 of the Code, shall be cited using this Code
section number. The terms and definitions of Chapter 9.01 of this Code
shall remain applicable to any such offense.
B. Theft. A violation of § 943.20, Wis. Stats., adopted by reference by
§ 9.01.010 of the Code, shall be cited using this Code section number.
The terms and definitions of Chapter 9.01 of this Code shall remain
applicable to any such offense.
C. Fraud on hotel or restaurant keeper, recreational attraction, taxicab
operator, or gas station. A violation of § 943.21, Wis. Stats., adopted by
reference by § 9.01.010 of the Code, shall be cited using this Code
section number. The terms and definitions of Chapter 9.01 of this Code
shall remain applicable to any such offense.
D. Removal of shopping cart. A violation of § 943.55, Wis. Stats., adopted
by reference by § 9.01.010 of the Code, shall be cited using this Code
section number. The terms and definitions of Chapter 9.01 of this Code
shall remain applicable to any such offense.
§ 9.47.060 GRAFTON CODE § 9.50.010
1.01:266
ISSUANCE OF WORTHLESS CHECKS
§ 9.52.010. Worthless checks; state statute adopted.
A violation of § 943.24, Wis. Stats., adopted by reference by § 9.01.010 of
the Code, shall be cited using this Code section number. The terms and
definitions of Chapter 9.01 of this Code shall remain applicable to any such
offense.
Chapter 9.54
LITTERING
§ 9.54.010. Throwing refuse on streets and public grounds.
No person shall throw or leave any paper, fruit peelings, foods, cans,
bottles, glass or any other waste or refuse upon the public grounds, streets,
alleys, school grounds, parks or upon the private premises of any other
person in the Village.
§ 9.54.020. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $1 nor more than $100, together
with the costs of prosecution. In the event of a failure to pay such forfeiture,
where no showing of indigency is made, the defendant may be imprisoned
for no more than 90 days, as the court deems fit or until such judgment is
sooner paid.
Chapter 9.56
SHOPLIFTING
§ 9.56.010. Shoplifting; state statute adopted.
A violation of § 943.50, Wis. Stats., adopted by reference by § 9.01.010 of
the Code, shall be cited using this Code section number. The terms and
definitions of Chapter 9.01 of this Code shall remain applicable to any such
offense.
Chapter 9.58
FRAUDULENT RETURN OF MERCHANDISE
§ 9.58.010. Fraudulent return of merchandise.
It is a violation of this chapter, subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter
1.12, Issuance of Citations, of the Code of the Village of Grafton, for any
person to return merchandise to a merchant for the purpose of claiming a
§ 9.50.010 CODE ADOPTION § 9.58.010
1.01:267
cash refund or credit if the person deceives the merchant by doing any of
the following:
Chapter 9.60
GRAFFITI
§ 9.60.010. Graffiti prohibited. [Amended by Ord. No. 014, Series
1999]
It shall be unlawful for any person to write, draw, inscribe, mark, scratch,
scrawl, paint, spray or otherwise place graffiti of any kind on any public
or private building, structure or place or on any real or personal property.
This shall not be construed to prohibit the placement of temporary and
easily removable chalk or other water-soluble markings on public or private
streets, sidewalks or other paved surfaces incident to youth activities, such
as hopscotch and various types of ball games, or any lawful business or
activity.
A. Represents that such person purchased the merchandise when the
person did not purchase it;
B. Represents that the merchandise was purchased from a particular
merchant when it was not purchased from that merchant;
C. Represents that the merchandise was purchased for a particular price
when it was purchased for a lower price;
D. Gives the merchant a false name, address or telephone number.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GRAFFITI — The intentional marking, drawing or writing with paint,
ink or another substance on, or the intentionally etching into, the
physical property of another without the other person's consent.
PROPERTY — Any real or personal property and that which is affixed,
incidental or appurtenant to real property, including but not limited
to any premises, house, building, structure, fence, wall, sign or other
public or private property.
B. Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a
penalty as set forth in Chapter 1.12, Issuance of Citations. In addition,
any person who shall cause physical damage to or destroy any public
property shall be liable for the costs of replacing or repairing such
damaged or destroyed property. The parent or parents of any
unemancipated minor child who violates said section may also be held
liable for the cost of replacing or repairing such damaged or destroyed
property in accordance with § 895.035, Wis. Stats. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
§ 9.58.010 GRAFTON CODE § 9.60.020
1.01:268
§ 9.60.020. Graffiti removal.
The purpose and intent of this section is to provide a procedure requiring
the removal of graffiti from property within the Village of Grafton. Graffiti
contributes to blight, deterioration to surrounding properties, and reduces
the attractive physical qualities of neighborhoods, all to the detriment of
the Village; constitutes a public nuisance and must be abated promptly to
avoid the detrimental impact of graffiti on the Village, its residents and
businesses and to protect the surrounding properties and neighborhoods.
The existence of graffiti on any property within the Village is expressly
declared to be a public nuisance as it affects the public health, safety and
welfare.
Chapter 9.63
DIGITAL SECURITY IMAGING SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
§ 9.63.010. Security.
A. Graffiti prohibited. No owner of any property within the Village may
maintain or allow any graffiti to remain upon such property for a period
of more than 15 days.
B. Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a
penalty as set forth in Chapter 1.12, Issuance of Citations. Each day in
which a violation continues shall be determined a separate and distinct
offense. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code
Adoption)]
C. If after 30 days the property owner or business manager, if owner is not
accessible, has not removed said graffiti, the Village has the authority
to remove the said graffiti and assess costs to the property tax roll.
A. Purpose and intent. To provide for the implementation and use of digital
security imaging systems (DSIS) that monitor the exterior and interior
spaces and areas of certain commercial establishments. The DSIS will
afford the opportunity for public safety departments (e.g., Police and
Fire Department) to visually examine certain commercial
establishments and will provide emergency response personnel with a
visual assessment of an emergency situation in advance of arrival. The
advanced visual assessment may pertain to a person(s) (personal
identification), a location (scene identification), and/or a situation
(action identification) in emergency situations.
1. While it is anticipated that the implementation and usage of DSIS
will greatly aid law enforcement agencies in subsequent criminal
investigations and prosecutions, it is recognized that DSIS alone
cannot provide for or be solely relied upon to produce positive
personal, action or scene identification.
§ 9.60.020 CODE ADOPTION § 9.63.010
1.01:269
§ 9.63.020. Developments required to install Digital Security
Imaging Systems (DSIS).
2. Furthermore, it is recognized that since there is no Village
requirement that these systems be actively monitored, it cannot be
expected that these systems will, on their own, provide a safer or
more secure environment, nor are they a substitute for other
security measures.
3. It is also the intent of this chapter to attain commercial and
industrial establishments of sustained desirability and economic
stability, and to avoid unreasonable adverse effects to the property
values of the surrounding properties and surrounding
neighborhoods, and to maintain and promote the public health,
safety and welfare of the Village.
B. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Shall not include uses of an
industrial or residential nature.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the following property owners and any/
all successors in interest or ownership of the properties to provide,
install and maintain in good working order the interior and exterior
DSIS. The property owner shall furnish to the Chief of Police
documentation that describes the system, specifications and the name
of the vendor that installed the product.
1. Multitenant or individual commercial use buildings containing
more than 50,000 square feet of total gross floor area, as
referenced by § 19.03.0703(P) of the Zoning Code.20
2. All commercial uses that are open for business in excess of 20
hours a day will be required to install a remote access DSIS system
with a panic button activation feature that will allow remote access
viewing of the internal surveillance system to public safety
personnel.
3. All commercial uses that sell, manufacture or repair firearms will
be required to install a remote access DSIS system with a panic
button activation feature that will allow remote access viewing of
the internal surveillance system to public safety personnel.
B. Date of compliance.
1. All new commercial uses or buildings that require DSIS systems, as
set forth above, shall comply with the plan submittal requirements
of § 9.63.060 of this chapter.
20.Editor's Note: This reference is to the Village's Zoning Code, which is accessible on the
Village's website.
§ 9.63.010 GRAFTON CODE § 9.63.020
1.01:270
§ 9.63.030. Digital security imaging, storage devices, and related
equipment.
§ 9.63.040. Hardware standards.
Equipment deployed under this chapter shall be in compliance with
specifications that are approved by the Police Department.
§ 9.63.050. Implementation.
If the development consists of multiple buildings, tenant spaces and/or
phases, the DSIS shall be installed and fully operational upon receipt of
the occupancy permit of each building, tenant and/or phase. The adequacy
of the implementation of the DSIS minimum standards for each building,
tenant and/or phase shall be determined by the Village Police Department.
§ 9.63.060. Plan submittal.
2. All existing commercial uses or buildings that require DSIS
systems, as set forth above, shall comply with the plan submittal
requirements of § 9.63.060 when there is a change in ownership.
For tenancy changes or increase in total area (square footage) in
multitenant or individual commercial use buildings, the affected
individual tenant space must comply
A. Such systems shall provide for complete surveillance of all building
entrances and exits, loading docks and parking lots within the
development. Parking lot surveillance must be capable of monitoring
and capturing all activities within 300 feet of the building.
B. Such systems shall function continuously or have an effective distance
motion detection with two-second pre-record, whether the businesses
are open or closed, and shall provide visible surveillance to the abovedescribed
areas during hours of darkness.
C. Such systems within such developments shall provide and maintain a
centrally located security room that will be accessible and used by the
Village departments responsible for public safety. Access to these
spaces shall be in cooperation with the retailer, tenant or property
owner.
D. All digital video recorded by such system shall be archived for a period
of not less than 14 days and shall be available to the Village for public
safety purposes.
E. Such systems will provide interior cameras that will, at minimum,
monitor and record all areas of cash transactions with the public. This
includes, but is not limited to, all cash registers and service desks.
A. For developments that qualify under § 9.63.020, the DSIS shall be a
component of any required Village site and/or operational plan
application. Upon application, the applicant/property owner shall
§ 9.63.020 CODE ADOPTION § 9.63.060
1.01:271
§ 9.63.070. Nonoperational DSIS system; penalty.
In the event that an existing DSIS system becomes nonoperational or
incompatible with the Police Department for any reason, or there is a
violation of any term or condition of this chapter, the Police Department
shall provide the owner with a fifteen-day written notice of same and
opportunity to cure. In the event that the system is not repaired within
the time allowed in the notice, the owner shall be deemed in violation of
this section. Any owner who shall violate this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, forfeit not less than $100 nor more than $300, together with
the costs of prosecution. Each day a violation exists or continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 9.66
ABANDONED ICEBOXES AND REFRIGERATORS
§ 9.66.001. Abandoned refrigerators.
Abandoned iceboxes and refrigerators. It is unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or
other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling
or other structure, under his or its control, in a place accessible to children,
any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other
container which has an airtight door or lid, snaplock or other locking device,
which may not be released from the inside, without first removing such door
or lid, snaplock or other locking device from such icebox, refrigerator or
container.
Chapter 9.67
RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS FOR SEX OFFENDERS
provide to the Village seven sets of DSIS plans, which shall clearly
depict the location of all proposed cameras and hardware as well as
the location of the security room. The DSIS portion of the submittal
shall also include a written narrative explaining in detail the required
DSIS. If a site and/or operational plan is not required, the property
owner must provide the DSIS plan prior to obtaining an occupancy
permit. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code
Adoption)]
B. Any occupancy or building permit requiring the submittal of the DSIS
plans under Subsection A above will not be deemed complete and will
not be released by the Village until the DSIS plans are received and
reviewed as required in this chapter.
§ 9.63.060 GRAFTON CODE § 9.67.010
1.01:272
§ 9.67.010. Purpose and findings.
This chapter is a regulatory measure aimed at protecting the health and
safety of children in Grafton from the risk that certain convicted sex
offenders may re-offend in locations close to their residences. The Village
finds and declares that certain sex offenders are a serious threat to public
safety. When convicted sex offenders reenter society, they are much more
likely than any other type of offender to be rearrested for a new rape or
sexual assault. Given the high rate of recidivism for sex offenders and that
reducing opportunity and temptation is important to minimizing the risk of
re-offense, there is a need to protect children where they congregate or
play in public places in addition to the protections afforded by state law
near schools and day-care centers. The Village finds and declares that, in
addition to schools and day-care centers, children congregate or play at
public parks, swimming pools, libraries, recreational trails, athletic fields,
and playgrounds.
§ 9.67.020. Definitions.
The following definitions shall be used in this chapter unless the context
otherwise requires:
CRIME AGAINST CHILDREN — Any of the following offenses set forth
within the Wisconsin Statutes, as amended, or the laws of this or any
other state or the federal government having like elements necessary for
conviction and involving a person under the age of 18 years, respectively:
Wisconsin Statutes Sections
940.225(1) First degree sexual assault
940.225(2) Second degree sexual assault
940.225(3) Third degree sexual assault
940.22(2) Sexual exploitation by therapist
940.30 False imprisonment - victim a minor and not offender's
child
940.31 Kidnapping - victim a minor and not offender's child
944.01 Rape (prior statute)
944.06 Incest
944.10 Sexual intercourse with a child (prior statute)
944.11 Indecent behavior with a child (prior statute)
944.12 Enticing child for immoral purposes (prior statute)
948.02(1) First degree sexual assault of a child
948.02(2) Second degree sexual assault of a child
948.025 Engaging in repeated acts of sexual assault of the same
child
948.05 Sexual exploitation of a child
§ 9.67.010 CODE ADOPTION § 9.67.020
1.01:273
948.055 Causing a child to view or listen to sexual activity
948.06 Incest with a child
948.07 Child enticement
948.075 Use of a computer to facilitate a child sex crime
948.08 Soliciting a child for prostitution
948.085 Sexual assault of a child placed in substitute care
948.09 Sexual intercourse with a child age 16 or older
948.095 Sexual assault of a child by a school staff person or a
person who works or volunteers with children
948.10 Exposing genitals or pubic area
948.11 Exposing child to harmful material or harmful descriptions
or narrations
948.12 Possession of child pornography
948.13 Convicted child sex offender working with children
948.14 Registered sex offender and photographing minors
948.30 Abduction of another's child
971.17 Commitment of persons found not guilty by reason of
mental disease or mental defect
975.06 Sex crimes law commitment
OFFENDER — A person who has been convicted of or has been found
delinquent of or has been found not guilty by reason of disease or mental
defect of a crime against children.
ORIGINAL DOMICILE — The offender's true, fixed and permanent home,
to which the offender intends to return and remain even though currently
residing elsewhere.
PERMANENT RESIDENCE — The place where an offender abides, lodges
or resides for 14 or more consecutive days.
TEMPORARY RESIDENCE — The place where the offender abides, lodges
or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any
calendar year, and which is not the person's permanent residence; or the
place where the person routinely abides, lodges or resides for a period of
four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month, and which
is not the person's permanent residence.
§ 9.67.030. Residency restrictions.
An offender shall not establish a permanent residence or temporary
residence in any location on a parcel of land which, in whole or in part, is
within 1,000 feet of the real property comprising any of the following:
A. Any facility for children (which means a public or private school, a
group home, as defined in § 48.02(7), Wis. Stats.; a residential care
center for children and youth, as defined in § 48.02(15d), Wis. Stats.; a
§ 9.67.020 GRAFTON CODE § 9.67.030
1.01:274
§ 9.67.040. Residency restriction exceptions.
An offender establishing a residence in any location on a parcel of land
which, in whole or in part, is within 1,000 feet of the real property
comprising any of the uses enumerated in § 9.67.030, does not commit a
violation of this chapter if any of the following apply:
shelter care facility, as defined in § 48.02(17), Wis. Stats.; a foster
home, as defined in § 48.02(6), Wis. Stats.; a day-care center licensed
under § 48.65, Wis. Stats.; a day-care program established under
§ 120.13(14), Wis. Stats.; a day-care provider certified under § 48.651,
Wis. Stats.; or a youth center, as defined in § 961.01(22) Stats); and/
or [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code
Adoption)]
B. Any path, route, area or facility used for:
1. A public park, parkway, parkland, park facility;
2. A public swimming pool;
3. A public library;
4. A recreational trail;
5. A public playground;
6. A school for children;
7. Athletic fields used by children;
8. A day-care center;
9. Any specialized school for children, including but not limited to a
gymnastics academy, dance academy or music school;
10. Aquatic facilities open to the public;
11. Rehabilitative agencies for children and adults with developmental
disabilities, (i.e., Portal Industries, Inc.).
The distance shall be measured from the closest boundary line
of the real property supporting the residence of an offender to
the closest real property boundary line of the applicable aboveenumerated
use(s). A map depicting the above-enumerated uses
and the resulting residency restriction distances, as amended from
time to time, is on file in the office of the Village Clerk for public
inspection.
A. The offender has established a residence prior to the effective date of
this chapter, November 16, 2007, which is within 1,000 feet of any of
the uses enumerated in § 9.67.030 above, or such enumerated use is
newly established after such effective date and it is located within such
§ 9.67.030 CODE ADOPTION § 9.67.040
1.01:275
§ 9.67.050. Property owners prohibited from renting real property
to certain sexual offenders and sexual predators.
§ 9.67.060. Original domicile restriction.
In addition to and notwithstanding the foregoing, but subject to § 9.67.040
above, no offender and no individual who has been convicted of a crime
against children shall be permitted to establish a residence in the Village of
Grafton unless such person was domiciled in Ozaukee County at the time of
the offense resulting in the person's most recent conviction for committing
the crime against children.
§ 9.67.065. Designated walk zone restriction.
In addition to and notwithstanding the foregoing, but subject to § 9.67.040,
no offender and no individual who has been convicted of a crime against
children shall be permitted to establish a residence in a designated walking
zone for schools or school districts.
§ 9.67.070. Density regulation.
In addition to and notwithstanding the foregoing, but subject to § 9.67.040
above, no offender shall be permitted to establish a permanent or temporary
residence within 1,000 feet of a temporary or permanent residence of
another offender in the Village of Grafton. This restriction shall not apply
to offenders who have established residence within 1,000 feet of another
offender prior to the effective date of this chapter, but all existing offender
residences shall be considered when calculating distance and determining
residence availability for any offenders establishing a residence after the
effective date of the chapter.
1,000 feet of a residence of an offender which was established prior to
the effective date of this section.
B. The offender is a minor or ward under guardianship.
A. It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure, or part thereof, trailer
or other conveyance, with the knowledge that it will be used as a
permanent residence or temporary residence by any offender
prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or temporary
residence pursuant to this chapter, if such place, structure, or part
thereof, trailer or other conveyance is located within a prohibited
location zone described in § 9.67.030 and not subject to an exception
set forth in § 9.67.040 above,
B. A property owner's failure to comply with provision of this chapter shall
constitute a violation of this chapter and shall subject the property
owner to the code enforcement provisions in § 9.67.080, as provided in
this chapter.
§ 9.67.040 GRAFTON CODE § 9.67.080
1.01:276
§ 9.67.080. Violations and penalties.
If an offender violates any provisions of this chapter without any
exception(s) as also set forth above, said offender shall be subject to a
forfeiture of not less than $1,000 and not more than $2,500 for each
violation. Each day that a violation exists shall be considered a separate
offense. If any person, corporation or business entity of any kind rents to an
offender in violation of the terms of this chapter, said person, corporation
or business entity shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $1,000
and not more than $2,500 for each violation. Each day that a violation exists
shall be considered a separate offense. In addition to all relief called for
herein, the Village may also seek equitable relief, including, but not limited
to, an action in the name of the Village in the Circuit Court for Ozaukee
County to permanently enjoin such residency.
Chapter 9.72
BONFIRES
§ 9.72.010. Regulation of bonfires.
No person shall kindle or cause to be kindled any fire in or upon any street,
alley, public way, park or any public or private ground within the Village
within 25 feet of any building or within any fire lane unless the same is
confined within a wire refuse burner, basket or metal enclosure with a wire
cover attached to prevent the escape of sparks and burning material.
Chapter 9.73
CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS
§ 9.73.010. Carrying concealed weapons; state statute adopted.
[Amended by Ord. No. 022, Series 2010]
A violation of § 941.23, Wis. Stats., adopted by reference by § 9.01.010 of
the Code, shall be cited using this Code section number. The terms and
definitions of Chapter 9.01 of this Code shall remain applicable to any such
offense.
Chapter 9.74
FIREARMS
§ 9.74.010. Firing or discharge of weapons prohibited. [Amended
4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 009-2014; 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 010-2017]
A. General rule. No person shall fire or discharge any firearm, rifle, spring
gun or air gun within the Village.
B. Exceptions. The prohibition set forth in Subsection A shall not apply to:
§ 9.67.080 CODE ADOPTION § 9.74.010
1.01:277
§ 9.74.011. Hunting prohibited. [Added 10-16-2017 by Ord. No.
010-2017]
1. A law enforcement officer or member of the armed forces in the
performance of or training for their official duties;
2. The maintenance and use of a duly supervised rifle range, pistol
range, or shooting gallery authorized by the Village Board;
3. The firing or discharging of BB guns upon private property by a
person 17 years of age or older, or by a person 16 years of age or
younger who is under the direct personal supervision of a parent or
guardian;
4. The firing or discharge of a weapon when privileged pursuant to
§ 939.48, Wis. Stats.
A. General rule. Hunting is prohibited within the Village.
B. Definitions. In this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Any permanent structure used for human occupancy,
including a manufactured home as defined by § 101.92(1), Wis. Stats.
HUNTING — Shooting, shooting at, pursuing, taking, capturing or
killing or attempting to capture or kill any wild animal.
C. Exceptions. Notwithstanding the prohibition in Subsection A, hunting is
allowed:
1. With a bow and arrow or crossbow, so long as such hunting meets
all of the following criteria:
a. The hunting does not take place on public property;
b. The hunting is done with the permission of the owner of the
private property on which the hunting takes place;
c. The hunting is not done within 100 yards of any building
located on land owned by another without the owner's consent;
d. The arrow or bolt of the weapon is discharged towards the
ground.
2. With a bow and arrow or crossbow for bow-fishing, as permitted by
§ 9.80.010 of this title.
3. Pursuant to a written permit issued by the Chief of Police to the
owner or occupant of private property and subject to such
safeguards as the Chief of Police may impose for the safety of the
lives and property of other persons within the Village, if the Chief of
Police finds such privileges necessary for the protection of life or
property.
§ 9.74.010 GRAFTON CODE § 9.74.011
1.01:278
§ 9.74.015. Firearms in public buildings prohibited. [Amended
9-19-2011 by Ord. No. 028-2011]
§ 9.74.020. Penalties for firearms violations [Amended 9-19-2011 by
Ord. No. 028-2011]
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $150 nor more than $500, together
with the costs of prosecution. In the event of a failure to pay such forfeiture,
where no showing of indigency is made, the defendant may be imprisoned
for no more than 90 days, as the court deems fit, or until such judgment is
sooner paid.
Chapter 9.75
FACSIMILE FIREARMS
§ 9.75.010. Facsimile firearms; state statute adopted.
A violation of § 941.2965, Wis. Stats., adopted by reference by § 9.01.010 of
the Grafton Code, shall be cited using this Code section number. The terms
D. Other laws apply. To the extent hunting is permitted by this section,
nothing in this section should be interpreted to conflict with or
supersede any other law regulating hunting, including but not limited
to licensing, tagging, seasons, manner of harvest, or species
restrictions.
A. Pursuant to § 943.13(1m)(c)4, Wis. Stats., no person shall enter or
remain in any part of a building owned, occupied or controlled by the
state or local governmental unit if the state or local governmental unit
has notified the person not to enter or remain in the building while
carrying a firearm or a specific type of firearm.
B. The Village Administrator shall cause signs to be erected at all
entrances to all buildings owned, occupied or under the control of the
Village of Grafton, providing notice that no person is to enter or remain
in any such building while carrying a firearm. Such signs shall be five
inches by seven inches or larger.
C. Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to prohibit a peace
officer or armed forces or military personnel armed in the line of duty or
any person duly authorized by the Chief of Police to possess a firearm in
any public building. Notwithstanding § 939.22(22), Wis. Stats., for
purposes of this subsection, "peace officer" does not include a
commission warden who is not a stat- certified commission warden.
D. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to authorize the carrying
of any firearm or dangerous weapon contrary to § 941.23 or 941.235,
Wis. Stats.
§ 9.74.011 CODE ADOPTION § 9.75.010
1.01:279
and definitions of Chapter 9.01 of this Code shall remain applicable to any
such offense.
Chapter 9.76
FIREWORKS
§ 9.76.010. Fireworks sales, discharge and use.
It is unlawful within the limits of the Village for any person to sell, expose
or offer for sale, use, keep or discharge, or to explode any firecracker,
bottle rocket, cherry bomb, colored smoke bomb, blank cartridge toy pistol
or cannon in which explosives are used, contrivances using explosive caps
or cartridges, display wheels, the type of balloon which requires fire
underneath to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, sky rockets, roman
candles, aerial salutes, American or Chinese bombs or other fireworks
containing any explosives of flammable compound, or any tablets or other
device commonly used and sold as fireworks containing nitrates, chlorates,
oxylates, sulphides of lead, barium, antimony, arsenic, mercury,
nitroglycerine, phosphorus, or any compound containing any of the same or
other explosives.
§ 9.76.020. Permit required.
Fireworks, other than those prohibited by the laws of the state, may be
used and displayed in open fields, public parks, private parks or rivers,
lakes and ponds by public authorities, fair associations, amusement parks,
park boards, civic organizations and groups of individuals that have been
granted permits for such displays by the Village President. Application for
permits shall be filed in writing with the Village Clerk, who shall refer such
applications to the Village President.
§ 9.76.030. Permit issuance.
If the Village President determines that the applicant will use the fireworks
in a public exhibition and that all reasonable precautions will be exercised
with regard to the protection of the lives and property of all persons, he may
issue a permit for the use of fireworks at the time and place set out in the
application.
§ 9.76.040. Permit; bond required.
Before any permit for the use or display of fireworks shall be granted to any
applicant, the applicant shall file with the Village Clerk an indemnity bond
in the name of the Village in the amount of $2,000 with good and sufficient
sureties for the payment of all claims that may arise by reason of injury to
persons or property from the handling, use or discharge of fireworks under
such permit.
§ 9.75.010 GRAFTON CODE § 9.76.050
1.01:280
§ 9.76.050. Permit restrictions.
No permit shall be granted for the display of fireworks within 50 feet of
any gasoline pump, gasoline filling station or gasoline bulk station or any
building in which gasoline or volatile liquid is sold in quantities in excess of
one gallon.
Chapter 9.78
GRASS FIRES
§ 9.78.010. Regulation of grass fires.
No person shall kindle any grass fire within the limits of the Village without
first securing a written permit from the Village Clerk, who shall issue
such permit only upon approval of and subject to any conditions for the
protection of life and property imposed by the Chief of the Grafton volunteer
fire company.
Chapter 9.80
THROWING OBJECTS
§ 9.80.010. Throwing or shooting objects prohibited.
A. General rule. No person shall throw or shoot any arrow, stone, missile,
projectile, or any other object, by hand or by any other means, at any
person, animal, property or thing.
B. Exception for archery. Notwithstanding the prohibition in Subsection A,
a person may use a bow and arrow or crossbow at any of the following:
1. An archery range officially designated and established by lawful
authority;
2. Any organized archery activity under the supervision of a public
school, private school, or the Parks and Recreation Board.
C. Exception for hunting. Notwithstanding the prohibition in Subsection A,
a person may use a bow and arrow or crossbow in strict compliance
with the exception set forth in § 9.74.011C.1 of this Code.
D. Exception for bowfishing. Notwithstanding the prohibition in
Subsection A, a person may use a bow and arrow or crossbow for
fishing if such use meets all of the following criteria:
1. The person is engaged in bowfishing from a boat freely floating on a
navigable body of water;
2. The arrow or bolt is specific to the task of bowfishing;
§ 9.76.050 CODE ADOPTION § 9.80.010
1.01:281
Title 10: Vehicles and Traffic
Chapter 10.04
STATE LAW ADOPTED
§ 10.04.010. State traffic laws adopted. [Amended by Ord. No.
A-431-82, 1982; Ord. No. A-446-83, 1983]
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, the statutory
provisions in Chs. 340 to 348, Wis. Stats., describing and defining
regulations with respect to vehicles traffic, exclusive of any regulations for
which the statutory penalty is a fine or term of imprisonment, are adopted
and by reference made a part of this Code as if fully set forth herein. Any
act required to be performed or prohibited by any regulation incorporated
herein by reference is required or prohibited by this Code. Any future
amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutory regulations in Chs.
340 to 348 incorporated herein are intended to be made a part of this
Code in order to secure to the extent legally practicable uniform statewide
regulation of vehicles, traffic on the highways, streets and alleys of the State
of Wisconsin.
§ 10.04.020. Other statutes adopted. [Amended by Ord. No.
A-431-82, 1982; Ord. No. 015, Series 1998]
There are also adopted by reference, as amended, the following provisions
of the Wisconsin Statutes, exclusive of any provisions therein relating to
penalties to be imposed:
§ 10.04.030. Court authority to impose alternative juvenile
dispositions and sanctions. [Amended by Ord. No. 011, Series 1997]
3. The arrow or bolt is attached to the bow or crossbow by an
appropriate cord or line not more than 100 feet in length;
4. The person discharges the arrow or bolt on a downward trajectory;
5. Any auxiliary lighting used is angled at least 45° towards the water.
E. Other laws apply. To the extent bowfishing is permitted by this section,
nothing in this section should be interpreted to conflict with or
supersede any other law regulating fishing or bowfishing, including by
not limited to manner of harvest, seasons or species restrictions.
A. Section 941.01, Wis. Stats. (negligent operation of vehicle);
B. Chapter 350, Wis. Stats. (snowmobiles).
C. Chapter Trans 305, Wis. Adm. Code; §§ 110.075, 341.10(6), 341.268,
342.06, and 347, Wis. Stats.
§ 9.80.010 GRAFTON CODE § 10.04.030
1.01:282
Chapter 10.08
ACCIDENT REPORTS
§ 10.08.010. Accident reports.
The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall, within 10 days
after such accident, file with the Village Police Department a copy of the
report required by § 346.70, Wis. Stats., if any. If the operator is unable to
make such a report, any occupant of the vehicle at the time of the accident
capable of making such report shall have the duty to comply with this
section. Such report shall be subject to the provisions and limitations in
§§ 346.70(4)(f) and 346.73, Wis. Stats.
Chapter 10.12
TRAFFIC SIGNS AND SIGNALS
§ 10.12.010. Erection and placement authority.
The Director of Public Works is authorized and directed to procure, erect
and maintain appropriate standard traffic signs, signals and markings
conforming to the rules of the Department of Transportation, giving such
notice of the provisions of this title as required by state law. Signs shall be
erected in such locations and manner as the Chief of Police shall determine
will best effect the purposes of this title and give adequate warning to users
of the street or highway.
§ 10.12.020. Removal of unofficial signs and signals.
The Chief of Police shall have the authority granted by § 349.09, Wis. Stats.,
and is directed to order the removal of a sign, signal, marking or device
maintained or displayed in violation of this title or § 346.41, Wis. Stats. Any
charge imposed on the premises for removal of such an illegal sign, signal
or device shall be reported to the Village Board at its next regular meeting
for review and certification.
A. For a juvenile adjudged to have violated an ordinance, the Municipal
Court is authorized to impose any of the dispositions listed in
§§ 938.343 and 938.344, Wis. Stats., in accordance with the provisions
of those statutes, as amended.
B. For a juvenile adjudged to have violated an ordinance who violates a
condition of a dispositional order of the Court under § 938.343 or
938.344, Wis. Stats., the Municipal Court is authorized to impose any of
the sanctions listed in § 938.355(6)(d), Wis. Stats., in accordance with
the provisions of those statutes, as amended.
C. This section is enacted under the authority of § 938.17(2)(cm), Wis.
Stats., as amended.
§ 10.04.030 CODE ADOPTION § 10.12.020
1.01:283
Chapter 10.13
SCHOOL BUSES
§ 10.13.010. School buses.
All school buses shall use their flashing red warning lights and stop arms
while loading or unloading students or other authorized passengers upon
all streets, highways and roadways in the Village.
§ 10.13.020. School bus operators.
All school bus operators shall bring their vehicles to the far right-hand side
of the street, highway or roadway when loading or unloading students or
other authorized passengers within the Village.
Chapter 10.16
SPEED LIMITS
§ 10.16.010. Modification necessary; statutory authority.
The Village Board determines that the statutory speed limits on the streets
or portions thereof enumerated in this chapter are unreasonable, unsafe
or imprudent and modifies such speed limits under authority granted by
§ 349.11, Wis. Stats.
§ 10.16.020. Speed limit statutes adopted.
The provisions of §§ 346.57, 346.58 and 346.59, Wis. Stats., relating to
maximum and minimum speed of vehicles, are adopted as part of this
chapter as if fully set forth in this chapter, except as modified by this
chapter.
§ 10.16.030. Twenty-five miles per hour. [Amended by Ord. No.
A-396-80, 1980; Ord. No. 036, Series 1995]
The maximum permissible speed shall be 25 miles per hour on all streets,
except as modified elsewhere in this chapter.
§ 10.16.040. Thirty miles per hour. [Amended by Ord. No. A-445-83,
1983; Ord. No. 036, Series 1995; Ord. No. 019, Series 1996; Ord.
No. 001, Series 2003; Ord. No. 023, Series 2005; Ord. No. 009,
Series 2007; Ord. No. 003, Series 2008]
The maximum permissible speed shall be 30 miles per hour on the following
streets:
A. Wisconsin Avenue, from Falls Road to the south Village limits.
B. Cedar Creek Road, from Maple Road to the west Village limits.
§ 10.12.020 GRAFTON CODE § 10.16.040
1.01:284
§ 10.16.050. Thirty-five miles per hour. [Amended by Ord. No. 036,
Series 1995; Ord. No. 025, Series 1996; Ord. No. 038, Series 2001;
Ord. No. 029, Series 2007]
The maximum permissible speed shall be 35 miles per hour on the following
streets:
§ 10.16.060. Forty miles per hour. [Amended by Ord. No. 036, Series
1995]
The maximum permissible speed shall be 40 miles per hour on the following
streets:
§ 10.16.070. Fifty-five miles per hour. [Amended by Ord. No. 036,
Series 1995]
The maximum permissible speed shall be 55 miles per hour on the following
streets:
Chapter 10.20
THROUGH HIGHWAYS
§ 10.20.010. Through highways designated. [Amended by Ord. No.
A-443-83, 1983; Ord. No. A-002-93, 1993]
In the interest of public safety and pursuant to § 349.07, Wis. Stats., the
following streets or portions thereof are declared to be through highways,
and traffic signs or signals giving notice thereof shall be erected by the
Director of Public Works, in accordance with Chapter 10.12 of this Code:
C. Washington Street (STH 60) between Seventeenth Avenue and
Cheyenne Avenue.
A. Keup Road, from the north Village limits to the south Village limits.
B. Cheyenne Avenue, from Washington Street to Grafton Avenue.
C. Washington Street, from Cheyenne Avenue to the west line of Interstate
Highway 43.
D. Pleasant Valley Road, from east Village limits to the west Village limits.
A. Washington Street, from 0.34 miles east of Seventeenth Avenue to the
east Village limits.
A. Grafton Avenue, from Willow Lane to the north Village limits.
§ 10.16.040 CODE ADOPTION § 10.20.010
1.01:285
Street Limits
Beech Street From the east line of First Avenue to the west line of
Eleventh Avenue
Cedar Creek Road From the west Village limits to the east Village
limits
Falls Road From the east line of First Avenue to the east Village
limits
First Avenue From the south line of Washington Street to the
north line of Wisconsin Avenue
Grafton Avenue From the west curbline of Sixteenth Avenue to the
northeast Village limits
North Green Bay
Road
From North Street to the north Village limits
Seventeenth Avenue From the south line of Washington Street to the
south Village limits
Twelfth Avenue From the center line of Bridge Street to North
Street
Washington Street From the west Village limits to the east Village
limits
Wisconsin Avenue From the south Village limits to the center line of
Bridge Street
Chapter 10.22
PEDESTRIAN MALLS
§ 10.22.010. Motor vehicle defined.
A. "Motor vehicle(s)" shall include, but not be limited to, mobile home,
moped, motor bicycle, motor scooters (not including ADA wheelchairs),
motor bus, motorcycle, motor toys, motor trucks, or motor vehicles, as
defined in Ch. 340, Wis. Stats.
B. Exceptions. The following motor vehicles are exempt from the
provisions outlined herein:
1. Authorized emergency vehicles.
2. ADA-compliant motor scooters and/or wheelchairs.
3. Municipal vehicles.
4. Vehicles providing a service contracted by the Village of Grafton.
§ 10.20.010 GRAFTON CODE § 10.22.020
1.01:286
§ 10.22.020. Pedestrian mall areas designated.
In the interest of public safety and pursuant to the provisions of § 66.0905,
Wis. Stats., there are hereby designated pedestrian-only areas within the
Village of Grafton. No motor vehicles, with the exception of those outlined
in § 10.22.010B of this chapter, shall be permitted in the following areas:
Chapter 10.24
ONE-WAY STREETS
§ 10.24.010. One-way streets designated.
Pursuant to § 349.10, Wis. Stats., the following streets and parts thereof
are declared to be one-way streets, and no person shall operate any vehicle
thereon except in the indicated direction:
Street Limits
Direction of
Travel Permitted
Bridge Street From Twelfth Avenue to Eleventh
Avenue
West
Sixteenth Avenue From southwest curbline of
Washington Street to northwest
curbline of Bridge Street
South
Thirteenth
Avenue
From south curbline of
Washington Street and Thirteenth
Avenue to the north curbline of
Bridge Street at Thirteenth
Avenue
South
Chapter 10.28
NO-PASSING ZONES
§ 10.28.010. No-passing zones designated. [Amended by Ord. No.
A-445-83, 1983; Ord. No. A-474-85, 1985]
The following are designated as no-passing zones for the Village:
A. On Twelfth Avenue from its intersection with Wisconsin Avenue and
Bridge Street to a point 215 feet south of said intersection.
§ 10.22.020 CODE ADOPTION § 10.28.010
1.01:287
Street Limits Direction
Falls Road From Falls Road at Cedar Drive,
west to South Green Bay Road,
south on South Green Bay Road to
north curbline of Vienna Court
Grafton Avenue From intersection with Washington
Street northbound to corporate
limits of Village
North and
southbound
Highway 57 From center of bridge crossing
Milwaukee River to intersection
with Sixteenth Avenue
Westbound
Highway 57 From intersection with Eleventh
Avenue to intersection with
Washington Avenue
Highway 57 From intersection with Thirteenth
Avenue to intersection with
Twelfth Avenue
Westbound
Highway 60 From intersection with Eleventh
Avenue to intersection with
Twelfth Avenue
Eastbound
Highway 60 From intersection with Fifth
Avenue to intersection with Second
Avenue
Westbound
Highway 60 From west Village limits to
intersection with Third Avenue
Eastbound
South Green Bay
Road
From a point 360 feet south of
south curbline of Vienna Court to
Fall Road, west on Falls Road to
Wisconsin Avenue
Chapter 10.32
STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS
§ 10.32.010. Stop intersections. [Last amended 12-19-2016 by Ord.
No. 021-2016]
A. Traffic shall come to a complete stop pursuant to stop signs erected at
the following intersections:
On Fifth Avenue at Cedar Creek Road
On Ninth Avenue at Cedar Creek Road
On Tenth Avenue at Cedar Creek Road
On Eleventh Avenue at North Street
On Eleventh Avenue at STH 60 (Washington Street)
§ 10.28.010 GRAFTON CODE § 10.32.010
1.01:288
On Twelfth Avenue at Beech Street
On Thirteenth Avenue at STH 60 (Washington Street)
On Fifteenth Avenue at STH 60 (Washington Street)
On Seventeenth Avenue at Grafton Avenue
On Audubon Avenue at West Highland Drive
On Badger Circle at Cheyenne Avenue
On Badger Court at Cheyenne Avenue
On Beech Street at Twelfth Avenue
On Beech Street at First Avenue
On Blackfoot Avenue at Cheyenne Avenue
On Bobolink Avenue at Keup Road
On Bobolink Avenue at West Falls Road
On Bobolink Avenue at West Highland Drive
On Boxelder Lane at Keup Road
On Bridge Street at Eleventh Avenue
On Bridge Street at Twelfth Avenue
On Bridge Street at Seventeenth Avenue
On Broad Street at Wisconsin Avenue
On Cedar Creek Road at the Wisconsin Central Limited Right-of-Way
On Cedar Drive at Falls Road
On Cedar Street at Thirteenth Avenue
On Cedar Street at Seventeenth Avenue
On Chateau Drive at First Avenue
On Chateau Drive at the Wisconsin Central Limited Right-of-Way
On Chateau Drive at Wisconsin Avenue
On Cherokee Street at Cheyenne Avenue
On Cheyenne Avenue at CTH V
On Cheyenne Court at Cheyenne Avenue
On Claern Court at North Green Bay Road
On Creed Lane at Hunter's Lane
On Dakota Drive at Cheyenne Avenue
On Dakota Drive at STH 60 (Washington Street)
On Deerwood Court at Fifth Avenue
On Delaware Avenue at Arrowhead Road
On Delaware Avenue at Cheyenne Avenue
On Dove Lane at West Highland Drive
On Eighth Avenue at Hickory Street
§ 10.32.010 CODE ADOPTION § 10.32.010
1.01:289
On Eighth Avenue at STH 60 (Washington Street)
On Eleventh Avenue at Beech Street
On Eleventh Avenue at Cedar Street
On Erie Street at Cheyenne Avenue
On Fifteenth Avenue at Bridge Street
On Fifth Avenue at Beech Street
On Fifth Avenue at STH 60 (Washington Street)
On Fourteenth Avenue at Bridge Street
On Fourth Avenue at Beech Street
On Fourth Avenue at North Street
On Fourth Avenue at STH 60 (Washington Street)
On Hickory Street at Fifth Avenue
On Highland Drive at Falls Road
On Highland Drive at First Avenue
On Highland Drive at Maple Street
On Homestead Trail at Cedar Creek Road
On Hunter's Lane at Port Washington Road
On Keup Road at STH 60 (Washington Street)
On Maple Street at First Avenue
On Maple Street at Seventh Avenue
On Mayfair Road at Fifth Avenue
On Mole Drive at Ninth Avenue
On Mountain Lane at Hunter's Lane
On Ninth Avenue at Falls Road
On Ninth Avenue at Hickory Street
On Ninth Avenue at North Street
On Ninth Avenue at STH 60 (Washington Street)
On Ninth Avenue at Wisconsin Avenue
On North Street at Twelfth Avenue
On North Street at First Avenue
On Northbrooke Drive at North Green Bay Road
On Oak Street at Wisconsin Avenue
On Overland Court at Ninth Avenue
On Overland Trail at Fifth Avenue
On Overland Trail at Ninth Avenue
On Pine Street at Seventeenth Avenue
On Power Street at Eight Avenue
§ 10.32.010 GRAFTON CODE § 10.32.010
1.01:290
On Prairie Run at Cedar Creek Road
On Rose Street at Fifth Avenue
On Second Avenue at Beech Street
On Second Avenue at STH 60 (Washington Street)
On Seminole Street at Cheyenne Avenue
On Seventh Avenue at Beech Street
On Seventh Avenue at Hickory Street
On Seventh Avenue at North Street
On Seventh Avenue at STH 60 (Washington Street)
On Seventh Avenue at Wisconsin Avenue
On Shoreland Lane at North Green Bay Road
On Sixteenth Avenue at Falls Road
On Sixth Avenue at Beech Street
On Sixth Avenue at Hickory Street
On Sixth Avenue at North Street
On Sixth Avenue at STH 60 (Washington Street)
On South Green Bay Road at Falls Road
On South Green Bay Road at Falls Road
On Spring Street at Twelfth Avenue
On Spring Street at Eleventh Avenue
On Spring Street at Fifth Avenue
On Spring Street at First Avenue
On Spring Street at the Wisconsin Central Limited Right-of-Way
On Spring Street at Third Avenue
On Spring Street east and westbound at Eighth Avenue
On Spruce Street at Seventeenth Avenue
On Spruce Street at Arapaho Avenue
On Streamside Court at Cedar Creek Road
On Sunset Court at Grafton Avenue
On Tenth Avenue at Hickory Street
On the driveway of Centennial Park at the crosswalk located 375 feet
east of Seventeenth Avenue
On the eastbound right-turn lane on Washington Street to southbound
Port Washington Road
On Third Avenue at North Street
On Third Avenue at STH 60 (Washington Street)
On Thirteenth Avenue at Bridge Street
§ 10.32.010 CODE ADOPTION § 10.32.010
1.01:291
§ 10.32.011. Traffic signals.
Motor vehicles shall obey the traffic signals at following locations:
At the intersection of Washington Street and Twelfth Avenue
At the intersection of Washington Street and Seventeenth Avenue
At the intersection of Washington Street and Cheyenne Avenue
On Valley Drive at Seventeenth Avenue
On Valley Road at Fifth Avenue
On Vienna Court at South Green Bay Road
On Walters Drive at First Avenue
On West Althea Drive at First Avenue
On West Bridge Street at Bobolink Avenue
On West Bridge Street at First Avenue
On West Falls Road at Bobolink Avenue
On West Falls Road at First Avenue
On West Highland Drive at First Avenue
On West Highland Drive at Keup Road
On West Juniper Drive at Bobolink Avenue
On West Juniper Drive at First Avenue
On West Lilac Lane at West Highland Drive
On West Maple Street at First Avenue
On West Oak Street at First Avenue
On West Walters Drive at First Avenue
On Wichita Lane at Seventeenth Avenue
On Willow Lane at Grafton Avenue
B. Traffic shall come to a complete stop on all approaches pursuant to stop
signs erected at the following intersections:
Bridge Street and Thirteenth Avenue
Eighth Avenue and North Street
Eleventh Avenue and Broad Street
Eleventh Avenue and Maple Street
Fifth Avenue and North Street
First Avenue and Falls Road
Seventeenth Avenue and Falls Road
Twelfth Avenue and Broad Street
Twelfth Avenue and Cedar Street
§ 10.32.010 GRAFTON CODE § 10.32.011
1.01:292
At the intersection of Washington Street and First Avenue
At the intersection of Washington Street and Grafton Avenue
At the intersection of Washington Street and Port Washington Road (CTH
W)
At the intersection of Wisconsin Avenue and Falls Road
At the intersection of Wisconsin Avenue and First Avenue
Falls Road and the private entrances 150 east of Highland Drive
§ 10.32.015. Stop signs on private property.
Motor vehicles shall come to a complete stop pursuant to stop signs erected
on private property on the following streets:
A. Manchester Plaza Shopping Center and Grafton State Bank.
1. Grafton State Bank property northwest driveway, 220 feet east of
First Avenue, exit onto Falls Street.
2. Grafton State Bank property northeast driveway, exit onto Falls
Street, 486 feet east of First Avenue.
3. Manchester Plaza Shopping Center property southwest driveway,
728 feet east of First Avenue, exit onto Falls Street.
4. Manchester Plaza Shopping Center property northeast driveway,
exit onto Falls Street, 910 feet east of First Avenue.
5. Manchester Plaza Shopping Center property east entrance, exit
onto Wisconsin Avenue, 444 feet south of Falls Street.
6. Manchester Plaza Shopping Center property southwest entrance
364 feet east of First Avenue, exit onto Oak Street.
7. Manchester Plaza Shopping Center property southeast exit, 628
feet east of First Avenue, exit onto Oak Street.
8. Oak Street Commons property southwest exit, 156 feet west of
Wisconsin Avenue on Oak Street. [Amended by Ord. No. 014,
Series 1995]
B. Twin City Plaza Shopping Center.
1. Corner of Wisconsin Avenue and Falls Street, entrance to rear of
Plaza Shopping Center and entrance to First Financial Bank,
location northeast corner;
2. Twin City Plaza property entrance onto Wisconsin Avenue, 210 feet
south of Seventh Avenue;
3. On private road exiting from Twin City Plaza Shopping Center on
the Falls Road.
§ 10.32.011 CODE ADOPTION § 10.32.015
1.01:293
C. Grafton Elementary and Grafton High School Area.
1. Grafton Elementary property west driveway entrance onto
Seventeenth Avenue, 354 feet north of Washington Street.
2. Grafton Elementary property south exit, 572 feet east of
Seventeenth Avenue.
3. Grafton High School property southwest exit, 1,322 feet east of
Seventh Avenue, exit onto Washington Street.
4. Grafton High School property southeast entrance, exit onto
Washington Street, 1,624 feet east of Seventeenth Avenue.
5. Grafton High School property far eastern access driveway onto
Washington Street, 1,943 feet east of Seventeenth Avenue.
D. Woodview School Area, rear of John Long Middle School, Fifth Avenue.
1. Entrance to Woodview School, also rear of John Long Middle
School, Fifth Avenue, 624 feet north of Hickory Street.
E. Cedar Creek Road at Milwaukee Railroad crossing, 206 feet west of
Highway 0.
F. Shopko and Pick and Save Shopping Center.
1. Shopko property entrance onto Wisconsin Avenue, 500 feet north of
the northwest corner of Wisconsin Avenue and Falls Road.
2. Shopko property entrance onto Highland Drive, 665 feet north of
the northeast corner of Highland Drive and Falls Road.
3. Pick and Save property entrance onto Falls Road, 140 feet east of
the northeast corner of Falls Road and Highland Drive.
G. John Long Middle School property entrance onto Hickory Street, 605
feet east of the northeast corner of Hickory Street and Fifth Avenue.
[Amended by Ord. No. 535-89, 1989; Ord. No. 536-89, 1989; Ord.
No. A-022-91, 1991]
H. Grafton Village Hall and Grafton Police Station. [Amended by Ord.
No. 041, Series 2001]
1. Entrance onto Washington Street.
2. Intersection of Village Hall driveway with the entrance onto
Washington Street.
3. Intersection of police station north parking lot with entrance onto
Washington Street.
I. Target shopping center. [Amended by Ord. No. 041, Series 2001]
§ 10.32.015 GRAFTON CODE § 10.32.015
1.01:294
§ 10.32.018. Restricted turn areas.
§ 10.32.020. Yield intersections. [Last amended by Ord. No. 006,
Series 2011]
Traffic shall yield the right-of-way pursuant to yield signs erected at the
following intersections:
On Audubon Avenue at West Maple Street
On Beech Street at Eleventh Avenue
On Blackfoot Avenue at Cherokee Street
On Bridge Street at Eleventh Avenue
On Bridge Street at Sixth Avenue
On Elm Street at Fifth Avenue
On Heritage Court at Prairie Run
On Homestead Trail at Prairie Run
On Iroquois Avenue at Hunter's Lane
On Ninth Avenue at Spring Street
On North Street at Thirteenth Avenue
On northbound Bobolink Avenue at West Maple Street
On Power Street at Fifth Avenue
On Second Avenue at Highland Drive
On Sixteenth Avenue at North Pine Street
On the northbound right-turn lane at Falls Road and Twelfth Avenue
On West Bridge Street at Bobolink Avenue
Chapter 10.36
1. Target property entrance onto Washington Street 410 feet east of
Port Washington Road.
J. Driveways exiting 1200 Washington Street onto Twelfth Avenue and
Thirteenth Avenue. [Amended by Ord. No. 024, Series 2002]
K. Driveway exiting the Grafton water and wastewater facility onto Ninth
Avenue at Falls Street. [Amended by Ord. No. 002, Series 2005]
A. Left turns are prohibited for southbound traffic on Pine Ridge Court at
its intersection with Columbia Road. [Amended by Ord. No. 024,
Series 1998]
B. Right turn only is allowed from Thirteenth Avenue onto Washington
Street from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. [Amended
by Ord. No. 019, Series 2007]
§ 10.32.015 CODE ADOPTION § 10.32.020
1.01:295
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
§ 10.36.010. No parking at any time.
No vehicle shall be parked in any of the following areas at any time:
Street Side Limits
600 Fifth Avenue
[Added 10-6-2014 by
Ord. No. 016-2014]
East From the driveway to a point 30
feet north
600 Fifth Avenue
[Added 10-6-2014 by
Ord. No. 016-2014]
East From the driveway to a point 30
feet south
900 block Badger Circle
driveway [Added
12-17-2018 by Ord.
No. 013-2018;
amended 3-4-2019 by
Ord. No. 008-2019]
East Directly across from driveway on
west side of Badger Circle, 83.5
feet to a point north from the
center of the driveway
900 block Badger Circle
driveway [Added
12-17-2018 by Ord.
No. 013-2018;
amended 3-4-2019 by
Ord. No. 008-2019]
East Directly across from driveway on
west side of Badger Circle, 83.5
feet to a point south from the
center of the driveway
900 block Badger Circle
driveway [Added
12-17-2018 by Ord.
No. 013-2018;
amended 3-4-2019 by
Ord. No. 008-2019]
West From the driveway to a point 70
feet north
900 block Badger Circle
driveway [Added
12-17-2018 by Ord.
No. 013-2018;
amended 3-4-2019 by
Ord. No. 008-2019]
West From the driveway to a point 70
feet south
1000 Badger Circle
driveway [Amended
5-16-2011 by Ord. No.
012-2011]
East From the driveway to a point 30
feet east
1000 Badger Circle
driveway [Amended
5-16-2011 by Ord. No.
012-2011; repealed
5-20-2019 by Ord. No.
011-2019]
§ 10.32.020 GRAFTON CODE § 10.36.010
1.01:296
Street Side Limits
1000 Badger Circle
driveway on north side
of Badger Circle [Added
3-4-2019 by Ord. No.
008-2019]
West From the driveway to the
intersection of Cheyenne Avenue
1000 Badger Circle
driveway on south side
of Badger Circle [Added
3-4-2019 by Ord. No.
008-2019]
West From the driveway to the
intersection of Cheyenne Avenue
1700-1800 blocks of
River Bend Road
[Added 3-18-2019 by
Ord. No. 010-2019]
North 350 feet to a point east from the
center of Yuma Street
1700-1800 blocks of
River Bend Road
[Added 3-18-2019 by
Ord. No. 010-2019]
North 836 feet to a point west from the
center of Yuma Street
First Avenue [Amended
by Ord. No. 028,
Series 2008]
East From Washington Street to a point
160 feet south of Washington Street
Sixth Avenue
[Amended by Ord. No.
017, Series 2004]
East To a point 90 feet south of the south
curbline of Washington Street
Seventh Avenue West From 165 feet north of Maple
Street to 460 feet north of Maple
Street
Ninth Avenue East From the east curbline of Wisconsin
Avenue to 110 feet south of the east
curbline of Wisconsin Avenue
Ninth Avenue West From Wisconsin Avenue to Falls
Street
Eleventh Avenue West From Beech Street to 30 feet north
of Beech Street
Twelfth Avenue East From 115 feet north of the north
curbline of Washington Street to
270 feet south of the south curbline
of Washington Street
Twelfth Avenue West From 157 feet north of the north
curbline of Washington Street to
200 feet south of the south curbline
of Washington Street
§ 10.36.010 CODE ADOPTION § 10.36.010
1.01:297
Street Side Limits
Thirteenth Avenue East From Washington Street to 40 feet
north of Washington Street
Thirteenth Avenue
[Amended by Ord. No.
027, Series 2006]
West From Washington Street to a point
65 feet north of Washington Street
1 Fifth Avenue East From Washington Street to 79 feet
north of Washington Street
1 Seventh Avenue
[Amended by Ord. No.
040, Series 2001]
From Grafton Avenue to 150 feet
north of Bridge Street
Badger Court [Added
11-18-2012 by Ord.
No. 014-2012]
From Cheyenne Avenue to end
Beech Street North From Wisconsin Avenue to Eleventh
Avenue
Bobolink Avenue From Oak Street to Pine Ridge
Court
Bridges Both All bridges
Cedar Street South From Twelfth to Thirteenth Avenue,
except for Fire Departmentauthorized
vehicles
Chateau Court [Added
2-16-2015 by Ord. No.
002-2015]
Both From the south end of Chateau
Court north 100 feet to the north
end of the bulb
Chateau Drive North From Wisconsin Avenue to 200 feet
west
Chateau Drive [Added
9-19-2011 by Ord. No.
027-2011]
South From a point 307 feet east of
curbline of First Avenue to a point
469 feet east of the east curbline of
First Avenue, from Monday through
Friday
Cheyenne Avenue From Cherokee to Fox Lane
Cheyenne Avenue
[Amended by Ord. No.
004, Series 2001]
East From a point 136 feet from the
south curbline of Washington Street
to 264 feet south of Washington
Street
Cheyenne Avenue
[Added 3-16-2015 by
Ord. No. 006-2015]
East For a distance of 750 feet north of
the north curb line of WIS 60
Cheyenne Avenue
[Amended by Ord. No.
003, Series 2006]
West To a point 113 feet north of the
center line of Ottawa Lane
§ 10.36.010 GRAFTON CODE § 10.36.010
1.01:298
Street Side Limits
Cheyenne Avenue
[Added 3-16-2015 by
Ord. No. 006-2015]
West For a distance of 750 feet north of
the north curbline of WIS 60
Dakota Drive [Added
5-20-2013 by Ord. No.
012-2013]
East From 695 feet south of the south
curbline of Washington Street to
835 feet south of Washington Street
on the south side of Dakota Drive
Dakota Drive [Added
5-20-2013 by Ord. No.
012-2013]
West From 695 feet south of the south
curbline of Washington Street to
765 feet of Washington Street on
the north side of Dakota Drive
Fall Road From Wisconsin Avenue to First
Avenue
Falls Road [Amended
by Ord. No. 027,
Series 2000]
North From South Green Bay Road to 35
feet east of Cedar Drive
Falls Road [Amended
by Ord. No. 027,
Series 2000]
South From South Green Bay Road to
Cedar Drive
Hickory Street [Added
9-19-2016 by Ord. No.
015-2016]
North For a distance of 40 feet east of the
western exit drive for 700 Hickory
Street
Hickory Street [Added
9-19-2016 by Ord. No.
015-2016]
North For a distance of 40 feet west of the
western exit drive for 700 Hickory
Street
Hickory Street
[Amended by Ord. No.
003, Series 2011]
North From Eleventh Avenue west 66 feet
to the first driveway on Hickory
North Green Bay Road West From Northbrooke Drive to Hickory
Street
River Bend Road
[Added 4-17-2012 by
Ord. No. 003-2012]
East 1,330 feet north of the corner post
at River Bend Road and Lakefield
Road
River Bend Road
[Added 4-17-2012 by
Ord. No. 003-2012]
West 960 feet west of the corner post at
River Bend Road and Lakefield
Road
Washington Street
[Amended by Ord. No.
015, Series 1997]
North From First Avenue to 2nd Avenue
Washington Street
[Amended by Ord. No.
040, Series 2001]
From 185 feet west of the west
curbline of Eleventh Avenue to the
west line of Interstate Highway 43
Wisconsin Avenue From First Avenue to Ninth Avenue
§ 10.36.010 CODE ADOPTION § 10.36.010
1.01:299
Street Side Limits
Wisconsin Avenue
[Added 3-4-2019 by
Ord. No. 009-2019]
East From Beech Street to Cedar Street
Wisconsin Avenue East From Broad Street to 72 feet north
of Broad Street
Wisconsin Avenue East From Cedar Street to 74 feet south
of Cedar Street
Wisconsin Avenue West From 256 feet south of the west
curbline extended of Eleventh
Avenue to 275 feet south of the
west curbline extended of Eleventh
Avenue
Wisconsin Avenue West From 371 feet south of the west
curbline extended of Eleventh
Avenue to 409 feet south of the
west curbline of Eleventh Avenue
extended
Wisconsin Avenue West From 448 feet south of the west
curbline extended of Eleventh
Avenue to 458 feet south of the
west curbline extended of Eleventh
Avenue
Wisconsin Avenue West From 555 feet south of the west
curbline extended of Eleventh
Avenue to 576 feet south of the
west curbline extended of Eleventh
Avenue
Wisconsin Avenue West From a point 282 feet south of
Beech Street to a point 333 feet
south of Beech Street
§ 10.36.020. No parking at specified times.
No vehicle shall be parked in any of the following areas at the times
specified:
§ 10.36.010 GRAFTON CODE § 10.36.020
1.01:300
Street Side Time Period Limits
Tenth Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
weekends and
holidays
Between Power Street
and Hickory Street
Eleventh
Avenue
[Amended by
Ord. No. 026,
Series 1999;
Ord. No. 005,
Series 2005]
West 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., regular
school days
2-hour parking, from the
south curbline of Broad
Street to a point 270
feet south
No parking/bus loading:
remaining 250 feet
Eleventh
Avenue
[Amended by
Ord. No. 026,
Series 1999]
East 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., regular
school days
2-hour parking, from the
south curbline of Broad
Street to a point 375
feet south
No parking: remaining
120 feet
Beech Street
[Amended by
Ord. No. 026,
Series 2005]
North 2:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
From Eleventh Avenue
to a point 235 feet west
Bridge Street North 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., except
weekends and
holidays
From 125 feet west of
Eleventh Avenue to 165
feet west of Eleventh
Avenue
Bridge Street
[Added
7-15-2019 by
Ord. No.
013-2019]
North 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday
From 6th Avenue 100
feet west
Bridge Street
[Added
7-15-2019 by
Ord. No.
013-2019]
South 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday
From 6th Avenue 100
feet west
Cheyenne Court
[Amended by
Ord. No. 018,
Series 2010]
South 6:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Monday
through Friday
From the Grafton School
District property to
Cheyenne Avenue
Washington
Street
7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., regular
school days
From Seventh Avenue to
a point 1,934 feet east
§ 10.36.020 CODE ADOPTION § 10.36.020
1.01:301
Street Side Time Period Limits
Washington
Street
South 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., regular
school days
Between Sixth Avenue
and Eighth Avenue
§ 10.36.030. Fifteen-minute parking. [Amended by Ord. No. 028,
Series 2006; Ord. No. 006, Series 2007; 9-19-2011 by Ord. No.
030-2011; 5-21-2012 by Ord. No. 005-2012]
No vehicles shall be parked for more than 15 minutes in any of the following
areas at the times specified:
Street Side Limits
Eleventh Avenue East From the north curbline of Beech
Street to 110 feet north of the north
curbline of Beech Street, Monday
through Friday from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
Eleventh Avenue
[Added 4-16-2013
by Ord. No.
010-2013]
East From the north curbline of Bridge
Street to 77 feet north, from 7:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m.
Bridge Street South From a point beginning 39 feet east of
Wisconsin Avenue to a point 63 feet
east of Wisconsin Avenue
Wisconsin Avenue East In front of 1540 Wisconsin Avenue
between 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
§ 10.36.040. Thirty-minute parking. [Amended by Ord. No. 008,
Series 1999]
No vehicle shall be parked for more than 30 minutes in any of the following
areas at the times specified:
§ 10.36.050. One-hour parking. [Amended 3-6-2017 by Ord. No.
003-2017]
No vehicle shall be parked for more than one hour in any of the following
areas at the times specified:
A. On any street between 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., by trucks having a
license weight over 9,000 pounds, unless a permit is obtained therefor
from the Grafton Police Department.
B. On any street between 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., between December 1
and April 1, except physicians on emergency calls.
§ 10.36.020 GRAFTON CODE § 10.36.050
1.01:302
Street Side Limits
Eleventh Avenue East From the north curbline of Beech
Street to 110 feet north of the north
curbline of Beech Street, except
Sunday
§ 10.36.055. Ninety-minute parking. [Amended by Ord. No. 026;
Series 2005]
No vehicle shall be parked for more than 90 minutes in any of the following
area at any times specified:
§ 10.36.060. Two-hour parking.
No vehicle shall be parked for more than two hours in any of the following
areas at the times specified:
Street Side Time Period Limits
Eleventh Avenue
[Amended by
Ord. No. 009,
Series 1999]
East 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m. weekdays
From a point 25 feet
north of the north
curbline of Washington
Street to a point 50 feet
north of the north
curbline of Washington
Street
Eleventh Avenue
[Amended by
Ord. No. 025,
Series 2005]
East 7:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., Monday
through Saturday,
except holidays
From Bridge Street to
350 feet north
Twelfth Avenue East 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
From Bridge Street to
270 feet south of the
south curbline of
Washington Street
Twelfth Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
From 200 feet south of
the south curbline of
Washington Street to
Beech Street
Twelfth Avenue
[Amended by
Ord. No. 018,
Series 2009]
East 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday
All spaces, except
accessible parking
spaces, south of the
Paramount Plaza to Beech
Street
Sixth Avenue West All days, except
Sundays and
holidays
From Beech Street to
southerly end of Sixth
Avenue
A. On the north side of Beech Street from the railroad tracks 240 feet east.
§ 10.36.050 CODE ADOPTION § 10.36.060
1.01:303
Street Side Time Period Limits
Seventh Avenue
[Added
3-6-2017 by
Ord. No.
003-2017]
West 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., Anytime
From the south curbline
of Beech Street, to a point
460 feet north of the
north curbline of Maple
Street
Seventh Avenue
[Added
3-6-2017 by
Ord. No.
003-2017]
West Anytime From the north curbline
of Maple Street, to a point
165 feet north of the
north curbline of Maple
Street
Ninth Avenue West All days, except
Sundays and
holidays
From North Street to
Spring Street
Beech Street All days, except
Sundays and
holidays
From Fourth Avenue to
the Wisconsin Central
Railroad right-of-way
Bridge Street
[Amended
9-19-2011 by
Ord. No.
029-2011]
North 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
From the west curbline of
Thirteenth Avenue to 45
feet east of the east
curbline of Twelfth
Avenue
Bridge Street
[Amended
9-19-2011 by
Ord. No.
029-2011]
South 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
From the west curbline of
Thirteenth Avenue to 139
feet west of the west
curbline of Twelfth
Avenue
Hickory Street North All days, except
Sundays and
holidays
From 10th Avenue to the
Wisconsin Central
Railroad
Municipal lot
(Twelfth Avenue
and Washington
Street)
[Amended by
Ord. No. 009,
Series 1999;
Ord. No. 015,
Series 2008;
Ord. No. 024,
Series 2008]
At west end: first space
designated "handicap"
and adjacent six spaces
designated "two-hour
parking"
Wisconsin Avenue East 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
From Bridge Street to
Cedar Street
§ 10.36.060 GRAFTON CODE § 10.36.060
1.01:304
Street Side Time Period Limits
Wisconsin Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
From Bridge Street to
Beech Street
§ 10.36.070. Angle parking. [Amended by Ord. No. 025, Series 1997;
Ord. No. 012, Series 2001]
Angle parking is permitted at the following locations:
§ 10.36.075. Van-accessible designated parking. [Amended by Ord.
No. 012, Series 2004]
There shall be van-accessible parking, as defined by the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA), within the following public right-of-way area:
§ 10.36.080. Forty-eight-hour parking limit.
No vehicle, camper or trailer shall be parked for more than 48 hours on any
street.
§ 10.36.090. Miscellaneous parking restrictions.
A. On Bridge Street between Wisconsin Avenue and the Wisconsin Central
Railroad right-of-way, as designated by pavement markings.
B. On the east side of Thirteenth Avenue from 140 feet north of the north
curbline of Washington Street to 118 feet north of the north curbline of
Washington Street.
C. On the west side of Tenth Avenue beginning at a point 348 feet south
from its intersection with Maple Street and continuing to a point 442
feet south.
A. On the west side of Eleventh Avenue beginning 135 feet from the
southwest corner of Eleventh Avenue and Bridge Street and continuing
south for a total of 34 feet in length.
A. When signs are erected in any block giving notice thereof, no person
shall park a vehicle for longer than the period hereinafter specified at
any time between 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Fridays only from April 1
through November 30 on the following streets:
1. Bridge Street from Eleventh Avenue to Thirteenth Avenue.
2. Washington Avenue from 10th Avenue to Thirteenth Avenue.
3. Twelfth Avenue from Spring Street to Cedar Street.
4. Wisconsin Avenue from Bridge Street to Wisconsin Central
Railroad.
§ 10.36.060 CODE ADOPTION § 10.36.090
1.01:305
B. No truck shall be parked on the north side of Bridge Street between
Eleventh Avenue and Twelfth Avenue.
C. There shall be no truck or van parking at any time on the west side of
Wisconsin Avenue from the south curbline of Bridge Street to 66 feet
south of the south curbline of Bridge Street.
D. There shall be no truck or van parking at any time on the north side of
Bridge Street from the corner of Thirteenth Avenue proceeding west 75
feet. [Amended by Ord. No. 023, Series 2006]
E. There shall be no truck parking for trucks over 10,000 pounds on Beech
Street from Eleventh Avenue to 60 feet west of Eleventh Avenue.
F. There shall be no truck parking at any time on the south side of
Washington Street from the west curbline of Eleventh Avenue to the
Wisconsin Central Railroad.
G. Parking of mobile recreational vehicles on Village streets. [Amended
by Ord. No. 030, Series 2006; Ord. No. 004, Series 2007]
1. Temporary permit required. No person shall park any mobile
recreational vehicle or trailer on any Village street, alley, highway,
public right-of-way, or Village off-street parking lot in a residentially
zoned area for a period in excess of two hours unless he possesses a
temporary permit. In no case may a person inhabit a mobile
recreational vehicle overnight unless he has obtained a temporary
permit, and in no event shall a mobile recreational vehicle be
parked in or inhabited in a Village park after the park's official
closing hours. Temporary permits will not be issued during winter
parking restrictions from December 1 to April 1.
2. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
MOBILE RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Any trailer or recreational
vehicle designed for camping or travel use, regardless of the
vehicle's size or weight. "Mobile recreational vehicles" also
includes, but is not limited to, motor homes, travel trailers, pickup
trucks with attached camping units, house trailers, mobile homes
and private coaches and converted buses.
TRAILER — Includes, but shall not be limited to, boat trailers,
snowmobile trailers, motorcycle trailers, car trailers, general
hauling trailers, semitrailers, and any other enclosed or unenclosed
hauling-style trailer. To qualify as "mobile recreational vehicle,"
the trailer must be equipped with axles and tires that enable it
to be towed/moved under its own power by another vehicle. Any
equipment must be appropriately attached to a vehicle capable of
carrying it.
3. Permit application. A temporary permit may be obtained from the
Village of Grafton Police Department where there is no alternative
§ 10.36.090 GRAFTON CODE § 10.36.090
1.01:306
Chapter 10.38
U-TURNS
§ 10.38.010. U-turns prohibited.
U-turns are not permitted on the following streets, as described:
Street Restricted Area
First Avenue [Added by Ord.
No. A-449-83, 1983]
At Oak Street and at Chateau Drive
Washington Street [Added
by Ord. No. 030, Series
1995]
From Grafton Avenue west to Twelfth
Avenue
Washington Street [Added
by Ord. No. 042, Series
2001]
Eastbound on Washington Street, vehicle
operator shall not enter Grafton High
School property from the median opening
920 feet west of Cheyenne Avenue
Chapter 10.40
WEIGHT LIMITS
§ 10.40.010. Class "B" highways.
All streets except those listed below are designated as class "B" highways
and shall be subject to the weight limits specified in § 348.16, Wis. Stats.:
Badger Circle
Beech Street between Fourth Avenue and Wisconsin Avenue
Cedar Creek Road between Ninth Avenue and Green Bay Road
Cheyenne Avenue between Dakota Drive and Grafton Avenue
parking available. Such permit shall be valid for a period of not
more than seven consecutive days. Temporary permits may be
received up to three times per year and may provide for parking
up to a maximum of 21 days in any calendar year. Under no
circumstances shall a permit be granted allowing parking of mobile
recreational vehicle or equipment in parking lots adjacent to or
included in Village parks.
4. Enforcement. In addition to enforcement by law enforcement
officers acting pursuant to statutory authority, any adult citizen
may request enforcement for violation of this chapter by filing a
written complaint with the Village Police Department, setting forth
the specific dates and approximate times of the alleged violation.
Municipal vehicles or agents of the Village are exempt.
§ 10.36.090 CODE ADOPTION § 10.40.010
1.01:307
Fourth Avenue and Sixth Avenue between Washington Street and Beech
Street
Grafton Avenue
Green Bay Road between North Street and the north Village limits
Hickory Street between Ninth Avenue and Green Bay Road
Ninth Avenue between Hickory Street and Cedar Creek Road
Ninth Avenue between Wisconsin Avenue and Falls Road
North Street between Eighth Avenue and Green Bay Road
Port Washington Road
Seventeenth Avenue between Washington Street and Grafton Avenue
Seventh Avenue between Beech Street and Wisconsin Avenue
Twelfth Avenue between Bridge Street and North Street
Washington Street
Wisconsin Avenue
§ 10.40.020. Other weight limits.
No vehicle having a gross weight of over 15,000 pounds shall be operated
on any of the following streets, except when obtaining orders for supplies
or moving or delivering supplies or commodities to or from any place of
business or residence which has an entrance on such street:
Bridge Street between Fourteenth Avenue and Sixteenth Avenue
Cheyenne Avenue between Seminole Street and Falls Road [Added
2-16-2015 by Ord. No. 001-2015]
Eighth Avenue between Washington Street and North Street [Added
2-16-2015 by Ord. No. 001-2015]
Eleventh Avenue between a point 40 feet south of the south curbline of
Woodridge Drive and Brookside Drive [Amended 2-16-2015 by Ord. No.
001-2015]
Eleventh Avenue between Washington Street and North Street [Added
2-16-2015 by Ord. No. 001-2015]
Falls Road from Port Washington Road to South Green Bay Road [Added
2-16-2015 by Ord. No. 001-2015]
Falls Road between Twelfth Avenue and Seventeenth Avenue
First Avenue
Ninth Avenue between Washington Street and North Street [Added
2-16-2015 by Ord. No. 001-2015]
Seventeenth Avenue between Washington Street and South Village Limits
[Added 2-16-2015 by Ord. No. 001-2015]
Seventh Avenue between Washington Street and North Street [Added
2-16-2015 by Ord. No. 001-2015]
§ 10.40.010 GRAFTON CODE § 10.40.020
1.01:308
Sixth Avenue between Washington Street and North Street [Added
2-16-2015 by Ord. No. 001-2015]
Chapter 10.42
TOW-AWAY ZONES
§ 10.42.010. Tow-away zones designated.
The following areas are designated as tow-away zones in the Village:
Street Side Limits
Twelfth Avenue East From the north curbline of Washington
Street continuing north a distance of 90
feet
Twelfth Avenue East From the south curbline of Washington
Street continuing south a distance of 234
feet
Twelfth Avenue West From the north curbline of Washington
Street continuing north a distance of 180
feet
Twelfth Avenue West From the south curbline of Washington
Street continuing south a distance of 148
feet
Washington Street North From a point beginning 95 feet from the
east curbline of Eleventh Avenue and
continuing east to intersection of
Seventeenth Avenue
Washington Street South From intersection with Eleventh Avenue
proceeding east to intersection of
Seventeenth Avenue
§ 10.42.020. Owner responsible for costs.
The owner and/or operator of any vehicle that is towed away is responsible
for the towing and all costs associated with the towing and impounding and
processing of the vehicle.
§ 10.42.030. Removal of illegally parked vehicles. [Amended by Ord.
No. 026, Series 2006]
A. Hazard to public safety. Any vehicle parked, stopped or standing upon a
highway which is in violation of any of the provisions of § 10.04.010 or
Chapter 10.36 of this title, which is determined to be a hazard to traffic
or to public safety, shall be removed.
§ 10.40.020 CODE ADOPTION § 10.42.030
1.01:309
Chapter 10.44
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
§ 10.44.010. Adoption of state statutes and definitions pertaining to
snowmobiles; penalties.
§ 10.44.020. Operation of vehicles by minors. [Amended by Ord. No.
A-503, 1987]
B. Removal by operator. Such vehicle shall be removed by the operator in
charge, upon request of any traffic officer, to a position where parking is
legally permitted.
C. Removal by traffic officer. Any traffic officer, after issuing a citation for
illegal parking, stopping or standing of an unattended vehicle upon a
highway which in violation of any provisions of § 10.04.010 or Chapter
10.36 of this title, which is declared to be a hazard to traffic or to public
safety, is authorized to direct the removal of such vehicle.
A. Adoption of state statutes. The provisions of §§ 350.02 (operation of
snowmobiles on or in the vicinity of highways), 350.03 (right-of-way),
350.05 (operation by youthful operators restricted), 350.07 (driving
animals), 350.08 (owner permitting operation), 350.09 (head lamps, tail
lamps, brakes), 350.10 (miscellaneous provisions for snowmobile
operation), 350.101 (intoxicated snowmobiling), 350.1025 (application
of intoxicated snowmobiling law), 350.12 (registration of snowmobiles),
350.135 (interference with uniform trail signs and standards
prohibited), Wis. Stats., and all acts amendatory thereof and
supplementary thereto, are hereby adopted as a portion of this chapter
so far as is applicable. A violation of any such provision shall constitute
a violation of this chapter.
B. Definitions. The provisions of § 350.01, Wis. Stats., defining the terms
used in Ch. 350 of the Wisconsin Statutes, pertaining to snowmobiles
and all acts thereof and supplementary thereto, are hereby adopted as a
portion of this chapter so far as is applicable.
C. Violations and penalties. Except as otherwise provided herein, any
person violating this section shall be fined not less than $100 nor more
than $250 plus costs of prosecution for a first offense and not less than
$200 or more than $500 plus costs of prosecution for a violation
occurring within three years of the individual's conviction for violating
the provisions of Ch. 350, Wis. Stats., or a local ordinance adopting said
provisions. The penalty provisions of § 350.11, Wis. Stats., applicable to
individuals convicted of a first offense of operating a snowmobile while
under the influence of an intoxicant, operating a snowmobile with a
prohibited breath alcohol, are hereby adopted. [Added by Ord. No.
017, Series 2000]
§ 10.42.030 GRAFTON CODE § 10.44.020
1.01:310
§ 10.44.030. Prohibited in parks. [Amended by Ord. No. A-503,
1987]
No person shall operate a snowmobile, all-terrain vehicle, motorcycle or
other recreational vehicle in Veterans Memorial Park or any other area
designated as a park or recreational area within the corporate Village
boundaries. Mill Pond Park may be used by snowmobile operators, allterrain
vehicle operators, motorcycle operators or other recreational
vehicle operators only for the purpose of gaining access to the Milwaukee
River from the boat ramp area of Veterans Memorial Park on Fifteenth
Avenue.
A. No person under 12 years of age may operate an all-terrain vehicle
unless he or she is accompanied by a parent, guardian or person over
18 years of age. No person who is under 12 years of age may operate an
all-terrain vehicle which is an implement of husbandry on a roadway
regardless of whether he or she is accompanied by a parent, guardian
or person over 18 years of age. [Amended by Ord. No. 017, Series
2000]
B. A person who is at least 12 years of age but under 16 years of age may
not operate an all-terrain vehicle unless he or she holds a valid allterrain
vehicle safety certificate or is accompanied by a person over 18
years of age. A person who is at least 12 years of age but under 16 years
of age may not operate an all-terrain vehicle which is an implement of
husbandry on a roadway unless he or she holds a valid all-terrain
vehicle safety certificate, regardless if he or she is accompanied by a
person over 18 years of age. A person who is at least 12 years of age but
under 16 years of age who holds an all-terrain vehicle safety certificate
shall carry it while operating an all-terrain vehicle and shall display it to
a law enforcement officer on request.
C. Persons enrolled in a safety certificate program approved by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources may operate an all-terrain
vehicle in an area designated by the instructor.
D. The above requirements do not apply to operation of all-terrain vehicles
by an operator under the age of 16 years on land owned or leased by the
person's immediate family. "Leased lands" do not include lands owned
or leased by an organization of which said operator or his or her
immediate family is a member.
E. These requirements do not apply to a person at least 12 years of age but
under 16 years of age who holds a valid certificate issued by another
state.
F. No person shall be permitted to operate a motorcycle unless he or she
possesses a valid Wisconsin operator's license which has been
specifically endorsed for motorcycle operation.
§ 10.44.020 CODE ADOPTION § 10.44.040
1.01:311
§ 10.44.040. Prohibited areas on Milwaukee River. [Amended by
Ord. No. A-503, 1987]
§ 10.44.050. Equipment requirements. [Amended by Ord. No.
A-503, 1987]
No snowmobile, all-terrain vehicle, motorcycle or other recreational vehicle
may be operated unless it is equipped with equipment and noise controls
which comply with the requirements of Wisconsin state law.
§ 10.44.060. Violations and penalties. [Amended by Ord. No. A-503,
1987]
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, any person who violates any of
the provisions of this chapter shall forfeit not less than $45 nor more than
$250, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of
the forfeiture and costs of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the county jail
until the forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 10.48
NUISANCE MOTOR VEHICLES
A. No snowmobile, all-terrain vehicle, motorcycle or other recreational
vehicle may operate on the Milwaukee River within the corporate
Village boundaries unless at the time of operation the vehicle in
question is registered with the State of Wisconsin Department of Motor
Vehicles or the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and has the
registration decals or license plate displayed as required or is exempt
from registration. A snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle is exempt from
registration if it is:
1. Owned by the United States, another state or political subdivision
thereof, but such snowmobile shall display in a visible manner the
name of the owner;
2. Covered by a valid registration in another state, province or
country, if there is some identification of registration displayed on
the vehicle and it has not been in this state for more than 15
consecutive days;
3. Used exclusively for racing on a raceway facility;
4. Owned by a political subdivision of the state and used for
enforcement or emergency purposes.
B. No snowmobile, all-terrain vehicle, motorcycle or other recreational
vehicle may operate on the Milwaukee River in the area designated for
ice skating purposes north of the Highway 57 bridge or south of the
area as marked "no snowmobiling."
§ 10.44.040 GRAFTON CODE § 10.48.010
1.01:312
§ 10.48.010. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTOR VEHICLE(S) — Includes mobile home, moped, motor bicycle, motor
bus, motorcycle, motor trucks, or motor vehicles, as defined in Ch. 340, Wis.
Stats.
NUISANCE MOTOR VEHICLE(S) — Includes any inoperable, unlicensed,
disassembled, or wrecked vehicle. Included are vehicles on any public
street or highway for a period of 48 hours or more without the Village's
consent. Vehicles that are located on private property for such time and
under such circumstances as to cause a reasonable person to believe that
they are abandoned are deemed abandoned.
§ 10.48.020. Nuisance motor vehicles prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, party, firm or corporation to keep, place
or store any "nuisance motor vehicle" upon any public thoroughfare, street
or highway, or upon any private or public property within the Village in a
manner inconsistent with this chapter.
§ 10.48.030. Exceptions.
Nuisance motor vehicles may be kept, placed or stored outside of a garage
or enclosed structure in conjunction with an authorized and licensed auto
sales, repair or salvage business. Also included are vehicles located on
private property enclosed completely in a building or other storage place or
if covered completely by a car cover or tarpaulin.
§ 10.48.040. Removal.
A. Authority to tow. Subject to the procedures hereinafter set forth,
nuisance motor vehicles may be towed and stored by the Police
Department at the cost and expense of the owner. Unclaimed towed
vehicles may be disposed of by either the Police Department or towing
contractors through means and procedures authorized by state law.
B. Notice of intent to tow on private property. The owner of a nuisance
motor vehicle which is upon private property shall be notified of a
violation of this chapter and provided 10 calendar days to repair,
assemble, make the vehicle operable and roadworthy, and license any
vehicle which was unlicensed, or transport the vehicle to a garage or
enclosed structure, or place such vehicle within an authorized and
licensed sales, repair or salvage business.
C. Notice of intent to tow on public property. The owner of a nuisance
motor vehicle which is upon public property shall be notified of the
ordinance violation and shall be provided with 24 hours to repair,
assemble, make the vehicle operable and roadworthy and license any
§ 10.48.010 CODE ADOPTION § 10.48.040
1.01:313
vehicle which was previously unlicensed, or transport the vehicle to an
authorized and licensed sales, repair or salvage business.
D. Service of notice of intent to tow.. If the owner of a nuisance motor
vehicle can be reasonably determined, notification of the ordinance
violation and the intent to tow shall be made by personal service,
registered or certified mail with return receipt, and in addition, a stickon
or otherwise waterproofed and fastened notice of intent to tow shall
be posted on the nuisance motor vehicle in a conspicuous place. Notice
shall be deemed adequate in the event that personal service or return
receipt from registered or certified mail has not been returned.
E. Other ordinances and laws. A nuisance motor vehicle may be towed
under authority of any other ordinance or law pursuant to procedures
therein specified where a tow is authorized by another ordinance or law
for reason other than a violation of this chapter.
F. Notice of tow, impoundment, and storage. When a nuisance motor
vehicle is towed, and the owner and owner's address of the towed
vehicle is known or reasonably ascertainable to the person who
authorized the tow, said owner shall be provided notice, either
personally or by regular mail, that the vehicle has been towed to either
a certain towing contractor, to a certain location or to the Police
Department's impound lot. The owner shall be provided with the towing
contractor's phone number and advised that the vehicle should be
claimed therefrom, upon payment of the appropriate towing and
storage charges, as soon as possible, for daily storage charges are
accumulating. This notice shall also indicate that the vehicle may be
disposed of by the towing contractor or the Police Department to
recoup such charges, in a manner and through a procedure authorized
by state law.
G. Disposal of unclaimed vehicles. At any time prior to the sale of
impounded motor vehicles as herein provided, any person establishing
his ownership or right of possession to such vehicle may reclaim and
obtain possession of the same by paying all outstanding towing and
impound lot charges as set by the towing contractor or by the Chief of
Police or his/her designee. All nuisance motor vehicles will be towed by
contractor designated by the Chief of Police or his designee.
H. Penalties for violations of nuisance motor vehicle ordinance. The owner
of a nuisance motor vehicle who fails, in a timely manner, to comply
with this chapter shall be subject to have his nuisance motor vehicle
towed and stored at his expense and shall, as hereinafter provided, be
subject to a money forfeiture, which will be in addition to payment of
towing and storage costs. Each day of violation of this chapter shall be
deemed a separate offense.
§ 10.48.040 GRAFTON CODE § 10.48.050
1.01:314
§ 10.48.050. Vehicles towed for other reasons.
Any vehicle towed to the Grafton Police Department for reasons other
than violation of nuisance motor vehicle (i.e., emergency detention, traffic
violation arrests, safekeeping) have a grace period of five days. After
notification that the vehicle has been towed to the Grafton Police
Department (via person, phone, or mail) and the grace period, the owner
will be issued a citation for violation of this chapter. Daily storage fees will
commence after the five-day grace period. The citation issued may include
towing and storage costs.
§ 10.48.060. Seized vehicles.
All vehicles that are towed to the Grafton Police Department that were used
in the commission of a crime or are evidence of a crime may be stored
indefinitely. These vehicle are to be considered seized and may be released
or forfeited at the discretion of the Ozaukee County District Attorney's
office.
Chapter 10.56
USING SEMITRAILERS FOR STORAGE PURPOSES
§ 10.56.010. Use for storage purposes prohibited.
No person shall erect, construct, maintain or use any semitrailer, operative
or inoperative, in the Village for the purpose of storage, warehousing or
location for the operation of any business in the Village. This section shall
not apply to any parking in a properly zoned area for temporary periods
while awaiting unloading.
§ 10.56.020. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of § 10.56.010 shall be subject to
a forfeiture of not less than $10 nor more than $200, together with the costs
of prosecution, and in default of payment thereof shall be imprisoned for a
period of not less than one day or more than six months until such forfeiture
and costs are paid. Each day that such violation is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 10.60
LEAVING KEYS IN UNATTENDED VEHICLES
§ 10.60.010. Leaving keys in unattended vehicle prohibited.
No person shall permit a motor vehicle in his custody to stand or remain
unattended in any street, alley or in any other public place, except an
attended parking area, unless either the starting lever, throttle, steering
§ 10.48.050 CODE ADOPTION § 10.60.010
1.01:315
apparatus, gear shift or ignition of the vehicle is locked and the key for such
lock is removed from the vehicle.
§ 10.60.020. Violations and penalties.
The forfeiture for an offense described in § 10.60.010 relating to the leaving
of keys in an unattended motor vehicle shall be not less than $5 nor more
than $200.
Chapter 10.64
BICYCLE REGISTRATION AND REGULATION
§ 10.64.010. License required.
No person who is a resident of the Village shall ride or use a bicycle upon
any public street in the Village unless the same shall have been registered
and a registration sticker attached in a designated area of the frame as
provided in this chapter.
§ 10.64.020. Issuance of license.
Application for license shall be made to the Police Department upon forms
provided, containing the name, date of birth, address and phone number of
the owner, together with a complete description of the bicycle. Upon proper
application and payment of the license fee, the Police Department shall
issue a bicycle registration sticker. The sticker shall be issued for the life of
the bicycle beginning January 1, 1998. The fee for the bicycle sticker shall
be $5. The Police Department shall keep a record of the date of the issuance
of each sticker, to whom issued, and the number thereof. Registration shall
be serially numbered and kept on file at the Police Department. If a licensed
bicycle is transferred to another Village resident, a new license must be
purchased by the new owner.
§ 10.64.030. Authority of police officers.
Any police officer shall have authority to enforce provisions of Chs. 346 and
347, Wis. Stats., regarding the operation and equipment of the bicycle.
§ 10.64.040. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, forfeit a sum not less than $10 and not to exceed $50,
plus court costs.
Chapter 10.68
NAVIGATIONAL MARKERS AND AIDS
§ 10.60.010 GRAFTON CODE § 10.68.010
1.01:316
§ 10.68.010. Duty of Director of Public Works.
The Director of Public Works is authorized and directed to place and
maintain suitable markers, navigation aids and signs in such water areas
of the Milwaukee River as shall be appropriate to advise the public of
dangerous conditions and to advise the public of the provisions of this
chapter and to post and maintain a copy of the ordinance codified in this
chapter at all public access points within the jurisdiction of the Village. The
purpose of placing buoys and markers in the Milwaukee River is to notify
and warn swimmers, boaters and other members of the public of the dams
located in the Milwaukee River and to warn the public of this danger.
§ 10.68.020. Location of buoys.
Buoy locations between Bridge Street and Washington Street on the
Milwaukee River are shown on the sketch attached to Ordinance A-321-76,
copies of which are on file in the Village Clerk's office. Buoy locations at the
dam on the Milwaukee River at the Lime Kiln Park are likewise shown on
the sketch attached to Ordinance A-321-76, copies of which are on file in
the Village Clerk's office, which is made a part of this chapter.
§ 10.68.030. Standard markers.
All markers placed by the Director of Public Works or other person upon the
waters of the river shall comply with the regulations of the Department of
Natural Resources.
§ 10.68.040. Interference with markers prohibited.
No person shall, without authority, remove, damage or destroy or moor or
attach any watercraft to any buoy, beacon or marker placed in the waters of
the river by the authority of the United States, the state or Village or by any
private person pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 10.68.050. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, forfeit not more than $50 for the first offense or shall be imprisoned
not more than 30 days, or both, and shall be fined not more than $100 or
imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both, upon the conviction of the same
offense a second or subsequent time within one year.
Chapter 10.72
ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
§ 10.72.010. Statutory authority.
This chapter shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of
§§ 345.20 to 345.53, Ch. 299 and § 66.0114, Wis. Stats.
§ 10.68.010 CODE ADOPTION § 10.72.020
1.01:317
§ 10.72.020. Notice of demerit points and receipt. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
Every officer accepting a forfeit penalty or money deposit under this title
shall receipt therefor as provided in § 345.26(3)(b), Wis. Stats. Every officer
accepting a stipulation under the provisions of this title shall comply with
the provisions of §§ 343.27, 343.28 and 345.26(1)(a), Wis. Stats., and shall
require the alleged violator to sign a statement of notice in substantially the
form contained on the uniform traffic citation and complaint promulgated
under § 345.11, Wis. Stats.
§ 10.72.030. Deposits of forfeited penalties.
Any officer accepting deposits of forfeited penalties under this chapter shall
deliver them to the Village Clerk within 20 days after receipt. Any officer
authorized to accept deposits under § 345.26, Wis. Stats., or this title shall
qualify by taking the oath prescribed by § 19.01, Wis. Stats., and filing an
official bond in the sum of $25,000 as described in § 19.01, Wis. Stats.
§ 10.72.040. Uniform citation.
The uniform traffic citation promulgated under § 345.11, Wis. Stats., shall
be used for all moving traffic violations under this title.
§ 10.72.050. Parking citations. [Amended by Ord. No. A-427-82,
1982]
Chapter 10.76
PENALTIES
A. Citations for all nonmoving traffic violations under this chapter shall
conform to § 345.28, Wis. Stats., and shall permit direct mail payment
of the applicable minimum forfeiture to the Grafton Police Department
within five days of the issuance of the citation in lieu of court
appearance. The issuing officer shall specify thereon the amount of the
applicable forfeiture as provided in this title.
B. No officer or Village authority shall be personally or officially
responsible for payment of any dishonored check in payment of any
forfeiture.
C. If the alleged violator fails to pay the amount of the forfeiture as
provided herein or to appear in court within 28 days after the issuance
of a nonmoving traffic citation, the Chief of Police may take any or all of
the actions authorized under § 345.28, Wis. Stats.
§ 10.72.020 GRAFTON CODE § 10.76.010
1.01:318
§ 10.76.010. Costs of prosecution.
The penalty for violation of any provision of this title shall be a forfeiture as
provided in this chapter together with the cost of prosecution imposed as
provided in §§ 345.20 to 345.53, Wis. Stats.
§ 10.76.020. State forfeiture statutes. [Amended by Ord. No.
A-431-82, 1982]
§ 10.76.030. Special local regulations. [Amended by Ord. No. 017,
Series 2005]
The forfeiture for violation of Chapter 10.08, 10.16, 10.20, 10.22, 10.24,
10.28, 10.32, 10.36 or 10.40 of this title shall be not less than $5 nor more
than $200 for the first offense and not less than $10 nor more than $500 for
the second offense within two years.
§ 10.76.040. Penalty for violation of § 10.16.020. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
The forfeiture for violation of any provision of § 10.16.020 (pertaining to
speed limits) of this title shall be as provided in § 346.60, Wis. Stats.
Chapter 10.80
BOATING REGULATIONS
§ 10.80.010. State regulations.
The ordinance codified in this chapter recognizes that the Milwaukee River
from Cedar Creek Road to the southern end of Limekiln Park is subject
to all of the water regulations contained in §§ 30.50 through 30.71, Wis.
Stats. Many of these regulations are explained in the Department of Natural
Resources' publication entitled "Wisconsin Boating Regulations," and we
urge river users to learn them. This chapter adopts those state statutes
generally, recites some of them in full text for emphasis due to past
A. Any forfeiture for violation of the state statutes adopted by reference in
Chapter 10.04 of this title shall conform to the forfeiture permitted to
be imposed for violation of such statutes as set forth in the Uniform
Deposit and Misdemeanor Bail Schedule of the Wisconsin Judicial
Conference, including any variations or increases for subsequent
offenses, which schedule is adopted by reference, as the same may be
amended from time to time.
B. Where the Uniform Deposit and Misdemeanor Bail Schedule of the
Wisconsin Judicial Conference, as amended, fails to provide a penalty
for violation of a state statute adopted by reference in Chapter 10.04 of
this title, the penalty shall be a forfeiture in accordance with the
minimum and maximum limits for violation of the applicable statute.
§ 10.76.010 CODE ADOPTION § 10.80.010
1.01:319
problems, and adds additional regulations to deal with unique problems of
public health, safety and welfare posed by this river area.
§ 10.80.020. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to the waters of the Milwaukee River within the
jurisdiction of the Village of Grafton and shall be enforced by the Grafton
Police Department.
§ 10.80.030. Adoption of statutory water regulations. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
The following sections of the Wisconsin Statutes, as amended from time to
time, are adopted by reference and made a part of these regulations as if
fully set forth herein:
30.50, Wis. Stats., Definitions
30.501, Wis. Stats., Capacity plates on boats
30.51, Wis. Stats., Certificate of number and registration; requirements;
exemptions
30.52, Wis. Stats., Certificate of number and registration; application;
certification and registration period; fees; issuance
30.53, Wis. Stats., Certificate of origin; requirements; contents
30.54, Wis. Stats., Lost, stolen or mutilated certificates
30.541, Wis. Stats., Transfers of boat titles
30.549, Wis. Stats., Transfer of ownership of boats with a certificate of
title, certificate of number, or registration
30.55, Wis. Stats., Notice of abandonment or destruction of boat or
change of address
30.60, Wis. Stats., Classification of motorboats
30.61, Wis. Stats., Lighting equipment
30.62, Wis. Stats., Other equipment
30.635, Wis. Stats., Motorboat prohibition
30.64, Wis. Stats., Patrol boats
30.65, Wis. Stats., Traffic rules
30.66, Wis. Stats., Speed restrictions
30.67, Wis. Stats., Accidents and accident reports
30.68, Wis. Stats., Prohibited operation
30.69, Wis. Stats., Water skiing
30.70, Wis. Stats., Skin diving
30.71, Wis. Stats., Disposal of waste from boats equipped with toilets
§ 10.80.040. General regulations.
§ 10.80.010 GRAFTON CODE § 10.80.040
1.01:320
§ 10.80.050. Rafts and stationary platforms.
No person shall erect or maintain a raft or stationary platform more than 25
feet from the shore. Every raft or stationary platform shall be anchored and
shall have at least six inches of freeboard above the waterline on all sides,
painted white, and shall have visible at all times a red reflector at least three
inches in diameter attached not less than 12 inches from each side of each
corner.
§ 10.80.060. Swimming.
Swimmers shall obey the following regulations:
A. Hours and speed limitations. No person shall operate a boat faster than
10 miles per hour.
B. Clearance and right-of-way.
1. No person shall operate a boat in excess of "slow-no wake" within
100 feet of the following: Any dock, raft, pier, swimmer, marked
public swimming area or other buoyed restricted area or diving
flag.
2. No person shall operate a boat in excess of "slow-no wake" within
500 feet of a public landing or anchorage.
3. "Slow-no wake" means the speed at which a boat moves as slowly
as possible while still maintaining steerage control.
4. Motorboats shall yield the right-of-way to boats propelled by
muscle power, and boats propelled by muscle power shall yield the
right-of-way to sailboats. When two motorboats are approaching
each other "head and head," or so nearly so as to involve risk of
collision, each boat shall bear to the right and pass the other boat
on either side if it can be done with safety, but the boat doing the
overtaking shall yield the right-of-way to the boat being overtaken.
No person shall operate a motorboat so as to approach or pass
another boat in such a manner as to create a hazardous wake or
wash.
C. No riding on decks or gunwales. No person operating a motorboat shall
allow any person to ride or sit on the gunwales, top of seat backs or
sides or on the decking of the bow of the boat while underway, unless
the person is inboard of guards or railing provided on the boat to
prevent passengers from being lost overboard.
A. No swimming from unattended boats.
B. No swimming more than 25 feet from shore between sunset and sunrise
unless accompanied by a properly lighted boat.
C. No swimming from the shores of municipal parks.
§ 10.80.040 CODE ADOPTION § 10.80.070
1.01:321
§ 10.80.070. Water sports and sporting events.
§ 10.80.080. Commercial operations.
A. Persons in boat. No person shall operate a motorboat towing a person
unless there is in the boat a competent person in addition to the
operator in a position to observe the progress of the person being
towed. An observer shall be considered competent if he can in fact
observe the person being towed and relay any signals to the operator.
B. Safety equipment. No person shall be towed without wearing a U.S.
Coast Guard approved life preserver.
C. Special sporting events. No person shall direct or participate in any
boat race, regatta, water-ski meet, exhibition or other water sporting
event, including but not limited to setting up a slalom course, without a
permit from the Chief of Police. Every permit issued by the Chief of
Police shall specify the time and course to be used, and the permittee
shall clearly mark and remove the course at the beginning and the end
of the event. A permit shall state the date, times and course of the
permitted activity and shall make adequate provision to insure and
indemnify the Village of Grafton. No permitted activity shall be
conducted unless it can be done safely and without danger to other
watercraft, persons or property. The number of simultaneous permitted
activities shall be determined by the Chief of Police based on
considerations of public health, safety and welfare. The Chief of Police
shall revoke the permit of any person who violates any section of this
chapter.
A. Introduction. Commercial users pose particular problems of public
health, safety and welfare due to their potential for disproportionately
heavy river usage. Commercial operations shall be permitted as
specified in this section. Every commercial user remains subject to all
other regulations applicable generally to boaters on the river.
B. Use permit. Every commercial operator shall obtain an annual permit
from the Chief of Police. A permit shall state the dates, times and course
of the permitted operation and shall make adequate provision to insure
and indemnify the Village. A commercial permit may be issued only for
the nonresidential area as determined by the Grafton Police
Department. No permit shall allow any commercial operation on the
river after 3:00 p.m. on weekdays or at anytime on weekends or
holidays. The number of simultaneous commercial operations permitted
shall be determined by the Chief of Police based on considerations of
public health, safety and welfare. The Chief of Police shall revoke the
permit of any commercial operator who violates any section of this
chapter.
C. The holder of a commercial use permit shall have no special right-ofway
over other users within the permitted area.
§ 10.80.070 GRAFTON CODE § 10.80.090
1.01:322
§ 10.80.090. Littering.
§ 10.80.100. Posting navigating aids.
§ 10.80.110. Other regulations.
§ 10.80.120. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
Any person who violates the statutes adopted by reference or any of the
provisions in this chapter shall be punishable as provided in § 30.80, Wis.
Stats., Penalties.
Title 11: Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places
Chapter 11.04
SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
A. Throwing refuse in river. No person shall deposit, place or throw any
cans, paper, bottles, debris, refuse, garbage, solid or liquid waste into
the river.
B. Cleanliness of docks. Persons using docks, seawalls, launches and
adjacent premises shall keep them neat and clean.
A. Duty of Police Chief. The Chief of Police is authorized and directed to
place and maintain suitable markers, navigation aids and signs in
appropriate areas to advise the public of the rules and regulations of
this chapter and to post a copy of this chapter at all public access points
within the Village.
B. Standard markers. All markers placed upon the waters of the river shall
comply with the regulations of the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources.
C. Interfering with markers. No person shall without authority remove,
damage or destroy, or moor or attach any craft to any buoy, beacon or
marker placed in the river by anyone pursuant to the provisions of this
section.
A. Health and conduct rules. Persons occupying boats docked or moored
to land, docks, piers or wharves abutting waterways shall observe all of
the Village health and sanitary regulations and ordinances.
B. Mooring. No person shall moor a boat to a private or municipal dock or
beach it upon private property in the Village without the owner's
permission.
C. Spear guns. No person shall have in his possession any loaded spear
gun except when in the water at least 1,000 feet away from the marked
limits of any public beach or boat landing.
§ 10.80.090 CODE ADOPTION § 11.04.010
1.01:323
§ 11.04.010. Construction and maintenance responsibility of
abutting owner. [Amended by Ord. No. 020, Series 2004]
§ 11.04.015. Bond requirements. [Amended by Ord. No. 020, Series
2004; Ord. No. 023, Series 2004]
§ 11.04.020. Permit required.
No person shall hereafter lay, remove, replace or repair any public sidewalk
within the Village unless he is under contract with the Village to do such
work or has obtained a permit therefor from the Director of Public Works at
least seven days before work is proposed to be undertaken. No fee shall be
charged for such permit.
§ 11.04.030. Specifications.
All sidewalks within the Village hereafter shall be repaired, rebuilt and
constructed in accordance with the following specifications:
A. It shall be the duty of the abutting property owner to build, repair,
construct and perpetually maintain sidewalks along or upon any street
in the Village and to pay the entire cost thereof, except as indicated in
Subsection B.
B. As part of the Village of Grafton Sidewalk Replacement Program, the
Village replaces concrete sidewalk that poses a trip hazard based upon
specific review criteria. There is no cost to the property owner for
sidewalk replacement work completed within the scope of the Sidewalk
Replacement Program.
A. Sidewalk bonds shall be required for all projects where the potential for
damage to public sidewalk is probable as a result of constructionrelated
activities, except sheds, decks and other structures that pose no
potential damage to the sidewalk, as determined by the Director of
Public Works.
B. The sidewalk bond amount shall be determined as follows:
1. One- and two-family homes shall have a flat fee of $2,000;
2. Building additions and garages shall have a flat fee of $500;
3. All other general construction shall be determined by frontage, as
follows:
a. One to 100 feet of frontage: $2,000.
b. Each additional 50 feet of frontage: $500.
C. The sidewalk bond shall be posted prior to or at the time a building
permit is obtained.
§ 11.04.010 GRAFTON CODE § 11.04.030
1.01:324
A. Subgrade. The subgrade shall be prepared by excavating to the line,
grade and cross section as furnished by the Village. Soft and unsuitable
material shall be removed and replaced with suitable material, and the
subgrade shall be compacted and thoroughly moistened immediately
before the concrete is placed. When so specified by the Director of
Public Works, a subbase of sand and gravel or other approved porous
material shall be placed under the sidewalk. At all places where existing
ground level is below subgrade elevation, the owner shall furnish and
place suitable material in successive layers of four inches or less, and
each layer shall be rolled and thoroughly compacted, until subgrade
elevation is reached. In all cases where the grading is carried to a line
below the subgrade elevation, the owner shall furnish and refill the
space with material satisfactory to the Director of Public Works or his
agent, and soil, tamp and sprinkle the fill in a thorough manner
approved by the Director of Public Works or his agent.
B. Surplus excavation and fill between sidewalk and curb. All surplus
earth and other material excavated from the line of work which may not
be required for filling shall be hauled and deposited as directed by the
Director of Public Works. Where the sidewalk does not abut the curb,
gutter, pavement or other structures and when the concrete has been
cured and forms removed, the space along the sides shall be backfilled
with a satisfactory soil thoroughly compacted. Backfill shall be
approved by the Director of Public Works.
C. Material and method.
1. All sidewalks shall be of concrete construction composed of six-bag
mix, one-course construction, four inches thick and built to the
established line and grade. All sidewalks shall be five feet in width
as determined by the Board of Public Works in view of existing
sidewalks in the area, except sidewalks located in front of
commercial establishments, which shall be six feet in width. Where
new sidewalks are constructed along an entire block in any
residential district, such sidewalks shall be five feet in width.
Concrete shall be placed in straight forms of wood or metal of
sufficient strength to resist springing, tipping or other
displacement during the process of depositing and consolidating
the concrete. Wood forms shall be surfaced plank of at least two
inches in thickness, except for sharply curved sections. Metal forms
shall be of approved section. The forms shall be of full depth of the
required sidewalk and shall be of such design as to permit secure
fastening. Forms shall be thoroughly cleaned and oiled before the
concrete is placed against them. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
2. Concrete shall be placed in the forms on a moist subgrade,
deposited just above the finished grade and consolidated and
spaded sufficiently to bring the mortar to the surface and to
prevent honeycombing. It shall then be struck off level with the top
of the forms and finished with wooden flats. All joints and edges
§ 11.04.030 CODE ADOPTION § 11.04.030
1.01:325
Chapter 11.08
STREET, ALLEY AND SIDEWALK GRADES
§ 11.08.010. Establishment.
The grade of all streets, alleys and sidewalks shall be established and
described by the Village Board and the same recorded by the Village Clerk.
No street, alley or sidewalk shall be worked until the grade thereof is
established.
§ 11.08.020. Alteration of grade prohibited.
No person shall alter the grade of any street, alley, sidewalk or public
ground or any part thereof in the Village by any means whatsoever unless
authorized or instructed to do so by the Village Board or the Director of
Public Works. All such alterations of grade shall be recorded in the office of
the Village Clerk by the Clerk or the officer authorizing the alteration.
Chapter 11.12
DRIVEWAYS
shall be finished with a one-quarter-inch-radius edging tool. Before
the last finish has set, the sidewalk shall be steel troweled and
brushed in transverse direction. Before final finishing, the surface
shall be checked with a ten-foot straight edge, and any areas
departing from the testing edge shall be corrected by adding or
removing concrete while the walk pour is still plastic.
3. Transverse expansion joints one-half-inch thick of premolded
expansion material shall be located every 40 feet, at the street and
against the back of all curb and gutter encountered. Expansion
material shall be placed every five feet and shall be at least 1 1/2
inches deep. All joints shall be at right angles to the direction and
grade of the walk. Diagonal joints may be used only when ordered
by the Director of Public Works and shall be placed under his
direction.
D. Curing and drying. As soon as any of the concrete work mentioned in
this section has been finished and hardened sufficiently to prevent
excessive marring of the surface, it shall be cured and protected against
rapid drying. Failure to comply with this requirement shall be deemed
sufficient cause for suspension of the work. Curing shall be
accomplished by the "impervious coating," "wet fabric" or "paper"
methods. Walks shall be kept free from all traffic at normal
temperatures for 48 hours, and in cold weather (below 50° F.), for 96
hours.
§ 11.04.030 GRAFTON CODE § 11.12.010
1.01:326
§ 11.12.010. Approval required.
Whenever the owner of any real estate in the Village desires to have
constructed a driveway from any street or alley to his property, he shall
first submit an exact sketch thereof to the Director of Public Works for his
approval.
§ 11.12.020. Specifications.
All driveways hereafter constructed within the Village shall be one-course
construction, five inches thick with the same foundation, materials and
workmanship as specified for sidewalks in § 11.04.030 of this title. Where
driveways are constructed across a sidewalk, the concrete shall be five
inches thick with the same foundation and materials as specified for
sidewalks in § 11.04.030 of this title.
§ 11.12.030. Planking sidewalk and curb area.
No vehicle or other equipment shall be allowed to cross the curb or sidewalk
area of any premises without the curb or sidewalk first being planked with
material sufficiently strong to protect such curb and sidewalk area.
Chapter 11.16
STREET AND SIDEWALK OPENINGS
§ 11.16.010. Permit required; fee schedule.
A. No person shall, for any purpose, make or cause to be made any
excavation in any street, alley, highway, sidewalk or other public way
without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Director of Public
Works.
B. Fee schedule. [Amended 12-18-2017 by Ord. No. 013-2017]
1. Street opening (damaging pavement): $300.
2. Opening curb, alleyway, walkway or parkway: $100.
3. Perform work/labor or deposit excavation material or construction
material within a public right-of-way: $50.
4. Failure to obtain a permit before work begins: triple fees.
5. Fee for public utility right-of-way: $100.
6. Fee for public utility:
a. Street: $300.
b. Public utilities shall be billed on a quarterly basis for all
permits issued.
§ 11.12.010 CODE ADOPTION § 11.16.020
1.01:327
§ 11.16.020. Bond required.
Before a permit may be issued for making any excavation or opening in
any street or public way, the applicant shall execute and deposit with
the Director of Public Works an indemnity bond in the sum of $1,000,
conditioned that he/she will indemnify and save harmless the Village and
its officers from all liability for accidents and damage caused by any of his
work, or by any unfaithful, imperfect or inadequate work done by virtue
of his permit or for any other reason, and that he/she will replace and
restore the pavement over any opening he/she may have made to as good
a state and condition to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works for
one year, and that he/she will pay all fines imposed upon him/her for any
violation of any rules or regulations governing street openings and drain
laying adopted by the Village Board. Such bond shall also guarantee that, if
the Village elects to make the street repair, the person opening the street
will pay all costs of making such repair and of maintaining the repair for
one year. Recovery on such bond for any accident, injury, violation of law,
ordinance, rule or regulation shall not exhaust the bond but it shall cover
any and all accidents, injuries or violations during the period of excavation
for which it is given. An annual bond may be given under this chapter
covering all excavation work done by the principal for one year, which shall
be conditioned as specified in this section and in the amount determined
annually by the Department of Public Works as necessary to adequately
protect the public and the Village.
§ 11.16.030. Insurance.
Prior to the commencement of excavation work, a permittee must furnish
the Director of Public Works satisfactory written evidence that he/she has
in force and will maintain during the life of the permit and the period
of excavation, public liability insurance of not less than $100,000 for one
person, $300,000 for one accident and property damage insurance of not
less than $50,000.
§ 11.16.040. Frozen ground.
No opening in the streets or sidewalks for any purpose will be permitted
when the ground is frozen, except where necessary as determined by the
Director of Public Works.
§ 11.16.050. Removal of paving.
In opening any street or other public way, all paving materials shall be
removed with the least possible loss of, or injury to, surfacing material and,
together with the excavated material from trenches, shall be placed so as to
cause the least practicable inconvenience to the public and permit free flow
of water along gutters.
§ 11.16.020 GRAFTON CODE § 11.16.060
1.01:328
§ 11.16.060. Protection of public.
Every person shall maintain around any excavation or building material
or other obstruction in the street or public ways, from sunset to sunrise,
sufficient lights to warn operators of vehicles and pedestrians of the
presence of such excavation or obstruction. Barricades and lights are to
be placed at each end of the opening or obstruction in the street or way,
and other lights are to be placed at intervals of 10 feet. All necessary
precautions shall be taken to guard the public effectually from accidents
or damage to persons or property during the period of the work. Each
person making such opening shall be held liable for all damages, including
costs incurred by the Village in defending any action brought against it for
damages, as well as costs of any appeal that may result from the neglect
by his employees or himself of any necessary precaution against injury or
damage to persons, vehicles, or property of any kind.
§ 11.16.070. Replacing street surface.
In opening a trench on any street or right-of-way, the bituminous pavement,
base course, sidewalk, curb and gutter, grassy parkway must be removed
and replaced back to the original or better condition. All bituminous edges
shall be finish saw cut prior to placing four-inch minimum bituminous
pavement. This shall be done in two consecutive lifts. All rubbish shall be
immediately removed, leaving the street or sidewalk in perfect repair, the
same to be so maintained for a period of one year. In refilling the opening,
the earth must be puddled or laid in layers not more than nine inches in
depth and each layer rammed or tamped to prevent after-settling. When
sides of the trench will not stand perpendicular, sheathing and braces must
be used to prevent caving. The Village may elect to have the Department of
Public Works make the pavement repair for any street or sidewalk opening,
in which case the cost of making such repair and of maintaining it for one
year shall be charged to the person making the street opening.
§ 11.16.080. Excavations in permanent paving.
When any excavation is made in a permanently paved road or street, or in
any road or street which is to be permanently paved, all clay or hardpan
must be removed and the excavation entirely backfilled with sand or gravel
thoroughly wet and consolidated. Any tunnel dug in such road or street shall
be backfilled with concrete in a manner approved by the Director of Public
Works.
§ 11.16.090. Emergency excavations authorized.
In the event of an emergency, any person owning or controlling any sewer,
water main, conduit or utility in or under any street and his agents or
employees may take immediate proper emergency measures to remedy
dangerous conditions for the protection of property, life, health or safety,
without obtaining an excavation permit, provided that such person shall
apply for an excavation permit not later than the end of the next succeeding
§ 11.16.060 CODE ADOPTION § 11.16.090
1.01:329
business day and shall not make any permanent repairs without first
obtaining an excavation permit under this chapter.
§ 11.16.100. Village work excluded.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to excavation work under
the direction of the Director of Public Works by Village employees or
contractors performing work under contract with the Village necessitating
openings or excavations in Village streets.
Chapter 11.20
OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS
§ 11.20.010. Obstructions and encroachments prohibited.
No person shall encroach upon or in any way obstruct or occupy any
street, alley, sidewalk, public grounds or land dedicated to public use,
or any part thereof, by placing, storing, displaying, building, erecting or
causing to be placed, stored, displayed, built or erected thereon any goods,
wares, merchandise, material, substance, snow or ice, building, billboard,
advertising sign, clock, pole or other obstruction or structure or suffer
the same to remain thereon when placed or built as aforesaid except as
provided by this chapter. No person, firm or corporation shall operate or
cause to be operated any trucks, contractor's equipment of any kind or any
other vehicle from any premises adjoining any street or highway within the
Village, so as to enter upon such street or highway from such premises with
the wheels, tires, lugs, cleats or other portions of the equipment containing
earth, mud or other material, without providing proper means of cleaning
up the street or highway and removing the earth, mud, dirt and other
materials so deposited thereon.
§ 11.20.020. Exceptions.
The prohibition of § 11.20.010 shall not apply to signs or clocks attached to
buildings which project not more than six feet from the face of such building
and which do not extend below any point 10 feet above the sidewalk, street
or alley, or to awnings which do not extend below any point seven feet
above the sidewalk, street or alley; nor to public utility encroachments
duly authorized by law; nor to goods, wares, merchandise or fixtures being
loaded or unloaded which do not extend for a distance of more than three
feet on the sidewalk from the curb of any street (provided that such goods,
wares, merchandise or fixtures do not remain thereon for a period of
more than two hours); nor to temporary encroachments or obstructions
authorized by permit under §§ 11.20.030 through 11.20.070 of this chapter;
nor to street or sidewalk openings and excavations permitted under Chapter
11.16 of this title.
§ 11.16.090 GRAFTON CODE § 11.20.025
1.01:330
§ 11.20.025. Private street banners. [Amended by Ord. No. 005,
Series 1996; Ord. No. 001, Series 2002; Ord. No. 008, Series 2011]
The Director of Public Works may erect or cause to be erected within
the street right-of-way banners for the promotion of events or activities
sponsored by private, not-for-profit organizations under the following
conditions:
§ 11.20.030. When street privilege permit required.
Permits for the use of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public ways
of the Village for the purpose of moving any building or structure or for
encumbering the same with building material or other articles necessary
in and about the construction, erection, repair or removal of any building
or structure may be granted to applicants by the Director of Public Works,
provided such applicants have first obtained a building permit and have
complied with the other requirements of this section and §§ 11.20.040
through 11.20.070.
A. Pole-mounted banners and ground banners may be erected at First
Avenue/WIS 60; Falls Road/Green Bay Road (near Lime Kiln Park); and
Grafton Avenue/Washington Street.
B. There may be only one banner per site at any given time.
C. Banners shall be installed and removed by the Department of Public
Works.
D. The materials and construction of banners shall be subject to rules to be
determined by the Director of Public Works.
E. Banners shall be displayed no earlier than two weeks prior to the start
of the event or activity being promoted. Requests for banners to be
displayed longer than two weeks shall be subject to the approval of the
Director of Public Works.
F. Banners from eligible organizations will be erected on a first-come,
first-served basis; however, banners from Village-sponsored events will
take precedence over all other organizations.
G. Banners shall not contain any commercial message, except the logo or
name of commercial cosponsors, which may occupy not more than 20%
of the surface area of a ground banner.
H. Banners promoting political candidates or parties, or political or
legislative causes, activities or events shall not be displayed.
I. The Director of Public Works may remove banners which become
damaged, unsightly, unsafe, or when severe weather is expected.
J. There shall be a fifty-dollar fee for the erection of banners.
§ 11.20.025 CODE ADOPTION § 11.20.040
1.01:331
§ 11.20.040. Street privilege permit; bond required.
No permit shall be issued under this chapter until the applicant executes
and files with the Village Clerk a bond in an amount determined by the
Director of Public Works, conditioned that the applicant will indemnify and
save harmless the Village of and from all liability for accidents or damage
caused by reason of the granting of the permit and will remove such
encumbrance upon termination of the building or moving operations, will
leave the vacated premises in a clean and sanitary condition, and will repair
any and all damage to any street, alley, sidewalk or public property resulting
from such building or moving operations.
§ 11.20.050. Fee. [Amended by Ord. No. A-528-89, 1989]
The fee for a street privilege permit shall be $25.
§ 11.20.060. Conditions of occupancy.
The permission to occupy or obstruct the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public
grounds is intended only for use in connection with the actual erection,
alteration, repair, removal or moving of buildings or structures and shall
be given upon the following terms and conditions and subject to revocation
without notice for violation thereof:
A. Such temporary obstruction or occupancy shall cover not more than 1/3
of any street or alley;
B. Obstructions shall be sufficiently lighted at night so as to be in full view
of the public from all directions;
C. Sidewalk traffic shall not be interrupted, but temporary sidewalks of
not less than four feet in width, guarded by a closed fence at least four
feet high on both sides, may be maintained during the period of
occupancy;
D. The process of moving any building or structure shall be as continuous
as possible until completed and, if ordered by the Director of Public
Works, shall continue during any hours of the day or night;
E. No building or structure shall be allowed to remain overnight on any
street crossing or intersection or so near thereto as to prevent easy
access to any fire hydrant;
F. Buildings shall be moved only in accordance with the route prescribed
by the Director of Public Works;
G. Upon termination of the work necessitating such obstruction, all parts
of the streets, alleys, sidewalks and public grounds occupied under the
permit shall be vacated, cleaned of all rubbish and obstructions, and
placed in a safe condition for public travel at the expense of the
permittee.
§ 11.20.040 GRAFTON CODE § 11.20.070
1.01:332
§ 11.20.070. Street privilege permit termination.
All permits issued under this chapter shall automatically terminate at the
end of three months from the date of issuance unless an earlier termination
date is specified thereon at the direction of the Director of Public Works.
Chapter 11.24
SPECIAL PRIVILEGES AND FEES
§ 11.24.010. Statutory authority.
Privileges for an obstruction or excavation beyond the street line, other than
those regulated by this chapter or other ordinances, may be granted by the
Village Board pursuant to § 66.0425, Wis. Stats.
§ 11.24.020. Petition required. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
Any person, firm, association or corporation desiring such special privilege
shall file with the Village Clerk a petition in writing on a form furnished for
such purpose by the Clerk, and shall pay to the Director of Administrative
Services of the Village a fixed charge of $50 for the purpose of deferring
the cost of printing and other expenses which the Village may incur in the
consideration of such a resolution for a special privilege.
§ 11.24.030. Responsibilities of grantee.
A special privilege shall be granted only on condition that by acceptance of
such special privilege the grantee shall:
A. Become primarily liable for damages to persons or property by reason
of the granting of such special privilege;
B. File with the Village Clerk a bond with a surety company duly
incorporated in the state, or duly licensed to do business in this state, in
such sum as the Village Board may require but not exceeding $10,000,
such bond to be approved by the Village Attorney. Individual surety
shall not be deemed in compliance with this section. The applicant shall
also file with the Village Clerk a certificate of insurance indicating that
applicant holds a public liability policy in the sum of at least $25,000,
covering bodily injury to any one person; and $50,000, covering bodily
injury to more than one person in any one accident; and $10,000,
covering property damage to any one owner on the area or areas
included within the special privilege, and naming the Village as an
insured. Both bond and insurance policy shall provide that they shall
not be concealed until at least 30 days' notice in writing is given to the
Village Clerk;
C. Pay to the Village Clerk the annual fee fixed by the Village President;
§ 11.20.070 CODE ADOPTION § 11.24.030
1.01:333
§ 11.24.040. Authority of Building Inspector and Director of Public
Works.
The Village Board shall refer to the Director of Public Works and the
Building Inspector all petitions for special privilege for their consideration
and recommendation.
§ 11.24.050. Curb space area privilege fee.
In the filing of an application for a curb space area privilege, there shall
be paid into the Village treasury the sum of $2 for each foot or fraction
thereof per year. If the Village Board finds that such loading and unloading
zone should be established, it shall direct the Village Clerk to issue a permit
therefor. Permits so issued shall be renewed or reissued on or before the
expiration thereof, or within five days thereafter, upon the holder of such
permit making application for and on payment of the annual permit fee.
Chapter 11.28
TRAINS OBSTRUCTING STREETS
§ 11.28.010. Obstructions by trains prohibited. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
It is unlawful to stop any railroad train, locomotive or car upon or across
any highway or street crossing in the Village or to leave the same standing
upon such crossing or in any other way to obstruct any such crossing for
longer than 10 minutes, except in case of accident or breakdown.
Chapter 11.32
TREE REGULATIONS
§ 11.32.010. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARK TREES — Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in
public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the Village, or
to which the public has free access as a park.
D. Remove such special privilege whenever public necessity so requires
and when so ordered by resolution adopted by the Village Board, and
such grantee shall not be entitled to damages for such removal;
E. Waive the right to contest in any manner the validity of § 66.0425, Wis.
Stats, or the amount of the annual fixed fee as determined by the
Village President.
§ 11.24.030 GRAFTON CODE § 11.32.010
1.01:334
STREET TREES — Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on
land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or
ways within the Village.
§ 11.32.020. Creation and establishment of Village Tree Committee.
There is hereby created and established a Village Tree Committee for
the Village of Grafton, Wisconsin, which shall consist of the Public Works
Committee of the Village Board.
§ 11.32.030. Duties and responsibilities of Committee.
It shall be the responsibility of the Committee to study, investigate, counsel
and develop and/or update and administer a written plan for the care,
preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees
and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas, as needed.
The Committee, when requested by the Village Board, shall consider,
investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter
of question coming within the scope of its work.
§ 11.32.040. Operation of Commitee.
The Committee shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and
regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members
shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.
§ 11.32.050. Street tree species to be planted.
The following list constitutes the official street tree species for Grafton,
Wisconsin. No species other than those included in this list may be planted
as street trees without the written permission of the Village Tree
Committee.
Small Trees Medium Trees Large Trees
Ironwood Turkish filber Accolade elm
Ivory silk lilac (tree
form)
Cleveland pear Princeton elm
Thornless hawthorne Bradford pear Ginko
Serviceberry Javelin pear (columnar
form)
Honey locust
Snow lilac European hornbeam Hackberry
Hornbeam English oak (pyramidal
form)
Purple leaf hazelnut
§ 11.32.010 CODE ADOPTION § 11.32.060
1.01:335
§ 11.32.060. Spacing.
The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species size
classes listed in § 11.32.050 of this chapter, and no tree may be planted
closer together than the following: small trees, 30 feet; medium trees,
40 feet; and large trees, 50 feet; except in special plantings designed
or approved by a landscape architect and approved by the Village Tree
Committee.
§ 11.32.070. Distance from curb and sidewalk.
The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks
will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in
§ 11.32.050 of this chapter, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb
or sidewalk than the following: small trees, two feet; medium trees, three
feet; and large trees, four feet.
§ 11.32.080. Distance from street corners and fire hydrants.
No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet to any street corner,
measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No
street tree shall be planted closer than 10 feet to any fire hydrant.
§ 11.32.090. Utilities.
No street trees other than those species listed as small trees in § 11.32.050
of this chapter may be planted under or within 10 lateral feet of any
overhead utility wire or over or within five lateral feet of any underground
wire line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility.
§ 11.32.100. Public tree care.
A. The Village shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove
trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues,
lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure
public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of
such public grounds.
B. The Village Tree Committee may remove or cause or order to be
removed any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or
which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines,
gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with
any injurious fungus, insect or other pest.
C. The purchasing of street trees by adjacent property owners is allowed,
providing that the selection and location of said trees is in accordance
with §§ 11.32.050 through 11.32.090 of this chapter and approved by
the Village Tree Committee. Privately purchased trees shall be planted
by Village crews and become Village property once planted. On
properties where numerous trees are to be planted, a plan showing
species and locations must be submitted for approval. Diversity of
§ 11.32.060 GRAFTON CODE § 11.32.100
1.01:336
§ 11.32.110. Tree topping.
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or Village
department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public
property. "Topping" is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs
larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a
degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees
severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility
wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical,
may be exempted from this chapter at the determination of the Village Tree
Committee.
§ 11.32.120. Pruning, corner clearance.
Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the
Village shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct
the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any intersection and
do that there shall be a clear space of 11 feet above the surface of any
street or eight feet above the surface of the sidewalk. Said owners shall
remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, of broken or decayed limbs
which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The Village shall have
the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes
with the proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight, interferes
with visibility of any traffic control device or sign, or when clear spaces as
required are not maintained.
§ 11.32.130. Dead or diseased tree removal on private property.
The Village shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or
diseased trees on private property within the Village, when such trees
constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which
constitute a potential threat to other trees within the Village. The Village
Tree Committee will notify, in writing, the owners of such trees. Removal
shall be done by said owners at their own expense within 60 days after the
date of service of notice. In the event of failure of owners to comply with
such provisions, the Village shall have the authority to remove such trees
and charge the cost of removal on the owner's property tax notice.
§ 11.32.140. Removal of stumps.
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of
the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface
of the ground.
species in new developments must be considered. Contractors may
be allowed to plant trees if approval is granted by the Village Tree
Committee. New developments shall not plant trees until driveways
are placed, allowing for proper tree placement and spacing. New trees
planted shall be a minimum caliper of 2 1/2 inches' diameter at time of
planting.
§ 11.32.100 CODE ADOPTION § 11.32.150
1.01:337
§ 11.32.150. Interference with Village Tree Committee.
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
Village Tree Committee, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about
the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any
street trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized by this
chapter.
§ 11.32.160. (Reserved)
§ 11.32.170. Review by Village Board.
The Village Board shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and
decisions of the Village Tree Committee. Any person may appeal from any
ruling or order of the Village Tree Committee to the Village Board who may
hear the matter and make final decision.
§ 11.32.180. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be, upon conviction
or plea of guilty, subject to a fine not to exceed $100.
Chapter 11.34
DISCHARGE OF FOUNDATION DRAINS AND SUMP PUMPS
REGULATED
§ 11.34.010. Discharge onto streets or sidewalks.
No person shall cause exterior roof drains, foundation drains, sump pumps,
or any other water from private property to discharge onto any street, alley
or sidewalk in such a manner as to cause accumulation of water or ice
on such street, alley or sidewalk. Upon recommendation of the Director
of Public Works, the Village Board may direct that exterior roof drains,
foundation drains, sump pumps, or any other water from private property
be connected to storm sewer mains.
Chapter 11.36
SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
§ 11.36.010. Removal of snow and ice required. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
The person in charge of any real property abutting or fronting upon a paved
public sidewalk shall remove and clear away or cause to be removed or
cleared away all snow and ice within 24 hours of the end of the snowfall,
provided that when ice has so formed on any sidewalk that it cannot be
removed then the persons referred to in this section shall cause the ice from
remaining and presenting a hazard to the users of the sidewalk by the use of
§ 11.32.150 GRAFTON CODE § 11.36.010
1.01:338
sand, abrasive material or any product designed to prevent ice from forming
or to remain in its form and to not be injurious to the health and safety of
the public.
§ 11.36.020. Complaints; investigation; owner responsibility.
The police department shall, upon complaint of any person, investigate and
cause the arrest of either the owner, occupant or person in charge of the
premises if there is a failure to have complied with the provisions of this
chapter, or cause the charging of such person with violation of this chapter.
In construing the provisions of this chapter, only owners of vacant lots or
vacant premises are deemed to be the proper person whose duty it shall
be to comply with the provisions of this chapter; where the real property
consists of a single-family residence or is solely used for business, the owner
or occupant shall be deemed to be the proper person whose duty it shall
be to comply with the provisions of this chapter; and as to any other real
property, the owner or any occupants, unless a person has been designated
by the owner to be in charge of the premises and is residing thereon, are
deemed to be the proper persons whose duty it shall be to comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 11.36.030. Other accumulations.
It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant or person in charge of the
property mentioned in § 11.36.020 to keep the sidewalk clean of any dirt,
dust, cinders, mud, oil or other similar substances when the sidewalks are
clear of snow and ice.
§ 11.36.040. Shoveling ice or snow onto streets prohibited.
No person shall cause or allow any snow, ice, slush or a combination thereof
to be shoveled, plowed, dumped, pushed or in any manner placed on a
public street, alley, sidewalk or thoroughfare in the Village.
§ 11.36.050. Violations and penalties. [Amended by Ord. No.
A-528-89, 1989; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code
Adoption)]
See the penalty in Chapter 11.40 of this title.
§ 11.36.060. Declaration of emergency.
The Village President shall declare a snow emergency during the period of
a severe snowstorm, or immediately thereafter, whenever traffic becomes
congested by reason of said snowfall and the operation of emergency
vehicles, including snow removal equipment and machinery, is impeded.
§ 11.36.070. Duration of emergency.
Such emergency shall exist so long as traffic remains congested and the
operation of emergency vehicles is impeded, or likely to be impeded, by the
§ 11.36.010 CODE ADOPTION § 11.36.070
1.01:339
falling of snow and the congestion of traffic upon the streets, alleys or public
parking lots of the Village.
§ 11.36.080. Notice of emergency.
The Village President or other authorized officials may proclaim the state
of emergency through the press, radio or other public means of
communication and may designate and authorize police officers and snow
removal personnel to inform the citizenry of the existence of the emergency.
§ 11.36.090. Parking prohibited during emergency.
No person shall park any vehicle on a street, alley or public parking lot
during the period of snow emergency, or immediately thereafter, until such
street, alley or public parking lot has been cleared of snow.
§ 11.36.100. Removal of vehicles.
The Chief of Police or any of his employees under his supervision and
direction may remove any vehicle which may interfere with the operation of
any snow removal equipment or any emergency vehicle and charge the cost
of removing such vehicle to the owner or the operator thereof. Said Chief
of Police may cause removal to be made either by his own department with
Village help or may contract for such removal with any service man, person,
firm or corporation that has as a part of their business towing service with
proper equipment to move vehicles.
§ 11.36.110. Snow emergency violations and penalties.
Anyone who violates §§ 11.36.060 through 11.36.100 shall be subject to a
fine of $20 for the first offense, $50 for the second offense, and $200 for
each offense thereafter. Nonpayment of fines shall subject the offender to
imprisonment for a period of up to 30 days. All fines shall have as additional
costs added thereto the towing charges involved in removing vehicle subject
to removal under the terms of this chapter.
Chapter 11.40
PENALTY FOR VIOLATING CHAPTERS 11.04 TO 11.36
§ 11.40.010. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
Unless otherwise provided in this title, any person who violates any
provision of Chapters 11.04 through 11.36 of this Code shall, upon
conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $50 for the first offense, $100 for a
second offense and $200 for a third or successive offenses, together with
the costs of prosecution. In the event of a failure to pay such forfeiture,
where no showing of indigency is made, the defendant may be imprisoned
for no more than 90 days, as the court deems fit or until such judgment
§ 11.36.070 GRAFTON CODE § 11.40.010
1.01:340
is sooner paid. In addition to the penalty imposed in this section, for a
violation of Chapter 11.20 of this Code, if the owner or occupant of the
premises adjoining any unlawful obstructed sidewalk refuses or neglects to
remove such obstruction within 24 hours after notice from the Director of
Public Works to do so, it shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works to
remove such obstruction and make return of the cost and expense thereof
to the Village Clerk, who shall enter such cost on the next annual tax roll
as a special charge against the property abutting such obstructed sidewalk,
and such sum shall be levied and collected as other special taxes against
real estate.
Chapter 11.44
REGULATIONS FOR PUBLIC GROUNDS
§ 11.44.010. Parking.
No person shall, upon any public grounds owned or leased by the Village,
park any vehicle upon such public grounds except within the limits of
clearly marked parking areas or in any undesignated areas as may be
necessary for special events when approved by the Village.
§ 11.44.020. Vehicles and horses.
No person shall, upon any public grounds owned or leased by the Village,
operate any vehicle or ride horses upon such public grounds except upon
clearly marked public roadways.
§ 11.44.030. Speed limit.
No person shall, upon any public grounds owned or leased by the Village,
operate any vehicle upon any roadway within the limits of such public
grounds at a speed in excess of 10 miles per hour.
§ 11.44.040. Nighttime curfew. [Amended by Ord. No. A-478-85,
1985; Ord. No. 037, Series 1994; at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
No person shall, upon any public grounds owned or leased by the Village,
park any vehicle or loiter or lounge in or upon such grounds between 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the following morning in any Village park, except as
allowed by permit issued by authority of the Grafton Parks and Recreation
Board.
§ 11.44.050. Compliance with traffic codes.
Each person shall, upon any public grounds owned or leased by the Village,
operate an automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle of traffic or burden
within the park to comply with the state, county and municipal traffic codes
and all orders, directions and regulations of traffic officers, or officially
§ 11.40.010 CODE ADOPTION § 11.44.050
1.01:341
displayed upon any post, standard, sign or device installed for the
regulation of traffic.
§ 11.44.060. Aircraft and parachutes.
No person shall, upon any public grounds owned or leased by the Village,
ascend or land with any aircraft, including gliders or parachutes, nor shall
any person engage in stunt flying or parachute landing in any park without
the written permit of the Village.
§ 11.44.070. Go-carts and mini bikes.
No person shall, upon any public grounds owned or leased by the Village,
operate a go-cart, mini bike or snowmobile, or fly a model engine-powered
airplane except in designated areas approved by the Village.
§ 11.44.090. Vegetation and equipment.
No person shall, upon any public grounds owned or leased by the Village,
climb any tree, or pluck any flowers or fruit, wild or cultivated, or break,
cut down, trample upon, remove or in any way injure or deface, write
upon, defile or ill use any trees, shrubs, flowers, flower beds, turf, fountain,
ornament, statue, building, fence, apparatus, bench, table, official notice,
sign, bridge, structure or other property, and remove any device for the
protection of trees or shrubs.
§ 11.44.100. Digging.
No person shall, upon any public grounds owned or leased by the Village,
dig or break up the ground surface anywhere in any public grounds.
§ 11.44.110. Fires.
No person shall, upon any public grounds owned or leased by the Village,
build any fires upon such public grounds except in fireplaces or grills
provided for such purpose or dispose of live embers of any fire where they
may start a grass or forest fire.
§ 11.44.120. Selling and begging.
No person shall, upon any public grounds owned or leased by the Village,
sell, keep or offer for sale any tangible or intangible article, merchandise
or thing; nor solicit for any trade, occupation, business or profession or for
alms within the park, without the written permit of the Village.
§ 11.44.130. Handbills.
No person shall, upon any public grounds owned or leased by the Village,
distribute, post, affix or display any card, handbill, sign, placard, target,
banner, flag (except that of the United States) or advertisement of any kind
within the park, or upon the gates or enclosures thereof, without the written
§ 11.44.050 GRAFTON CODE § 11.44.130
1.01:342
permit of the Village. The word "distribute" shall include the scattering of
printed matter from aircraft.
§ 11.44.140. Animals.
No person shall, upon any public grounds owned or leased by the Village,
kill, injure or attempt to injure, or unnecessarily disturb any waterfowl or
other birds or animals, wild or domestic, rob or disturb the nest or eggs of
any bird or other animals within the park.
§ 11.44.150. Ice, sand.
No person shall, upon any public grounds owned or leased by the Village,
take ice from the river within the park, remove any sand therefrom or from
the shores thereof, cut holes in the ice for fishing in areas designated for ice
skating.
§ 11.44.160. Garbage and refuse.
No person shall, upon any public grounds owned or leased by the Village,
leave, throw or break any bottle, box, can, garbage or other objects in any
park or public waters, except in clearly marked refuse receptacles.
§ 11.44.170. Dogs and cats.
No person shall, upon any public grounds owned or leased by the Village,
take, have or keep any dog, cat or other animals upon such public grounds,
except those placed in there by authority of the Village.
§ 11.44.180. Fireworks.
No person shall, upon any public grounds owned or leased by the Village,
set off fireworks of any kind in any park, except as allowed by permit issued
under Ch. 9.76 of the Code.
§ 11.44.190. Athletic activities.
No person shall, upon any public grounds owned or leased by the Village,
engage in any athletic contest, game or activity, except in areas designated
for such activity.
§ 11.44.200. Swimming.
No person shall, upon any public grounds owned or leased by the Village,
wade, bathe or swim in the park area, except in municipally owned
swimming pools.
§ 11.44.210. Camping.
No person shall, upon any public grounds owned or leased by the Village,
sleep, camp or lodge in the park, except in such places as designated by
§ 11.44.130 CODE ADOPTION § 11.44.210
1.01:343
the Village, subject to the rules and regulations and only to parties having a
lease with the Village, and only for the time prescribed in the lease.
§ 11.44.220. Tennis.
No person shall, upon any public grounds owned or leased by the Village,
play tennis on municipal courts with street shoes or shoes with rubber soles
and heels. Footwear must be tennis shoes.
§ 11.44.230. Intoxicating liquor; disorderly conduct.
No person shall, upon any public grounds owned or leased by the Village,
sell intoxicating liquors within the park, except when a park permit is
issued. Fermented malt beverages may be sold or consumed within the park
during park hours, but only in designated areas when the park is leased. No
person shall conduct himself in a disorderly manner within the park.
§ 11.44.240. Emergency closures.
In case of an emergency or when in the judgment of the Grafton Police
Department the public interest demands it, any portion of the park or
buildings therein may be closed to the public or to designated persons until
permission is given to return.
§ 11.44.250. Permits.
All permit fees and deposits as established from time to time shall be
collected by the Village Clerk when a reservation is made for use of any
portion of the Grafton park system. The Village Clerk shall issue a permit in
writing on an approved form cosigned by the Chief of Police.
§ 11.44.260. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1.12, Issuance of Citations, of this Code.
Title 12: Public Services
Chapter 12.02
COMPULSORY CONNECTION TO PUBLIC WATER AND
SEWER
§ 12.02.010. Declaration of policy.
The Village Board finds and declares that the public health, comfort, safety
and welfare is preserved and enhanced by provision of municipal water
and sewer service to each parcel that will be occupied. It further finds and
declares that failure to connect properties to available municipal water and
§ 11.44.210 GRAFTON CODE § 12.02.010
1.01:344
sewer systems is contrary to the public health and welfare and should be
avoided.
§ 12.02.020. Connection.
§ 12.02.030. Alternative disposal prohibited.
No person shall construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, holding tank,
septic tank, mound system, cesspool or other facility intended to be used for
the disposal of domestic wastewater if a public sewer is available.
§ 12.02.040. Exceptions. [Amended by Ord. No. 010, Series 2003]
A. To assure preservation of public health, comfort, safety and welfare, the
owner of any existing or proposed house, building or property used or
proposed for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other
habitation situated within the Village and adjacent to public water and
sewer mains or in a block through which public water and sewer extend
is hereby required at his expense to install suitable water and sanitary
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the public
municipal facilities within 12 months after public facilities first become
available or, if an immediate health hazard exists, within 30 days'
receipt of written notice from the County Health Officer or Village
Building Inspector.
B. If the person fails to comply with the said notice to connect within the
given period of time, the Village may, at its option: [Amended by Ord.
No. 010, Series 2003]
1. Cause such connection(s) to be made and bill the property owner
for such costs. If such costs are not paid within 30 days, such costs
shall be assessed as a special tax lien against the property unless
the owner within 30 days after the completion of the work files a
sworn affidavit with the Village Clerk stating that he cannot pay
such amount in one lump sum and asking that it be levied in not
more than five annual installments plus interest on the unpaid
amount at an applicable rate as determined by the Village Director
of Administrative Services.
C. Any person who is aggrieved by an order or direction to connect to
public water and/or sewer may file an appeal with the Board of Public
Works, for review and recommendation to the Village Board, within 30
days of the receipt of such an order. Availability of that service shall be
determined by the Village Board in accordance with standards adopted
by the Village Board relating to the distance from main to the building
to be connected, adverse soil conditions and elevations. No appeal shall
be considered for premises which have on-site facilities that are not in
compliance with state regulations.
§ 12.02.010 CODE ADOPTION § 12.02.040
1.01:345
Chapter 12.04
WATERWORKS AND SEWERS
§ 12.04.010. Water and sewer utilities combined.
The water and sewer utilities of the Village are combined into one public
utility pursuant to § 66.0819, Wis. Stats.
§ 12.04.020. Board of Public Works. [Amended by Ord. No. 010,
Series 2003]
The operation of the Village water and sanitary sewer system shall be under
the jurisdiction of the Board of Public Works subject to the final authority of
the Village Board.
§ 12.04.030. Utility Director. [Amended by Ord. No. 010, Series
2003]
The Utility Director is responsible for administration, supervision and
general management of the Water and Wastewater Utility operation.
§ 12.04.040. Water and sewer lateral maintenance and replacement.
[Amended by Ord. No. 011, Series 2005; Ord. No. 028, Series 2005]
A. Construction or maintenance of a holding tank within the Village of
Grafton may be allowed on a temporary basis under any of the following
conditions:
1. Public sewer is not available according to the standards adopted by
the Village Board.
2. The cost of public sewer connection is cost prohibitive. A "cost
prohibitive" connection to municipal sewer shall be determined by
the Village Board upon recommendation of the Board of Public
Works, in accordance with the standards adopted by the Board and
relative to distance from the existing main to the building to be
connected, adverse soil conditions and elevations.
B. Connection to the municipal sewer shall be required as provided for in
§ 12.02.020. In the event that there are any changes or improvements
in the sewer system which make public sewer available to the property
or make connection less costly under Subsection A.1 and 2 herein so
that it is no longer cost prohibitive under the rules adopted by the
Village Board, the property owner shall be required to connect to the
municipal sewer in accordance with § 12.02.020.
A. Water service maintenance. The property owner is fully responsible for
any and all maintenance, repair and/or replacement of water service
piping from the home or building to the property line or point of
connection with the curb stop or shutoff valve. The Water Utility owns
§ 12.02.040 GRAFTON CODE § 12.04.040
1.01:346
§ 12.04.050. Unauthorized operation of valves and hydrants.
[Amended by Ord. No. 010, Series 2003; at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
Any person who, without authority of the Utility Director, allows
contractors, masons or other unauthorized persons to take water from his
premises, operate any valve connected with the street or supply mains, or
open any fire hydrant connected with the distribution system, except for the
purpose of extinguishing fire, or who wantonly injures or impairs the same,
shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $100 for a first offense,
$200 for a second offense and $500 for a third or successive offenses,
together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such
forfeiture and costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the county jail
until said forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding 60 days. Owners
or operators of motor vehicles shall be liable for the cost of repair of any
the curb stop and water service piping in the public right-of-way. The
Utility is responsible for the maintenance, repair and/or replacement
of the curb stop including repair of water service breaks and leakage
between the curb stop and the point of connection with the public water
main. The Water Utility also owns the water meter and the initial shutoff
valve inside the building. The Utility is responsible for the maintenance,
repair and replacement of the water meter and meter valve as deemed
necessary by the Utility.
B. Sewer lateral maintenance. The property owner is fully responsible for
any and all maintenance, repair and/or replacement of sewer lateral
piping from the home or building to the point of connection with the
public sewer main. In cases where sewer lateral replacement work
involves a street opening and pavement replacement in the public rightof-
way, the Utility will reimburse the homeowner for excess costs
relative to public right-of-way and pavement restoration costs. The
excess cost subsidy amount will be capped at an equivalent cost as
determined and updated annually by the Village Engineer.
C. Service laterals replacement relative to water and sewer main
construction. Whenever the Village undertakes water and sewer main
replacement construction projects it shall be the policy of the Village
and its Water/Wastewater Utility to replace all existing water and sewer
service laterals from the property line to the point of connection with
the public main. The cost of this service lateral replacement work shall
be borne by the Water/Wastewater Utility. If it becomes necessary for a
property owner to replace his water and/or sewer lateral prior to when
a planned replacement project is undertaken, the Village will reimburse
the property owner for the cost of the service lateral replacement from
the main to the property line as determined on a unit basis and per
actual bidding and contract award. This retroactive reimbursement is
limited to three years from the date of the actual service lateral
replacement by the property owner to the date of utilities replacement
contract award by the Village.
§ 12.04.040 CODE ADOPTION § 12.04.050
1.01:347
hydrant damaged by being hit by such motor vehicle, and the Water and
Wastewater Utility will not be responsible for the damage to the motor
vehicle by reason of such accident.
§ 12.04.060. Water service pipe installation. [Amended by Ord. No.
010, Series 2003]
§ 12.04.070. Rates for metered water.
§ 12.04.080. Rates for public service.
A. Service connection specifications. Service connections or water laterals
shall be installed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
Village of Grafton.
B. Tapping mains. No person shall be permitted to tap or make any
connection with any street main or distribution pipe unless authorized
by the Utility Director.
A. Establishing rates. All water sold or furnished by the Water Utility shall
be paid for at the rates and charges approved by the Wisconsin Public
Service Commission.
B. Delinquent bills to be lien on premises. Customers whose water bills are
in arrears on October 15 of any year shall be notified of such
delinquency by the Village Director of Administrative Services in
accordance with the provisions of § 66.0809(3), Wis. Stats., and
delinquencies remaining on November 15, together with any penalty
imposed, shall be levied as a tax against the lot or parcel to which water
was furnished as provided in § 66.0809(3), Wis. Stats.
C. Building and construction service. Metered service rates shall apply to
building and construction service.
A. Public fire protection service. The Village shall pay $200 and $10,000
annually to cover the use of mains and hydrants. This service shall
include the use of hydrants for public fire protection service only and
such quantities of water as may be demanded for the purpose of
extinguishing fires within the Village limits only. For all other purposes,
the metered or other rates set forth shall apply. [Amended by Ord. No.
008, Series 2003]
B. General public service. Water service supplied to Village buildings,
schools, etc., shall be metered and the regular service rates applied.
Water used for flushing sewers, street sprinkling, flooding skating
rinks, etc., shall be metered where meters can be set to measure the
service. Where it is impossible to measure such service, the Water and
Wastewater Utility shall estimate the gallons of water used, based on
the pressure, size of opening and period of time water is allowed to flow.
The estimated quantity shall be billed at the rates and charges
established by the Water Utility and approved by the Wisconsin Public
§ 12.04.050 GRAFTON CODE § 12.04.080
1.01:348
§ 12.04.090. Fluoridation of Village water. [Amended by Ord. No.
010, Series 2003; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code
Adoption)]
Until further direction of the Village Board, the Utility shall introduce
approximately one to 1 1/2 parts of fluoride to every million parts of water
being distributed in the water supply system of the Village.
§ 12.04.100. Regulation of use of water during emergencies and
repairs to water mains. [Amended by Ord. No. 010, Series 2003]
§ 12.04.110. Water main extensions.
Service Commission. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
A. Repairs to water mains. The Water and Wastewater Utility reserves the
right to shut off the water in the mains temporarily to make repairs,
alterations or additions to the plant or system. When circumstances, in
the opinion of the Utility Director, will cause excessive delay, he shall
give notification by newspaper publication or otherwise of the
discontinuance of the supply.
B. Regulation during emergency. The Village President is authorized to
declare a water emergency whenever in his opinion the Water and
Wastewater Utility shall have an inadequate water supply to meet the
needs and requirements of the users of said water. Said emergency may
be declared by proclamation, and when circumstances in the opinion of
the President will permit sufficient delay, he shall give notification by
newspaper publication or posting or otherwise on the restrictions of the
supply. During the period of such emergency, the Village President may
place such restrictions and limitations upon the use of water being
furnished as he may deem necessary. He may suspend the use of water
fountains, sprinkling of streets, yards, gardens, watering or washing
buildings, cars or other implements, use of water in air-conditioning
units or any other use of water not vital to the health and welfare of the
consumer.
A. General policy. The Board of Public Works shall determine when water
mains are to be extended for new customers and whether the extension
shall be an eight-inch or larger pipe where fire protection service is
needed or a two-inch pipe or larger where only general service is
needed. No main shall be extended outside the limits of the service
needed. No main shall be extended nor service provided outside the
limits of the Village except to a municipality that has a public water
system and by ordinance of the Village Board designating the exact
limits of such extension or service. All such extensions shall be
commemorated by a written water service agreement between the
Village and the benefiting municipality. [Amended by Ord. No. 010,
Series 2003; Ord. No. 001, Series 2006]
§ 12.04.080 CODE ADOPTION § 12.04.110
1.01:349
B. Assessment of cost of extension. The Village Board shall determine
whether the extension cost is to be immediately assessed against
abutting property, as provided in Chapter 3.36 of the Code, or is to be
extended on a customer-financed basis as hereinafter provided.
C. Customer-financed water main extensions.
1. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
CONTRIBUTOR — The owner of property at time of a contribution
or refund unless otherwise specified by written agreement.
CUSTOMER — As used in this rule means the owner of premises
to which water is or is to be furnished unless specific written
agreements specify otherwise. The customer at all times means the
property owner at the time a contribution is to be made or a refund
becomes available.
2. Basis for determining contributions from original customer. The
applicant or applicants will advance the amount that would have
been assessed under Subsection C.1 of this section. The
contribution must be paid in advance of construction.
3. Additional customers and refunds. When additional customers are
connected to a water main that was originally financed in part by
customers, the Utility will require a contribution from each new
customer equal to the existing average contribution. When the
amount of customer contribution computed under Subsection C.2
of this section is less than would have been assessed under
Subsection C.1 of this section, the applicant for service shall pay an
amount equivalent to the assessment. This amount shall then be
refunded pro rata to all contributors along the extension whose
remaining contribution still exceeds what would have been
assessed under Subsection C.1 of this section.
When refunds have reduced the contribution of any contributor
to the applicable assessment per front foot, no further refund will
be made to that individual. After all refunds have been made, the
remaining premises that may connect will be charged at the rate
per front foot established for the extension.
4. Limit of extension. When an extension beyond an existing extension
is required to serve a new customer, and the cost of a customer
exceeds the average remaining contribution in the original
extension, then the new extension will be considered as an entirely
new project, without refunds or other connection with the original
extension.
D. Connection to Utility-financed mains or loops. When customers connect
to a transmission main or connecting loop laid at Utility expense, there
shall be assessed against the property of said customer on a front-foot
basis an amount equal to the average front-foot assessment in the area.
§ 12.04.110 GRAFTON CODE § 12.04.110
1.01:350
§ 12.04.120. Sewer rates and regulations.
§ 12.04.130. Sewer main extensions.
§ 12.04.140. Annexed areas to pay connection fee. [Amended by
Ord. No. 010, Series 2003]
If land to be benefited by a connection to the Village water or sewer system
has not been specifically assessed for water or sewer main extension in
the street abutting such property, for the reason that the property to be so
benefited was not within the corporate limits of the Village at the time the
assessment was levied for such water or sewer main extensions, the owner
thereof shall, prior to annexation, pay a connection fee to the Village in an
amount equal to the amount which the property would have been assessed
for such service had the connection been made to the Village water or
E. Limitation of refunds. The development period during which refunds
shall be made will be limited to 20 years.
A. Sewer service charges. Contributors of sewerage to the Village
sewerage system shall pay such service charges as shall be established
by the Village Board. [Amended by Ord. No. 010, Series 2003]
B. Billings and payment.
1. Sewer charges are billed quarterly and included on the same
statement used for billing of water charges. Payment is due on the
20th of the month following the date of billing. A one-time threepercent
penalty is applied if payment is not received by the due
date.
2. Delinquent charges to be placed on tax roll. All bills not paid by
November 15 shall be placed on the current tax roll in the same
manner as unpaid water bills for the corresponding periods.
A. General policy. The cost of installing, constructing or laying of all
sanitary sewer mains and storm sewer mains shall be charged in whole
to each lot or part of lot or parcel of land to be benefited thereby
fronting or abutting upon such street, alley or highway or cost by such
sewer pursuant to § 66.0703, Wis. Stats., and Titles 12 and 18 of the
Code. Assessments on corner lots shall be as determined by the Village
Board. No main shall be extended nor service provided outside the
limits of the Village except to a municipality that has a wastewater
treatment plant and by ordinance of the Village Board designating the
exact limits of such extension or service. All such extensions shall be
commemorated by a written sewer service agreement between the
Village and the benefiting municipality. [Amended by Ord. No. 002,
Series 2006]
B. Assessment of cost of extension. See Chapter 3.36 of the Code of the
Village of Grafton.
§ 12.04.110 CODE ADOPTION § 12.04.140
1.01:351
sewer system when the mains were laid, together with interest thereon at
an applicable rate as determined by the Village Director of Administrative
Services from such date to the date of payment. The estimate of the Village
Engineer as to the cost of such sewer and water service shall be binding on
all parties.
§ 12.04.150. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter or any order, rule
or regulation made hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
Chapter 1.08, General Penalty, of the Code of the Village of Grafton.
Chapter 12.08
SEWER USE AND SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
§ 12.08.010. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Utility Director or his duly authorized
deputy, agent or representative.[Amended by Ord. No. 010, Series 2003]
BOD (denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — The quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter in five days
at 20° C., expressed as milligrams per liter. Quantitative determination of
BOD shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard
Methods.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer.
BUILDING SEWER — A sanitary sewer which begins immediately outside of
the foundation wall of any building or structure being served and ends at its
connection to the public sewer.
CHLORINE REQUIREMENT — The amount of chlorine, in milligrams per
liter, which must be added to sewage to produce a specified residual
chlorine content in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard
Methods.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS — BOD, suspended solids, phosphorus,
nitrogen, pH, or fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified
in the municipality's WPDES permit for its wastewater treatment facility,
provided that such facility is designed to treat such additional pollutants
and, in fact, does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree.
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for the specified use of land owned
by others.
§ 12.04.140 GRAFTON CODE § 12.08.010
1.01:352
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if
it is properly pretreated, and the wastewater does not interfere with the
collection system.
GARBAGE — The residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food, and from the handling, storage and sale of food products and produce.
GENERAL SERVICE — Shall apply and mean those sanitary sewer users
who discharge normal domestic strength wastewater as defined under this
section.
GROUND GARBAGE — The residue from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such degree that all particles
will be carried freely in suspension under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch in any
dimension.
HIGH STRENGTH — Wastewater with a BOD concentration in excess of 200
mg/l of BOD, 250 mg/l of suspended solids, six mg/l of phosphorus, and 20
mg/l of nitrogen. Users whose wastewater exceeds the concentrations for
any one of these parameters shall be classified "high strength."
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS — Wastewater with pollutants that will
adversely affect the wastewater collection and treatment facilities or
disrupt the quality of wastewater treatment if discharged to the wastewater
collection and treatment facilities.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged,
permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial manufacturing process,
trade or business, as distinct from sanitary sewage.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface water.
NITROGEN — Kjeldahl nitrogen which is the sum of organic nitrogen and
ammonia nitrogen.
NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTEWATER — Wastewater with
concentrations of BOD no greater than 200 milligrams per liter, suspended
solids no greater than 250 milligrams per liter, phosphorus no greater than
six milligrams per liter, and nitrogen no greater than 20 milligrams per liter.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS — Includes all costs associated
with the operation and maintenance of the wastewater collection and
treatment facilities, including administration and replacement costs, all as
determined from time to time by the Utility.
PARTS PER MILLION — A weight-to-weight ratio; the parts per million
value multiplied by the factor 8.345 shall be equivalent to pounds per
million gallons of water.
PERSON — Any and all persons, including any individual, firm, company,
municipal or private corporation, association, society, institution,
enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
§ 12.08.010 CODE ADOPTION § 12.08.010
1.01:353
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration in
grams per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of
seven and a hydrogen ion concentration of 10-7.
PHOSPHORUS — Total phosphorus expressed in milligrams per liter of P
(phosphorus).
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting property have
equal rights and is controlled by the Village.
REPLACEMENT COSTS — Expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the
useful life of the wastewater treatment facility to maintain the capacity
and performance for which such facilities were designed and constructed.
Operation and maintenance costs include replacement costs.
SANITARY SEWAGE — A combination of water-carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial plants (other than
industrial wastes from such plant); together with such groundwaters,
surface waters, and stormwaters as may be present.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes
or a combination of both, and into which stormwaters, surface waters,
and groundwaters or unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally
admitted.
SEWAGE — The water-carried human, animal and household wastes in a
public or private drain, and may include groundwater infiltration, surface
drainage and industrial wastes. It is also defined as the spent water of a
community. The preferred term is "wastewater."
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for conveying wastewater or any other waste
liquids, including stormwater, surface water and groundwater drainage.
SEWERAGE — The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage and industrial wastes.
SEWER SERVICE CHARGE — A charge levied on users of the wastewater
collection and treatment facilities for payment of operation and
maintenance expenses, depreciation, return on investment, and other
expenses or obligations of said facilities.
SHALL; MAY — "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissible.
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
STANDARD METHODS — The examination and analytical procedures set
forth in the most recent edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Wastewater," published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water
Environment Federation.
§ 12.08.010 GRAFTON CODE § 12.08.010
1.01:354
STORM SEWER — A sewer that carries stormwater, surface water and
groundwater drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — That portion of the rainfall that is drained into
the sewers.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Total suspended matter that either floats to the
surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and
which is removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative
determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with
procedures set forth in Standard Methods for nonfilterable residue.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — A water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent of the wastewater treatment facilities or water that would not cause
violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by
discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities.
UTILITY — Refers collectively to the Grafton water and wastewater
operations which include the Village's water pumping and distribution
systems along with the wastewater collection and treatment system.
VILLAGE — The Village of Grafton.
WASTEWATER — Synonymous with "sewage" and means the water-carried
human, animal, household wastes in a public or private drain, and may
include groundwater infiltration, surface drainage and industrial wastes.
§ 12.08.020. Use of public sewers.
A. Sanitary sewers, clear water exclusion. No person shall cause to be
discharged any stormwater, surface drainage, subsurface drainage,
groundwater, roof runoff, cooling water or unpolluted water into the
sanitary sewer. All existing clear water connections, including roof
downspouts, exterior foundation drains and sump pumps, must be
permanently disconnected from the sanitary sewer upon written notice
from the Village Plumbing Inspector. Written notice shall include
deadline for compliance with disconnection. In the case of
noncompliant exterior foundation drains, the property owner may
request temporary relief from compliance for a period of time of no
more than six months. Utility personnel shall perform clear-water
compliance inspections of all public and private properties within the
Village; generally at the time of required water meter testing, or as
otherwise scheduled by the Utility. Inspection findings will be provided
to the Plumbing Inspector for any required follow-up action. The
Plumbing Inspector shall have authority to enforce all provisions of this
section. This authority, including performance of inspection duties, is as
further specified in §§ 16.12.040 and 16.12.050 of this Code.
[Amended by Ord. No. 005, Series 1998; Ord. No. 006, Series
2005; Ord. No. 003, Series 2007; 8-6-2018 by Ord. No. 004-2018;
12-17-2018 by Ord. No. 012-2018]
B. Storm sewers. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm
§ 12.08.010 CODE ADOPTION § 12.08.020
1.01:355
sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the approving authority.
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be
discharged, on approval of the approving authority, to a storm sewer or
natural outlet. Such approval is subject to review by the Department of
Natural Resources of the state.
C. Prohibitions and limitations. Except as hereinafter provided, no person
shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described
waters or wastes to any public sewer:
1. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
2. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any
hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant;
3. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0 and having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater treatment
plant;
4. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 10.0;
5. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with
the proper operation of the sewage works, such as, but not limited
to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood,
paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes,
cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage
grinders. Suspended solids concentrations shall be limited to 250
milligrams per liter per twenty-four-hour composite;
6. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears
likely in the opinion of the approving authority that such wastes can
harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment plant or equipment,
have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise
endanger life, limb, property or constitute a nuisance. In forming
its opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the approving
authority will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in sewers,
materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the wastewater
treatment process, capacity of wastewater treatment plant, and
other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:
a. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F.
§ 12.08.020 GRAFTON CODE § 12.08.020
1.01:356
b. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter
or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous
at temperatures between 32° and 150° F., and which will or
may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other
interference with the operation of the wastewater system.
c. Any commercial garbage that has not been properly shredded.
The installation and operation of any commercial grinder
equipped with a motor of one horsepower or greater shall be
subject to the review and approval of the approving authority.
A permit shall be obtained from the Plumbing Inspector prior
to the installation of such commercial garbage grinder unit.
The fee for said permit shall be as set by the Village Board.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01,
Code Adoption)]
d. Any waters or wastes containing iron, copper, zinc and similar
objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an
excessive chlorine requirement to such a degree that any such
material discharged in the composite wastewater to the sewer
exceeds limits established by the approving authority for such
materials.
e. Any waters or wastes discharged to the sewer containing over
0.1 milligrams per liter hexavalent chromium per twenty-fourhour
composite.
f. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or
odor-producing substances in such concentrations exceeding
limits which may be established by the approving authority as
necessary after treatment of the composite wastewater to meet
the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies
of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
g. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the
approving authority in compliance with state or federal
regulations.
h. Materials which exert or cause:
1. Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a
significant load on the wastewater treatment plant;
2. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes
constituting "slugs" as defined in § 12.08.010;
3. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, (such
as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime, slurries, and lime
§ 12.08.020 CODE ADOPTION § 12.08.020
1.01:357
§ 12.08.030. Control of industrial wastes directed to public sewers.
residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to,
sodium sulfate);
4. Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);
5. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater
treatment processes employed or are amenable to
treatment only to such degree that the wastewater
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of
the Department of Natural Resources of the state.
D. Special arrangements. No statement contained in this chapter shall be
construed as prohibiting any special agreement between the approving
authority and any person whereby an industrial waste of unusual
strength or character may be admitted to the wastewater collection and
treatment facilities either before or after pretreatment, provided that
there is no impairment of the functioning of the wastewater collection
and treatment facilities by reason of the admission of such wastes and
no extra costs are incurred by the approving authority without
recompense by the person.
E. WPDES permit. No person shall cause or permit a discharge into the
sanitary sewers that would cause a violation of the Village's WPDES
permit and any modifications thereof.
F. New connections. New connections to the Village's sanitary sewer
system will be allowed only if there is available capacity in all of the
downstream wastewater collection and treatment facilities.
A. Industrial discharges. If any waters or wastes are discharged or
proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters or wastes
contain substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in
§ 12.08.020C and which, in the judgment of the approving authority,
have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater collection or treatment
facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise
create a hazard to life, health or constitute a public nuisance, the
approving authority may:
1. Reject the wastes;
2. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
3. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
4. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under
the provisions of § 12.08.020D.
§ 12.08.020 GRAFTON CODE § 12.08.030
1.01:358
B. Approval required. Review and acceptance of the approving authority
shall be obtained prior to the discharge into the public sewers of any
waters or wastes having:
1. A BOD greater than 200 milligrams per liter;
2. A suspended solids concentration greater than 250 milligrams per
liter;
3. A chlorine requirement greater than 25 milligrams per liter;
4. A phosphorus concentration greater than six milligrams per liter;
and
5. A nitrogen concentration greater than 20 milligrams per liter.
C. Submission of basic data. Each person who presently discharges
industrial wastes to a public sewer or desires to make a new connection
for the purpose of discharging industrial wastes to a public sewer shall,
if required by the approving authority, prepare and file with said
authority within 90 days of notice a report that shall include actual or
predicted data relating to the quantity and characteristics of the waste
being discharged.
D. Extension of time. When it can be demonstrated that circumstances
exist which would create an unreasonable burden on the person to
comply with the time schedule imposed by Subsection C of this section,
a request for extension of time may be presented for consideration by
the approving authority.
E. Control manholes. Each customer or facility that discharges industrial
or other than residential wastes to a public sewer at the date of
enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter and thereafter shall,
if required by the approving authority, construct and maintain one or
more control manholes or access points to facilitate observation,
measurement and sampling of the wastes, including domestic sewage.
Similarly, each customer or facility desiring to make a new connection
to a public sewer for the purpose of discharging industrial or other than
residential wastes shall at the time of construction provide and
thereafter maintain one or more control manholes or access points to
facilitate observation, measurement and sampling of the wastes
including domestic sewage. Control manholes or access facilities shall
be located and constructed in a manner acceptable to the approving
authority. If measuring and/or sampling devices are to be permanently
installed, they shall be of a type acceptable to the approving authority.
Control manholes, access facilities and related equipment shall be
installed by the business or facility owner discharging the waste, at the
owner's expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be in
safe condition, accessible and in proper operating condition at all times.
Plans for installation of the control manholes or access facilities and
related equipment shall be approved by the approving authority prior to
§ 12.08.030 CODE ADOPTION § 12.08.030
1.01:359
the beginning of construction. [Amended by Ord. No. 015, Series
2006]
F. Measurement of flow. The volume of flow used for computing industrial
waste surcharges shall be the metered water consumption of the
person as shown in the record of meter readings maintained by the
Village Water and Wastewater Utility.
G. Metering of waste. Devices for measuring the volume of waste
discharged may be required by the approving authority if this volume
cannot otherwise be determined from the metered water consumption
records. Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, owned and maintained by the person. Following approval and
installation, such meters may not be removed without the consent of
the approving authority.
H. Provision for deductions. In the event that a person discharging
industrial waste into the public sewers produces evidence satisfactory
to the approving authority that more than 10% of the total annual
volume of water used for all purposes does not reach the public sewer,
then the determination of the water consumption to be used in
computing the waste volume discharged into the public sewer may be
made a matter of agreement between the approving authority and the
person.
I. Waste sampling. Industrial wastes discharged into the public sewers
shall be subject to periodic inspection and determination of character
and concentration of said wastes. The determinations shall be made as
often as may be deemed necessary by the approving authority. Samples
shall be collected in such a manner as to be representative of the
composition of the wastes. The sampling may be accomplished either
manually or by use of mechanical equipment acceptable to the
approving authority. Installation, operation and maintenance of the
sampling facilities shall be the responsibility of the person discharging
the waste and shall be subject to the approval of the approving
authority. Access to sampling locations shall be granted to the
approving authority or its duly authorized representatives at all times.
Every care shall be exercised in the collection of samples to ensure
their preservation in a state comparable to that at the time the sample
was taken.
J. Analyses. Laboratory procedures used in the examination of industrial
wastes shall be those set forth in Standard Methods. However, alternate
methods for certain analysis of industrial wastes may be used subject to
mutual agreement between the approving authority and the person.
Determination of the character and concentration of the industrial
wastes shall be made by the person discharging them, or his agent, as
designated and required by the approving authority. The Village may
also make its own analysis of wastes, and those determinations shall be
binding as a basis for charges.
§ 12.08.030 GRAFTON CODE § 12.08.030
1.01:360
§ 12.08.040. Right of entry and identification. [Amended by Ord.
No. 010, Series 2003]
The Utility Director, Plumbing Inspector, or other duly authorized employee
of the Village bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation
and testing, all in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and
§ 196.171, Wis. Stats. The Utility Director, Plumbing Inspector or other duly
authorized employees of the Village shall have no authority to inquire into
any process beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for wastewater
treatment.
§ 12.08.050. Sewer construction.
K. Pretreatment. Where required, in the opinion of the approving
authority, to modify or eliminate wastes that are harmful to the
structures, processes or operation of the wastewater collection or
treatment plant the person shall provide at his expense such
preliminary treatment or processing facilities as may be determined
required to render his wastes acceptable for admission to public
sewers.
L. Grease and/or sand interceptors. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall
be provided when, in the opinion of the approving authority, they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in
excessive amounts or any flammable wastes and/or other harmful
ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a
type readily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
M. Submission of information. Plans, specifications and any other
pertinent information relating to the proposed preliminary treatment or
processing facilities shall be submitted for review of the approving
authority prior to the start of their construction if the effluent from such
facilities is to be discharged into the public sewers.
A. Work authorized. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with or any opening into, use, alter or disturb any public
sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit
from the approving authority.
B. Cost of sewer connection. All costs and expenses incident to the
installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the
owner. The owner shall indemnify the Village from any loss or damage
that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the
building sewer.
C. Use of old building sewers. Old building sewers may be used in
connection with new buildings only when they are found, on
§ 12.08.030 CODE ADOPTION § 12.08.050
1.01:361
examination and test by the approving authority, to meet all
requirements for this chapter.
D. Materials and methods of construction. The size, slope, alignment,
materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be
used in excavation, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling
the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the Building and
Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the Village.
In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
ASTM and WEF Manual of Practice shall apply. [Amended by Ord. No.
010, Series 2003]
E. Building sewer grade. Whenever possible the building sewer shall be
brought to the building at the elevation below the basement floor. In all
buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to
the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall
be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
F. Stormwater and groundwater drains. No person shall make connection
of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or
other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or
building drain which is connected directly or indirectly to a public
sanitary sewer.
G. Conformance to Plumbing Code. The connection of the building sewer
into public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the Building and
Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the Village,
or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM
and the WEF Manual of Practice. All such connections shall be made
gastight and watertight. Garage floor drains must connect into the
sanitary sewer unless the garage floor drains directly into an approved
(by the Village of Grafton) stormwater management facility such as a
rain garden or stormwater pond. The garage floor drain cannot be tied
into any public or private storm sewer. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
approving authority before installation. [Amended by Ord. No. 010,
Series 2003; 11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 012-2012]
H. Inspection of connection. The applicant for the building sewer permit
shall notify the approving authority when the building sewer is ready
for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall
be made under the supervision of the approving authority.
I. Barricade; restoration. All excavations for the building sewer
installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so
as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and
other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be
restored in a manner satisfactory to the Village.
§ 12.08.050 GRAFTON CODE § 12.08.060
1.01:362
§ 12.08.060. Damage or tampering with sewage works.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the Utility works. Any person
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under a charge
of disorderly conduct.
§ 12.08.070. Violations and penalties.
§ 12.08.080. Basis for sewerage service charges.
A. Abatement of nuisance without notice. If the approving authority
determines that a public nuisance exists within the municipality and
that there is great and immediate danger to the wastewater collection
and treatment facilities or the public health, safety, peace, morals or
decency, the approving authority may cause the same to be abated and
charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or person causing,
permitting or maintaining the nuisance, as the case may be.
B. Accidental discharge. Any person found to be responsible for
accidentally allowing a deleterious discharge in the sewer system which
causes damage to the wastewater collection and treatment facility and/
or receiving body of water shall, in addition to a fine, pay an amount to
cover any damages, both values to be established by the Village Board.
C. Liability to Village for losses. Any person violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall become liable to the Village for any expense, loss or
damage occasioned by reason of such violation which the Village may
suffer as a result thereof.
D. Violations. Any person, partnership or corporation or any officer, agent
or employee thereof who continues any violation beyond the aforesaid
time limit provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the
general penalty in Chapter 1.08 of this Code. [Amended by Ord. No.
A-528-89, 1989; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code
Adoption)]
A. Sewer users served by Utility water meters. There is levied and
assessed upon each lot, parcel of land, building or premises having a
connection with the wastewater collection system and being served
with water solely by the Water Utility, a sewer service charge based, in
part, on the quantity of water used, as measured by the Water Utility
water meter used upon the premises.
B. Sewer users served by private wells. If any person discharging
wastewater into the sanitary sewers procures any part or all of his
water from sources other than the Water Utility, all or part of which is
discharged into the sanitary sewers, the person shall have water meters
installed by the Water Utility at the person's expense for the purpose of
determining the volume of water obtained from these sources. Where
§ 12.08.060 CODE ADOPTION § 12.08.080
1.01:363
§ 12.08.090. Sewerage service rates.
Sewerage service rendered by the Water/Wastewater Utility shall be paid
for at the current rates and charges in effect and as approved by the Village
Board; description of various rate components is as follows:
sewer meters are already installed, water meters will not be required.
The water meters shall be furnished by the Water Utility and installed
under its supervision, all costs being at the expense of the person
requiring the meter. The Water Utility will charge for each meter a
rental charge set by the Water Utility to compensate for the cost of
furnishing and servicing the meter. The rental charge shall be billed at
the time the sewer service charge is billed.
C. Deduct meters. If a person feels that a significant amount of metered
water does not reach the sanitary sewer, he can at his own expense,
with approval of the approving authority, install such additional meters
or metered services as are necessary to calculate the volume of water
not discharged to the sanitary sewer. Metered water not discharged to
the sanitary sewers shall not be subject to sewer service charges.
Requests to install additional meters must be made in writing to the
approving authority.
A. General sewer service. Metered.
1. Quarterly service charge. This is a fixed quarterly charge that
applies on a meter size basis to all metered customers discharging
domestic strength sewage up to 200 mg/l per liter BOD, 250 mg/l
per liter suspended solids, 6 mg/l per liter for phosphorus and 20
mg/l per liter for nitrogen.
2. Volume charge. A volume charge applies for each 1,000 gallons
domestic strength sewage discharged to the sanitary sewer
system.21
B. High strength sewer service, metered. Where the strength of any
contributor exceeds the strength limitations of 200 milligrams per liter
for BOD, 250 milligrams per liter for suspended solids, six milligrams
per liter for phosphorus and 20 milligrams per liter for nitrogen, a
periodic sampling shall be taken and wastewater analyzed to determine
the strength of said waste which will be billed at the high strength rates
currently in effect. [Amended by Ord. No. 035 Series 2002; Ord.
No. 008, Series 2003]
C. Reassignment of sewer users. The approving authority will reassign
sewer users into appropriate sewer service charge categories if
wastewater flow monitoring and sampling programs or other related
information indicate a change of categories is necessary.
21.Editor's Note: Original § 12.08.090A.3, Sprinkling credit for residential customers, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 0011-2012.
§ 12.08.080 GRAFTON CODE § 12.08.090
1.01:364
D. General sewer service unmetered. This rate shall be applied only to
single-family residential and small commercial customers and
approximates the cost for 18,000 gallons per quarter discharged to the
sewer system. If it is determined by the Utility that the user discharges
more than 18,000 gallons per quarter to the system, an additional
charge of the effective rate per 1,000 gallons will be made for estimated
additional usage. [Amended by Ord. No. 035 Series 2002; Ord No.
008, Series 2003]
Note: Larger sewer customers not connected to the municipal sewer
system will be required to rent a water meter from the Utility to
measure the water used, and the regular sewer rates will be applied.
E. Disposal of septic tank and holding tank wastes.
1. No person in the business of gathering and disposing of septic tank
sludge or holding tank sewage shall transfer such material into any
disposal area or public sewer unless a permit for disposal has been
first obtained from the approving authority. Written application for
this permit shall be made to the approving authority and shall state
the name and address of the applicant; the number of its disposal
units; and the make, model and license number of each unit.
Permits shall be nontransferable except in the case of replacement
of the disposal unit for which a permit shall have been originally
issued. The time and place of disposal will be designated by the
approving authority. The approving authority may impose such
conditions as it deems necessary on any permit granted.
2. Any person or party disposing of septic tank sludge or holding tank
sewage agrees to carry public liability insurance in an amount not
less than $100,000 to protect any and all persons or property from
injury and/or damage caused in any way or manner by an act, or the
failure to act, by any of the person's or party's employees. The
person or party shall furnish a certificate certifying such insurance
to be in full force and effect.
3. All materials disposed of into the treatment system shall be of
domestic origin or compatible pollutants only, and the person(s)
agrees that he will comply with the provisions of any and all
applicable ordinances of the Village and shall not deposit or drain
any gasoline, oil, acid, alkali, grease, rags, waste, volatile or
inflammable liquids, or other deleterious substances into the public
sewers, nor allow any earth, sand or other solid material to pass
into any part of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities.
4. Persons with a permit for disposing of septic tank sludge and/or
holding tank sewage into wastewater collection and treatment
facilities shall be charged in accordance with current and effective
septage rates approved by the Village Board. [Amended by Ord.
No. 035, Series 2002; Ord. No. 008, Series 2003]
§ 12.08.090 CODE ADOPTION § 12.08.090
1.01:365
§ 12.08.100. Billing practice. [Amended by Ord. No. 035, Series
2002; Ord. No. 008, Series 2003]
Sewer service charges shall be computed by the Utility according to the
current and effective rates. Bills for sewer service are rendered quarterly
and become due and payable on the first of the month following the period
for which service is rendered. A late payment charge of 3% but not less than
$0.50 will be added to bills not paid within 20 days of issuance. This onetime
three-percent late payment charge will be applied only to any unpaid
balance for the current billing period's usage. This late payment charge is
applicable to all customers. The Utility customer may be given a written
notice that the bill is overdue no sooner than 20 days after the bill is issued
and unless payment or satisfactory arrangement for payment is made within
the next 10 days, service may be disconnected pursuant to Ch. PSC 185,
Wis. Adm. Code. A delinquent bill may be placed on the year's tax roll and
collected along with other taxes due on the property. Change in ownership
or occupancy of premises found delinquent shall not be cause for reducing
or eliminating any charges or penalties due.
§ 12.08.110. Audit, notification, records.
5. The person(s) disposing waste agrees to indemnify and hold
harmless the Village from any and all liability and claims for
damages arising out of or resulting from work and labor performed.
F. Charge for toxic pollutants. Any person discharging toxic pollutants
which cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or sludge
from the municipality's wastewater treatment facility shall pay for such
increased costs as may be determined by the Village Board.
G. Operation, maintenance and replacement fund accounts. All sewer
service charge revenues collected for replacement costs shall be
deposited in a separate and distinct fund to be used solely for
replacement costs, as defined under § 12.08.010. All sewer service
charge revenues collected for other operation and maintenance
expenses shall also be deposited in a separate and distinct fund. All
revenues for the replacement fund and for operation and maintenance
of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities must be used
solely for the replacement fund and operation and maintenance of the
wastewater collection and treatment facilities. [Amended by Ord. No.
002, Series 1995]
A. Audit. The Utility shall review, every two years, or as otherwise deemed
necessary, the wastewater contribution of its sewer users, the operation
and the sewer service charge system. Based on this review, the Utility
shall revise the sewer service charge system, if necessary, to
accomplish the following: [Amended by Ord. No. 010, Series 2003]
1. Maintain a proportionate distribution of operation and
maintenance expenses among sewer users based on the
wastewater volume and pollutant loadings discharged by the users;
§ 12.08.090 GRAFTON CODE § 12.08.110
1.01:366
Chapter 12.12
CROSS-CONNECTION AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION
§ 12.12.010. Definition.
A "cross-connection" shall be defined as any physical connection or
arrangement between two otherwise separate systems, one of which
contains the potable water from the Village water system and the other
water from a private source, water of unknown or questionable safety, or
steam, gases or chemicals, whereby there may be a flow from one system
to the other, the direction of flow depending on the pressure differential
between the two systems.
§ 12.12.020. Purpose.
No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established
or maintain or permit to be maintained any cross-connection. No
interconnection shall be established whereby potable water from a private,
auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water
supply of the Village of Grafton may enter the supply or distribution system
of said Village unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and
the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved
by the Water/Wastewater Utility and the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources in accordance with § NR 811.09(2), Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 12.12.030. Inspections. [Amended by Ord. No. 013, Series 2009]
It shall be the duty of the Utility Director or his designate to cause
inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water system
where cross-connections with the public water system are deemed possible.
The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health
2. Generate sufficient revenues to pay the operation and maintenance
expenses of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities; and
3. Apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the
operation and maintenance expenses attributable to that class of
users for the next year, and adjust the sewer service charge rates
accordingly.
B. Annual notification. The municipality shall notify its sewer users
annually about the sewer service charge rates. [Amended by Ord. No.
010, Series 2003]
C. Records. The Utility shall maintain records regarding wastewater flows
and loadings, costs of the wastewater collection and treatment
facilities, sampling programs, and other information which is necessary
to document compliance with 40 CFR 35, Subpart E, of the Clean Water
Act.
§ 12.08.110 CODE ADOPTION § 12.12.030
1.01:367
hazards involved shall be as established by the Water/Wastewater Utility
and as approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
§ 12.12.040. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of credentials, the Utility Director or his authorized
representative shall have the right to request entry at any reasonable time
to examine any property served by a connection to the public water system
of the Village of Grafton for cross-connections. If entry is refused, such
representative shall obtain a special inspection warrant under § 66.0119,
Wis. Stats. On request, the owner, lessee or occupant of any property so
served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information
regarding the piping system or systems on such property.
§ 12.12.050. Discontinuance of service.
The Village Water and Wastewater Utility is hereby authorized and directed
to discontinue water service to any property wherein any connection in
violation of this chapter exists, and to take such other precautionary
measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of
A. Residential inspections. At a minimum, inspections of residential
properties shall be performed by Utility personnel prior to the time of
sale and also at the time of any meter maintenance or replacement
activity. Time-of-sale inspections must be scheduled at least 48 business
hours (Monday through Friday) in advance of closing on sale of
property. Any required inspection that is scheduled with less than 48
business hours prior to closing will be subject to a double charge.
Inspected properties that are found to be compliant with crossconnection
control requirements will be issued a certificate of
compliance. The certificate of compliance is good for 12 months from
the date of inspection. If installation of inside or outside hose bib
backflow preventers is required to achieve time-of-sale compliance,
these must be provided and installed by Utility personnel and will be
billed to the customer on the inspection fee statement. Hose bib
backflow preventers that are required and provided by the Utility
during any other compliance inspection will be billed to the customer
on the next water billing statement. Correction of any other type of
cross-connection or backflow prevention noncompliance issue that is
identified by Utility personnel during an inspection is the responsibility
of the home owner. Backflow preventers that are provided and installed
by the Utility will be warranted for a period of 24 months.
B. Industrial, commercial and public authority inspections. Crossconnection
control inspections of industrial, commercial and public
authority properties shall be conducted every two to six years,
depending upon the property's hazard classification as determined
during the initial inspection. All inspections will be scheduled in
advance by the Utility and performed by a contractor on behalf of the
Utility.
§ 12.12.030 GRAFTON CODE § 12.12.050
1.01:368
the public water system. Water service shall be discontinued only after
reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing under Ch. 68, Wis. Stats.,
except as provided below in § 12.12.060. Water service to such property
shall not be restored until the cross-connection(s) has been eliminated in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 12.12.060. Emergency discontinuance.
If it is determined by the Village Water and Wastewater Utility that a crossconnection
or an emergency endangers public health, safety or welfare
and requires immediate action and a written finding to that effect is filed
with the Village Clerk and delivered to the customer's premises, service
may be immediately discontinued. The customer shall have an opportunity
for hearing under Ch. 68, Wis. Stats., within 10 days of such emergency
discontinuance.
§ 12.12.070. State Plumbing Code.
The Village of Grafton adopts by reference the State Plumbing Code of
Wisconsin, being Chs. SPS 381 to 387, Wis. Adm. Code, and this chapter
does not supersede the State Plumbing Code or Grafton Plumbing Code but
is supplementary to them.
Chapter 12.16
PRIVATE WELL ABANDONMENT
§ 12.16.010. Purpose.
To prevent contamination of groundwater and to protect public health,
safety and welfare by assuring that unused, unsafe or noncomplying wells,
or wells which may serve as conduits for contamination, or wells which
may be illegally cross-connected to the municipal water system are properly
abandoned.
§ 12.16.020. Applicability.
This chapter applies to all wells located on premises served by the Village
of Grafton municipal water system.
§ 12.16.030. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM — A community water system owned by
a city, village, county, town, town sanitary district, utility district, public
inland lake and rehabilitation district, municipal water district or a federal-,
state- or municipal-owned institution for congregate care or correction, or
a privately owned water utility serving the foregoing.
§ 12.12.050 CODE ADOPTION § 12.16.030
1.01:369
NONCOMPLYING — A well or pump installation which does not comply
with the provisions of § NR 812.42, Wis. Adm. Code, Standards for Existing
Installations, and which has not been granted a variance pursuant to § NR
812.43, Wis. Adm. Code.
PUMP INSTALLATION — The pump and related equipment used for
withdrawing water from a well, including the discharge piping, the
underground connections, pitless adapters, pressure tanks, pits, sampling
faucets and well seals or caps.
UNSAFE — "Unsafe well or pump installation" means one which produces
water which is bacteriologically contaminated or contaminated with
substances in excess of the drinking water standards of Ch. NR 809 or 140,
Wis. Adm. Code, or for which a health advisory has been issued by the
Department of Natural Resources.
UNUSED — "Unused well or pump installation" means one which is not in
use or does not have a functional pumping system.
WELL — A drill hole or other excavation or opening deeper than it is wide
that extends more than 10 feet below the ground surface, constructed for
the purpose of obtaining groundwater.
WELL ABANDONMENT — The proper filling and sealing of a well according
to the provisions of § NR 812.26, Wis. Adm. Code.[Amended by Ord. No.
018, Series 2005]
§ 12.16.040. Abandonment required. [Amended by Ord. No. 008,
Series 2002; Ord. No. 018, Series 2005]
All wells located on premises served by the municipal water system shall be
abandoned in accordance with the terms of this chapter and Ch. NR 812,
Wis. Adm. Code, within 12 months after written notification to the owner
by the Grafton Water and Wastewater Utility, unless a valid well operation
permit has been obtained by the well owner from the municipal water utility
under the terms of this chapter. In any case, private well abandonment
must be arranged for and completed prior to the time of sale or property
transfer, unless a written statement is received from the prospective buyer
indicating that he or she will be assuming full operation and maintenance
responsibility for the private well, including applying for a private well
operation permit upon transfer of property.
§ 12.16.050. Well operation permit. [Amended by Ord. No. 008,
Series 2002; Ord. No. 018, Series 2005; 7-18-2011 by Ord. No.
018-2011]
Owners of wells on premises served by the municipal water system wishing
to retain their wells for any use shall make application for a well operation
permit for each well no later than 90 days after connection to the municipal
water system. The Grafton Water and Wastewater Utility shall grant a
permit to a private well owner to operate a well for a period not to exceed
three years, providing the conditions of this section are met. An owner
may request renewal of a well operation permit by submitting information
§ 12.16.030 GRAFTON CODE § 12.16.050
1.01:370
verifying that the conditions of this section are met. The Utility or its agent
may also conduct inspections to obtain or verify information necessary for
a permit application or renewal. In addition, the Utility will complete the
required bacteriological sampling and testing. If either sample fails the
bacteriological testing, the property owner is then required to contract with
a licensed well driller to either abandon the well per DNR requirements
or correct the well's unsafe water quality, including resampling by the
contractor for well permit renewal. Permit applications and renewals shall
be made on forms provided by the Utility. All initial and renewal applications
must be accompanied by a fee of $150. In addition, the following conditions
must be met for issuance or renewal of a well operation permit:
§ 12.16.060. Abandonment procedures.
A. The well and pump installation shall meet the "standards for existing
installations" described in § NR 812.42, Wis. Adm. Code;
B. The well construction and pump installation shall have a history of
producing bacteriologically safe water as evidenced by at least two
coliform bacteria samplings taken a minimum of two weeks apart. In
areas where the Department of Natural Resources has determined that
groundwater aquifers are contaminated with substances other than
bacteria, additional chemical tests may be required to document the
safety of the water;
C. There shall be no cross-connections between the well pump installation
or distribution piping and the municipal water system;
D. The water from the private well shall not discharge into a drain leading
directly to a public sewer utility unless properly metered and
authorized by the sewer utility;
E. The private well shall have a functional pumping system;
F. The proposed use of the private well and pump installation shall be
justified based upon need due to lack of other reasonable alternatives;
G. The operation permit is not transferable to a new property owner.
A. All wells abandoned under the jurisdiction of this chapter or rule shall
be abandoned according to the procedures and methods of § NR
812.26, Wis. Adm. Code. All debris, pump, piping, unsealed liners and
any other obstructions which may interfere with sealing operations
shall be removed prior to abandonment.
B. The owner of the well or the owner's agent shall notify the Utility at
least 48 hours prior to commencement of any well abandonment
activities. The abandonment of the well shall be observed by a
representative of the Utility.
C. A completed abandonment report form shall be submitted by the well
owner or his agent to the Utility and the Department of Natural
§ 12.16.050 CODE ADOPTION § 12.16.060
1.01:371
§ 12.16.070. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
Any well owner violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the general penalty in Chapter 1.08 of this Code. If
any person fails to comply with this chapter for more than 30 days after
receiving written notice of the violation, the municipality may impose a
penalty and cause the well abandonment to be performed and expense to be
assessed as a special tax against the property.
Chapter 12.20
EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL CONNECTION FEE
§ 12.20.010. Purpose.
The purpose of the ERC program and policy is to equitably assess the cost
of recent and future improvements to the wastewater treatment facilities
required to serve new development and the addition or expansion of
existing development to be served by the sewer system.
§ 12.20.020. Applicability.
This chapter applies to all new development construction, the addition or
annexation of existing development units and additions or expansions of
existing development already served by the Village of Grafton municipal
sewer system.
§ 12.20.030. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENR INDEX — The "20 cities" construction cost index published by the
Engineering News Record magazine, a national publication of the
construction industry.
ERC FEE — Equivalent residential connection fee and may be defined as
the WWTP connection charge applicable to a single-family residential home
that contributes 18,000 gallons per quarter to the municipal sewer system.
ERU — Equivalent residential unit and is synonymous with a single-family
home and its applicable sewer connection.
WWTP — Wastewater treatment facilities.
Resources within 30 days of the completion of the well abandonment.
The necessary report form is available through the Department of
Natural Resources and also at the Grafton Water and Wastewater
Utility.
§ 12.16.060 GRAFTON CODE § 12.20.040
1.01:372
§ 12.20.040. Policy.
All new development, additions or expansions of existing development and
the future incorporation of existing development shall be assessed an ERC
fee based upon its sewerage contribution as compared to a single-family
home. For new development the applicable ERC fee is due prior to issuance
of a building permit. For incorporation of existing development, the
applicable ERC fee is due prior to issuance of a plumbing permit.
§ 12.20.050. Unit ERC fee and adjustment.
The unit ERC fee charge in effect on January 1, 2008, was $770 per ERU.
The ERC fee will be adjusted annually by the Village Board, with effective
date of January 1. ERC fee adjustment will be in accordance with the ENR
Index over the prior twelve-month period and as determined by the Village
Engineer.
Title 13: Public Cemetery
Chapter 13.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 13.04.010. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. No. 024, Series 2004]
The following words and phrases have the designated meanings in this
chapter:
BOARD — The Board of Cemetery Commissioners.
A. The addition of any single-family home to the municipal sewer system
shall be assessed at one ERC.
B. The addition of any duplexes to the municipal sewer system shall be
assessed at two ERC units.
C. The addition of any multifamily building or development to the
municipal sewer system shall be assessed at one ERC per unit of
development.
D. The addition of any industrial, commercial or public authority
development to the municipal sewer system shall be assessed based
upon actual sewerage system usage. An initial assessment based upon
anticipated water usage/sewer contribution is due prior to building
permit issuance for new development or expansions and prior to
plumbing permit issuance for incorporation of existing development.
ERC fee adjustment and final assessment, if necessary, will occur in
follow-up to a minimum one full year of occupancy or municipal sewer
service. Final ERC assessment will be based upon the representative
sewerage contributions determined by the Utility from billings record
data.
§ 12.20.040 CODE ADOPTION § 13.04.010
1.01:373
COMMISSIONERS — The persons who are members of the Board of
Cemetery Commissioners.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of the Grafton Woodlawn Union
Cemetery.
§ 13.04.020. Location.
The location of the Woodlawn Union Cemetery is:
Commencing at the N.W. corner of the N.W. 1/4 of Section 24 Town 10 N.,
Range 21 east, thence east along the north line of said Section 24, 190.8
feet which is the point of beginning of the parcel of land to be described:
Continuing thence east along said section line, 470 feet to a point, thence
south and parallel with the west section line 24 to a point 508.75 feet,
thence west 470.0 feet to a point, thence north 509.10 feet to place of
beginning. Said parcel lies within Section 24 of the Village of Grafton and
contains approximately five acres of land.
Chapter 13.08
BOARD OF CEMETERY COMMISSIONERS
§ 13.08.010. Board created; membership. [Amended by Ord. No.
007-94, 1994; Ord. No. 026-94, 1994]
There is created a cemetery commission, which shall be responsible for
the management and operation of all municipally owned cemeteries. The
commission shall consist of five members as follows: the Building Inspector,
the Director of Public Works, and three citizens. The citizen members shall
be appointed by the Village President, subject to confirmation by a majority
of the members of the Village Board, to hold office for a period ending one,
two and three years, respectively, from the succeeding first day of May; and
thereafter, annually during April, one such member shall be appointed for
a term of three years. No compensation shall be paid for serving on the
cemetery commission. Citizen members shall take the official oath required
by § 19.01, Wis. Stats., which shall be filed with the Village Clerk.
§ 13.08.020. Board; authority; duties. [Amended by Ord. No. 024,
Series 2004]
The cemetery commission shall have full control and authority over all
municipal cemeteries and shall, upon approval by the Village Board, issue
such rules and regulations as it deems necessary for the proper execution
of this chapter.
§ 13.08.030. Cemetery Superintendent. [Amended by Ord. No. 024,
Series 2004]
The Building Inspector shall be the Cemetery Superintendent, and shall
serve until removed by the cemetery commission. The Cemetery
§ 13.04.010 GRAFTON CODE § 13.08.030
1.01:374
Superintendent shall be responsible for matters affecting the daily
operations of the cemetery and the administration of the provisions of this
chapter and any supplemental rules and regulations issued by the cemetery
commission. The Superintendent may utilize the services of existing Village
officials and employees.
Chapter 13.12
PLATTING
§ 13.12.010. Plats; recording; design. [Amended by Ord. No. 024,
Series 2004]
Before any new block of a municipal cemetery is opened for the sale of lots,
the Village Board shall cause it to be platted and recorded in the office of
the Register of Deeds.
Chapter 13.16
SINGLE GRAVE SECTION
§ 13.16.010. Designation authority. [Amended by Ord. No. 024,
Series 2004]
The Cemetery Commission may designate certain lots as a single grave
section, and lots therein may be sold as single grave lots. Unused portions
of lots repossessed or abandoned may likewise be sold as single graves, or
otherwise.
Chapter 13.20
SALE OF LOTS
§ 13.20.010. Price of lots.
The Village Board shall from time to time fix a schedule of prices for all lots
sold in municipal cemeteries and for all work done for private parties by the
Superintendent and his assistants, including charges to be made for the use
of any public vault. Fifty percent of the funds so derived shall be credited to
the perpetual care trust fund and shall be considered a full payment by the
purchaser of the lot by the Village in perpetuity.
§ 13.20.020. Sale procedure; issuance of deeds.
The sale of lots in municipal cemeteries shall be under the control of
the Cemetery Superintendent subject to the rules and regulations and
the general supervision of the Village Board. Any applicant shall apply
to the Cemetery Superintendent and select from those lots available for
sale the lot which he desires to buy. Upon full payment, the Cemetery
§ 13.08.030 CODE ADOPTION § 13.20.020
1.01:375
Superintendent shall issue a deed to the lot in the form prescribed by the
Village Attorney. The deed shall be signed by the Cemetery Superintendent
and Village President and acknowledged so as to entitle it to be recorded.
The purchaser may record this deed with the County Register of Deeds.
§ 13.20.030. Lot transfer.
The transfer in accordance with applicable Wisconsin Statutes of lots
previously sold may be registered, after payment of a transfer fee of $20
with the Cemetery Superintendent, by presentation of the original deed
on the back of which is written "I hereby transfer to (name of the owner)
(portions of the lot)" and the endorsement of the original lot owner or
by presenting a court order evidencing transfer. This would have to be
acknowledged and witnessed if it is desired to record the transfer with the
Register of Deeds.
Chapter 13.24
CARE OF CEMETERY
§ 13.24.010. Care defined. [Amended by Ord. No. 024, Series 2004]
"Care" shall include the cutting of grass upon the lot at reasonable intervals,
the raking and cleaning of the lot, the pruning or trimming of trees or
shrubs, and such work as may be necessary to keep the graves in neat
condition and for the care and maintenance of the cemetery, but shall
not include maintenance or repair of any monuments, nor the planting of
flowers or shrubs upon any lot.
§ 13.24.020. Perpetual care expense included in lot price.
All lots hereafter sold in municipal cemeteries shall be provided with
perpetual care services, the expense to be included in the price of the lot
pursuant to § 13.20.010 of this title.
Chapter 13.28
CEMETERY ACCOUNTS
§ 13.28.010. Cemetery account; source of funds.
The Cemetery Superintendent shall annually recommend to the Village
Board an amount as is deemed necessary to maintain and operate the
municipal cemeteries for the ensuing year. The moneys shall be expended
under direction of the Cemetery Superintendent for the development,
improvement, upkeep and care of the cemetery. Unless previously
authorized by the Village Board, no debt or deficit shall be incurred which
cannot be fully paid by moneys in the cemetery account.
§ 13.20.020 GRAFTON CODE § 13.28.020
1.01:376
§ 13.28.020. Perpetual care trust fund.
All moneys received for perpetual care shall be credited to the perpetual
care trust fund to be held by the Village as trustee, and shall be invested
as provided by § 66.0603(1m), Wis. Stats. The income from such trust fund
shall be paid into the Village treasury but shall not be used for any purpose
except the care of the cemetery.
§ 13.28.030. Duties of Village Clerk.
The Village Director of Administrative Services shall serve as trustee to
receive and hold moneys in trust, according to the terms of any gift or
bequest, the income of which is to be used for the improvement,
maintenance, repair, preservation or ornamentation of the cemetery or any
lot or structure thereon. Such moneys shall be invested pursuant to the
Wisconsin Statutes in the same manner as moneys in the perpetual care
trust fund, but separately accounted for. No additional compensation shall
be paid the Director of Administrative Services for his duties under this
chapter, and the bond of the Director of Administrative Services shall also
cover the performance of all such duties.
§ 13.28.040. Annual audit.
The cemetery account shall be audited annually by the Village Auditor.
Chapter 13.32
LOT IMPROVEMENTS
§ 13.32.010. Fences.
No fences or enclosures around lots shall be permitted.
§ 13.32.020. Graves.
Graves shall not be raised above the level of the lot.
§ 13.32.030. Monuments and markers. [Amended by Ord. No. 024,
Series 2004]
A. Sections A through E: Not more than one monument or marker, with the
exception of approved war or service markers, may be located on any
lot. No monument or marker may exceed two feet in height, and the
base area of such monument shall not exceed 20% of the lot area. All
monuments and markers shall be of bronze, granite or marble, and no
vertical joints therein shall be permitted. All foundations for
monuments and other structures must be of sufficient depth and
stability to support the proposed structure.
B. Sections G through M: Not more than one memorial monument or
marker may be located on any lot, with the exception of approved war
§ 13.28.020 CODE ADOPTION § 13.32.030
1.01:377
§ 13.32.040. Improvements by lot owners. [Amended by Ord. No.
024, Series 2004]
§ 13.32.050. Entry by Superintendent. [Amended by Ord. No. 024,
Series 2004]
The Superintendent may enter upon any lot and remove any shrub or
tree which is deemed detrimental to the cemetery or to adjoining lots,
or unsightly, diseased or inconvenient to the public. He may also enter
upon any lot and make any improvement deemed for the advantage of
the grounds. A spring cemetery cleanup is performed in late winter or
early spring. A fall cemetery cleanup is performed in late October or early
November.
Chapter 13.36
INTERMENT REGULATIONS
§ 13.36.010. Fee established.
An interment fee shall be established by the Village Board by resolution
from time to time as recommended by the Cemetery Board of
Commissioners.
§ 13.36.020. Payment of charges. [Amended by Ord. No. 024, Series
2004]
No interment shall be allowed in any lot which has not been fully paid.
or service markers. All memorial monuments and markers shall be of
flush bronze, granite or marble type. All foundations for memorials
or markers must be of sufficient depth and stability to support the
proposed memorial or marker.
A. Sections A through E: Lot owners shall have the right to cultivate trees,
shrubs and plants within the lot of such kind or size which do not
interfere with adjoining lots. Winter decorations may be maintained on
graves from November 15 until March 15 of the next year. Owners shall
not change the grade of any lot, nor interfere in any way with the
general plan of landscaping the cemetery.
B. Sections G through M: Lot owners shall have the right to place one vase
or wreath. The cultivation of trees, shrubs and plants within the lot is
prohibited. Winter decorations may be maintained on graves from
November 15 until March 15 of the next year. Owners shall not change
the grade of any lot, nor interfere in any way with the general plan of
landscaping the cemetery.
§ 13.32.030 GRAFTON CODE § 13.36.030
1.01:378
§ 13.36.030. Burial permit required; recordkeeping. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
No interment shall be permitted or dead body received without a burial
permit or removal certificate issued by the Register of Deeds, Cemetery
Superintendent or Village Clerk of the place where the death occurred.
Such permit or certificate shall be retained by the Superintendent as part
of his record. All interments, disinterments and other matters relating to
the disposal of dead bodies shall be pursuant to the state statutes and the
orders of the Village Board.
§ 13.36.040. Notice of interment; authority of Superintendent.
Notice of interment must be given to the Superintendent at least 24 hours
in advance. The Superintendent or an assistant must be present at all
interments, and he shall have full charge of opening, closing and sodding all
graves.
§ 13.36.050. Suspension of work.
Laborers working in the vicinity of a lot where an interment is in progress
must suspend work and maintain silence during the progress of the service
and during the period immediately preceding and following.
§ 13.36.060. Vault requirements. [Added by Ord. No. 024, Series
2004]
A commercially manufactured vault, approved by the Cemetery
Superintendent, shall be required for the placement or interment of any
and all types of remains or cremated remains. Two cremated remains or
one single full interment and one single cremated remains are allowed in a
single vault.
§ 13.36.070. Number of interments allowed. [Added by Ord. No.
024, Series 2004]
Each gravesite is allowed to contain one single full interment, or one single
cremated remains, or one single full interment and one single cremated
remains, or two cremated remains.
Chapter 13.40
RECORDKEEPING
§ 13.40.010. Required records.
The Cemetery Superintendent shall keep records consisting for each
cemetery of a cemetery plat map, a listing of lot owners, a deed ownership
record, and a file of burial permits.
§ 13.36.030 CODE ADOPTION § 13.40.020
1.01:379
§ 13.40.020. Cemetery plat map.
The plat map shall contain a diagram of each lot sold in the cemetery and
shall identify it by number of section, number of lot, and name of owner.
It shall also show by diagram the location and number of each grave, the
name and grave number within the lot of each person buried in the lot.
§ 13.40.030. Listing of lot owners.
A listing shall be maintained consisting of each lot owner or joint owner,
arranged by family name, showing the full name of the owner and the lot
and block number of the lot owned. The listing shall be kept and shall
contain a record of burials, showing the year of interment, the full name,
place of death, name and address of funeral director, lot and block, and
grave number.
§ 13.40.060. Deed ownership record.
The deed ownership record shall consist of a copy of the original deed
issued at the time of sale of the lots and filed by section upon payment of the
purchase price of a lot to the Village. The Cemetery Superintendent shall
permanently retain a copy of the deed.
§ 13.40.070. File of burial permits.
The burial permits required by the Wisconsin Statutes shall be endorsed by
the Superintendent with the date of the interment over his signature and
the permits filed chronologically in a binder.
Chapter 13.44
POLICE REGULATIONS
§ 13.44.010. Applicability of regulations.
The regulations in this chapter shall apply in the municipal cemetery.
§ 13.44.020. Entry.
No person shall enter or leave except through the gates. No persons other
than cemetery employees or police officers shall be within the cemetery
except during daylight hours.
§ 13.44.030. Firearms.
No person shall carry any firearms, except in the case of military funerals
and on Memorial Day, without the written permission of the Superintendent.
§ 13.44.040. Dogs.
No person shall allow any dog to run at large.
§ 13.40.020 GRAFTON CODE § 13.44.050
1.01:380
§ 13.44.050. Vehicles.
No vehicle shall be driven except on roads designated for that purpose, nor
shall such be driven in a reckless manner.
§ 13.44.060. Disturbing property.
No person except the owner of the lot or a cemetery employee shall cut,
remove, injure or carry away any flowers, trees, shrubs, plants or vines
from any lot or property; nor shall any person deface, injure or mark upon
any markers, headstones, monuments, fences or structures; nor shall any
person other than the owner injure, carry away or destroy any vases, flower
pots, urns or other objects which have been placed on any lot.
§ 13.44.070. Refreshments.
No person shall consume or possess refreshments or liquors.
§ 13.44.080. General.
The Cemetery Superintendent shall maintain order and shall eject any
person whose conduct is objectionable or who violates this chapter.
Chapter 13.48
PENALTIES
§ 13.48.010. Violations and penalties. [Amended by Ord. No. 024,
Series 2004]
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this title shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $100 nor
more than $500 for each offense, together with the costs of prosecution. In
the event of a failure to pay such forfeiture, where no showing of indigency
is made, the defendant may be imprisoned for no more than 90 days, as
the court deems fit, or until such judgment is sooner paid. Each day that a
violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
Title 14: Trailers and Trailer Courts
Chapter 14.04
DEFINITIONS
§ 14.04.010. Definitions.
Whenever used in this title, unless a different meaning appears from the
context, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this chapter.
§ 13.44.050 CODE ADOPTION § 14.04.010
1.01:381
DEPENDENT UNIT — A trailer which does not have bathroom or shower
and toilet facilities.
NONDEPENDENT UNIT — A trailer that has bath or shower and toilet
facilities.
PERSON — Shall be construed to include an individual, partnership, firm,
company, corporation, whether tenant, owner, lessee, licensee, or their
agent, heir or assign.
SPACE — A plot of ground in a trailer camp of not less than 1,000 square
feet of space, designed for the location for only one automobile and/or one
trailer.
TRAILER — Any coach, cabin, mobile home, housecar or other vehicle or
structure intended for or capable of human dwelling or sleeping purposes,
mounted upon wheels or supports, and/or capable of being moved by its
own power or transported by another vehicle.
TRAILER CAMP — Any park, court, camp, site, plot, parcel or tract of
land designed, maintained, intended or used for the purpose of supplying a
location or accommodations for more than two trailers and shall include all
buildings used or intended for use as part of the equipment thereof, whether
or not a charge is made for the use of the trailer camp and its facilities.
"Trailer camp" shall not include automobile or trailer sales lots on which
unoccupied trailers are parked for purposes of inspection and sale.
UNIT — A trailer unit.
Chapter 14.08
LOCATION OUTSIDE CAMPS
§ 14.08.010. Parking trailers prohibited.
It is unlawful, except as provided in this title, for any person to park any
trailer on any street, alley or highway, or other public place, or on any tract
of land owned by any person within the Village.
§ 14.08.020. Emergency trailer parking. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is permitted on any street,
alley or highway only as permitted in § 10.36.090G of the Code.
§ 14.08.030. Parking outside approved camps.
No person shall park or occupy any trailer on any premises which is situated
outside of an approved trailer camp. The parking of only one unoccupied
trailer in an accessory private garage building or in a rear yard is permitted,
providing no living quarters shall be maintained or any business practiced
in the trailer while such trailer is so parked or stored.
§ 14.04.010 GRAFTON CODE § 14.08.030
1.01:382
Chapter 14.12
PERMANENT OCCUPANCY
§ 14.12.010. Trailers not to be used as dwellings; exceptions.
Trailers shall not be used as a permanent place of abode or as a permanent
dwelling, or for indefinite periods of time, except as provided in § 14.40.010
of this title, provided that any nondependent trailer properly connected with
the public water supply and sanitary sewer system may be permitted on
any premises if such trailer is constructed and located in compliance with
all requirements of the building, plumbing, health, sanitary, electrical and
zoning ordinances.
§ 14.12.020. Removal of wheels as criteria for code compliance.
Any action toward the removal of wheels, except for temporary purposes
of repair, or other action to attach the trailer to the ground by means of
posts, piers or foundation shall subject the trailer to the requirements of the
Building Code as well as this title.
Chapter 14.16
LICENSING OF TRAILER CAMPS
§ 14.16.010. License required.
It is unlawful for any person to establish, operate or maintain, or permit to
be established, operated or maintained, upon any property owned, leased
or controlled by him, a trailer camp within the limits of the Village, without
having first secured a license for each such camp from the Village Board,
pursuant to this title. Such license shall expire one year from the date of
issuance but may be renewed under the provisions of this title for additional
periods of one year.
§ 14.16.020. Application fee, bond.
The application for such license or the renewal thereof shall be filed with
the Village Clerk and shall be accompanied by a fee of $100 for each 50
spaces or fraction thereof in the existing or proposed camp and a surety
bond in the sum of $5,000. This bond shall guarantee the collection by the
licensee of the monthly parking permit fee provided for in Chapter 14.52 of
this title and the payment of such fees to the Village Clerk; the payment by
the licensee of any fine or forfeiture including legal costs imposed upon or
levied against the licensee for a violation of the ordinances of the Village
pursuant to which the license is granted; and shall also be for the use and
benefit and may be prosecuted and recovery had thereon by any person,
firm or corporation who may be injured or damaged by reason of the
licensee violating the provisions of this title. A fee of $10 shall be paid for
each transfer of a license.
§ 14.08.030 CODE ADOPTION § 14.16.030
1.01:383
§ 14.16.030. Application; camp plan.
The application for a license or a renewal thereof shall be made on forms
furnished by the Village Clerk and shall include the name and address of
the owner in fee of the tract (if the fee is vested in some person other than
the applicant, a duly verified statement by that person that the applicant is
authorized by him to construct or maintain the trailer camp and make the
application), and such a legal description of the premises upon which the
trailer camp is or will be located as will readily identify and definitely locate
the premises. The application shall be accompanied by two copies of the
camp plan showing the following, either existing or as proposed:
§ 14.16.040. Inspection and enforcement.
No trailer camp license shall be issued until the Village Clerk notifies the
Chief of Police, Village Health Inspector, Chief of the Fire Department and
Building Inspector, or their authorized agent of such application, and these
officials shall inspect or cause to be inspected each application and the
premises on which trailers will be located to ensure compliance with the
regulations, ordinances and laws applicable thereto. These officials shall
furnish the Village Board in writing the information derived from such
investigation and a statement as to whether the applicant and the premises
meet the requirements of the department for whom the officer is certifying.
No license shall be renewed without a reinspection of the premises. For the
purpose of making inspections and securing enforcement, such officials or
their authorized agents shall have the right and are empowered to enter
on any premises on which a trailer is located, or about to be located, and
to inspect the same and all accommodations connected therewith at any
reasonable time.
A. The extent and area used for camp purposes;
B. Roadways and driveways;
C. Location of units for trailers;
D. Location and number of sanitary conveniences, including toilets,
washrooms, laundries and utility rooms to be used by occupants of
units;
E. Method and plan of sewage disposal;
F. Method and plan of garbage removal;
G. Plan for water supply;
H. Plan for electrical lighting of units. If the existing or proposed camp is
designed to serve nondependent trailer units, such plans shall clearly
set forth the location of all sewer and water pipes and connections.
§ 14.16.030 GRAFTON CODE § 14.16.050
1.01:384
§ 14.16.050. Revocation or suspension of license.
The Village Board is authorized to revoke any license or permit issued
pursuant to the terms of this title in accordance with § 66.0435, Wis. Stats.
Chapter 14.20
LOCATION AND SIZE OF TRAILER CAMPS
§ 14.20.010. Location in fire districts prohibited.
No trailer or trailer camp shall be located in any fire district.
§ 14.20.020. Location on lot.
No occupied trailer within the limits of the Village shall be located less than
10 feet from any building or other trailer or from the boundary line of the
premises on which located.
§ 14.20.030. Public utilities.
No trailer camp shall be located within the limits of the Village unless public
water and sewer connections and fire protection facilities are available.
§ 14.20.040. Maximum number in trailer camp.
No more than 25 trailers may be parked or kept in any one trailer camp at
any time.
Chapter 14.24
CAMP PLAN
§ 14.24.010. Drainage.
Every trailer or trailer camp shall be located on a well-drained area, and
the premises shall be properly graded so as to prevent the accumulation of
stormwater or other waters. No trailer or trailer camp shall be located in
any area that is situated so that drainage from any barnyard, outdoor toilet
or other source of filth can be deposited in its location.
§ 14.24.020. Spaces and driveways.
Trailer spaces shall be clearly defined and shall consist of a minimum of
1,000 square feet and a width of not less than 20 feet. The camp shall be
so arranged that all spaces shall face or abut on a driveway of not less than
20 feet in width, giving easy access from all units to a public street. Such
driveway shall be graveled or paved and maintained in good condition, have
natural drainage, be well lighted at night, and shall not be obstructed.
§ 14.16.050 CODE ADOPTION § 14.24.030
1.01:385
§ 14.24.030. Location of dependent units.
The camp shall be so laid out that no dependent unit shall be located farther
than 200 feet from the toilets and service buildings provided for in this
chapter, and walkways to such buildings shall be graveled or paved and
well-lighted at night.
§ 14.24.040. Electric service.
Every trailer space shall be furnished with an electric service outlet. Such
outlet shall be equipped with an externally operated switch or fuse of
not less than 30 amperes' capacity and a heavy-duty outlet receptacle.
Electrical outlets shall be weatherproof, and no power lines shall be less
than 15 feet above the ground.
§ 14.24.050. Parking outside designated spaces.
No trailer unit shall be parked in a camp outside of a designated space.
Chapter 14.28
WATER SUPPLY
§ 14.28.010. Water supply requirements.
An adequate supply of pure water, furnished through a pipe distribution
system connected directly with the public water main, with supply faucets
located not more than 200 feet from any dependent trailer, shall be
furnished for drinking and domestic purposes in all camps.
§ 14.28.020. Individual water service connections.
Individual water service connections provided for direct use of an
independent unit shall be so constructed that they will not be damaged by
the parking of such units. Such system shall be adequate to provide 20
pounds pressure per square inch and capable of furnishing a minimum of
125 gallons per day per space.
§ 14.28.030. Common drinking vessels.
No common drinking vessels shall be permitted, nor shall any drinking
water faucets be placed in any toilet room.
§ 14.28.040. Hot water.
Every trailer camp serving dependent units shall provide an abundant
supply of hot water at all reasonable hours for bathing, washing and laundry
facilities.
Chapter 14.32
§ 14.24.030 GRAFTON CODE § 14.28.040
1.01:386
SERVICE BUILDINGS AND ACCOMMODATIONS
§ 14.32.010. Service buildings.
Every trailer camp designed to serve dependent units shall have erected
thereon suitable buildings for housing toilets, lavatories, showers, slop
sinks and laundry facilities, as required by this title, such buildings to be
known as service buildings. Service buildings shall be located not more
than 200 feet from any dependent unit space, nor closer than 15 feet from
any trailer space. Such buildings shall be of permanent construction and
adequately lighted, screened and ventilated.
§ 14.32.020. Toilet rooms.
There shall be provided separate toilet rooms for each sex. Water flush
toilets shall be required. Toilets shall be provided for each sex in the ratio of
one toilet for each eight dependent units or fraction thereof and shall have
separate compartments. Every male toilet room shall also contain one urinal
for each 16 dependent units, but in no case shall any male toilet be without
one urinal; toilet rooms shall contain lavatories with hot and cold water in
the ratio of one lavatory to every two or less water closets.
§ 14.32.030. Bathing facilities.
Separate bathing facilities for each sex shall be provided, with one shower
enclosed in a compartment at least four feet square for each eight
dependent units or fraction thereof. Each shower compartment shall be
supplemented by an individual dressing compartment of at least 12 square
feet.
§ 14.32.040. Laundry facilities.
Laundry facilities shall be provided in the ratio of one double-tray unit
and one conventional-type washing machine, or one automatic washing
machine, with electric outlet, for each eight units. Sufficient drying facilities
shall be available.
§ 14.32.050. Slop sinks.
Slop sinks for disposal of liquid wastes originating at the units shall be
provided in a separate room of the service building in the ratio of one slop
sink for each 16 dependent units.
§ 14.32.060. Requirements to be based on camp capacity.
The accommodations required by this chapter shall be based on the total
camp capacity according to accepted plans.
§ 14.28.040 CODE ADOPTION § 14.32.070
1.01:387
§ 14.32.070. Floors of toilet and laundry facilities.
Floor of toilets, showers and the laundry shall be of concrete, tile or similar
material impervious to water and easily cleaned and pitched to a floor drain.
Chapter 14.36
WASTE AND GARBAGE DISPOSAL
§ 14.36.010. Connection with public sewer system.
All liquid waste from showers, toilets, laundries, faucets, lavatories, etc.,
shall be discharged into a sewer system extended from and connected with
the public sewer system.
§ 14.36.020. Sewer connections for nondependent units.
Every space designed to serve a nondependent unit shall be provided with
sewer connections which shall comply with the State Plumbing Code. The
sewer connection shall be provided with suitable fittings so that watertight
connections can be made. Such connections shall be so constructed so that
they can be closed when not connected and trapped in such a manner as to
be maintained in an odor-free condition.
§ 14.36.030. Sanitary facilities not connected to public system
prohibited.
All sanitary facilities in any unit which are not connected with a public
sewer system by approved pipe connections shall be sealed, and their use is
declared unlawful.
§ 14.36.040. Faucet drainage.
Each faucet shall be equipped with facilities for drainage of waste and
excess water.
§ 14.36.050. Garbage.
Every trailer unit shall be provided with a substantial flytight, watertight
metal garbage depository from which the contents shall be removed and
disposed of in a sanitary manner by the camp custodian at least twice
weekly between May 1 and October 15, and otherwise weekly.
Chapter 14.40
LIMITATIONS ON OCCUPANCY
§ 14.32.070 GRAFTON CODE § 14.40.010
1.01:388
§ 14.40.010. Limitation on length of stay and number of occupants.
It is unlawful for any person to occupy any trailer within the Village for more
than 90 days in each twelve-month period, except as provided in Chapter
14.12 of this title, and except that, upon a showing and proof that there
exists in the community a shortage of adequate housing facilities, additional
stays of 60 days may be granted as an emergency provision, provided that
this time limitation shall not apply to the licensee of a trailer camp or his
bona fide employees so as to prevent their remaining on the camp premises
at all times.
Chapter 14.44
MANAGEMENT
§ 14.44.010. Office; posting of license.
In every trailer camp there shall be located the office of the attendant or
person in charge of the camp. A copy of the camp license and of this title
shall be posted therein, and the camp register shall at all times be kept in
the office.
§ 14.44.020. Duties of management.
It is made the duty of the attendant or person in charge, together with the
licensee, to:
A. Keep a register of all guests, to be open at all times to inspection by
state, federal and local officials, which shall show for all guests:
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code
Adoption)]
1. Names and addresses;
2. Number of children of school age;
3. State of legal residence;
4. Dates of entrance and departure;
5. License numbers of all trailers and towing or other vehicles;
6. States issuing such licenses;
7. Purpose of stay in camp;
8. Place of last location and length of stay;
9. Place of employment of each occupant.
B. Maintain the camp in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all
times;
§ 14.40.010 CODE ADOPTION § 14.44.020
1.01:389
Chapter 14.48
APPLICABILITY OF STATE CODES
§ 14.48.010. Applicability of plumbing, electrical and building
codes. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code
Adoption)]
All plumbing, electrical, building and other work on or at any camp licensed
under this title shall be in accordance with the ordinances of the Village
and the requirements of the State Plumbing, Electrical and Building Codes.
Licenses and permits granted under this title grant no right to erect or
repair any structure, to do any plumbing work or to do any electrical work.
Chapter 14.52
MONTHLY PARKING FEE
§ 14.52.010. Monthly parking fee.
There is imposed on each owner or operator of a trailer camp licensed
under this title a monthly parking permit fee to be determined in
accordance with § 66.0435(3)(c), Wis. Stats., on each occupied nonexempt
trailer which shall have been parked in such camp at any time during the
month. It shall be the full and complete responsibility of the licensee to
collect the proper amount from each trailer and to pay to the Village Clerk
such parking permit fees on or before the 10th day of the month following
the month for which such fees are due in accordance with the terms of this
title and the statutes of the state and such regulations as the Director of
Administrative Services may promulgate.
Chapter 14.56
PENALTIES
C. Ensure that the provisions of this title are complied with and enforced,
and report promptly to the proper authorities any violations of this title
or any other violations of law which may come to his attention;
D. Report to the Village Health Inspector all cases of persons or animals
affected or suspected of being affected with any communicable disease;
E. Maintain, in convenient places approved by the Fire Chief, hand fire
extinguishers in the ratio of one to each eight units;
F. Collect the monthly parking permit fee provided for in § 14.52.010 of
this title. A book shall be kept showing the names of persons paying
such service charges and the amount paid;
G. Prohibit the lighting of open fires on the premises.
§ 14.44.020 GRAFTON CODE § 14.56.010
1.01:390
§ 14.56.010. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provisions of this title shall, upon conviction
thereof, forfeit not less than $25 nor more than $100 and the costs of
prosecution. In the event of a failure to pay such forfeiture, where no
showing of indigency is made, the defendant may be imprisoned for not
more than 90 days, as the court deems fit, or until such judgment is sooner
paid. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Title 15: Equal Opportunities In Housing
Chapter 15.04
STATUTE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE
§ 15.04.010. Prevention and removal of discrimination.
The Village Board of the Village of Grafton hereby adopts § 106.50, Wis.
Stats., as amended, and all subsequent amendments thereto. The officials
and employees of the Village of Grafton shall assist in the orderly prevention
and removal of all discrimination in housing within the Village of Grafton
by implementing the authority and enforcement procedures set forth in
§ 106.50, Wis. Stats. The Village Clerk shall maintain forms for complaints
to be filed under § 106.50, Wis. Stats., and shall assist any person alleging a
violation thereof in the Village of Grafton to file a complaint thereunder with
the Wisconsin Department of Workforce Development Equal Rights Division
for enforcement of § 106.50, Wis. Stats.
Title 16: Buildings and Construction
Chapter 16.04
BUILDING CODE
§ 16.04.010. Document adopted.
The Wisconsin Uniform Building Code has been adopted by the Village, and
copies of the code are attached to Ordinance A-358-78, on file in the Village
Clerk's office.
§ 16.04.015. Amendments adopted. [Amended by Ord. No. A-003-93,
1993; Ord. No. 006. Series 1997; Ord. No. 012, Series 2000]
A. Future amendments to the Wisconsin Uniform Building Code are
adopted and shall become a part of this title.
1. Section 30.55 of the Wisconsin Uniform Building Code is hereby
deleted in it entirety. [Added by Ord. No. 004, Series 2006]
§ 14.56.010 CODE ADOPTION § 16.04.015
1.01:391
§ 16.04.030. Permit fees. [Amended by Ord. No. 011, Series 2003;
Ord. No. 004, Series 2004; 3-17-2014 by Ord. No. 007-2014;
7-1-2019 by Ord. No. 012-2019]
§ 16.04.040. Delegated agent. [Amended by Ord. No. 004, 2004;
8-20-2012 by Ord. No. 009-2012; at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
The following Wisconsin Administrative Code chapters, their referenced
codes and standards, and subsequent revisions are adopted for municipal
enforcement by the Building Inspector, who shall be certified as a
commercial building inspector by the Wisconsin Department of Safety and
Professional Services. Wisconsin Administrative Code Chs. SPS 361-365,
Wisconsin Commercial Building Code, and Chapters SPS 375-379, Existing
Building Code, are hereby adopted by reference.
§ 16.04.050. Inspections. [Amended by Ord. No. 027, 2004;
8-20-1012 by Ord. No. 009-2012]
Upon the completion of the construction in or on any building, and before
any construction is to be hidden from doing the same, to notify the Building
Inspector. The inspection shall be made in accord with the provisions of
B. Amendments. The following sections of the Wisconsin Uniform Building
Code shall be amended.
1. Section 30.03(3.)(d.) shall be amended to require a roofing permit
when more than 10% of the roof covering is replaced.
C. Sections created. The following sections of the Wisconsin Uniform
Building Code shall be created:
1. Section 30.05(2.)(c.), Expiration of Applications. Applications for
permits, which exceed 30 days from the date of issue, shall be void
and reapplication shall be required.
2. Section 30.05(1.)(i.). Permits are required for any structural and
nonstructural work that exceeds $500 market value.
3. Section 30.40(3.), Spas. Access to all outdoor spas shall be
regulated as indicated in Section 30.40(2)(b)1. and 2. or by a
keyed, lockable cover designed and used to prevent access when
the spa is not in use or is left unattended.
A. The Building Inspector shall maintain a Schedule of Permit Fees of the
Wisconsin Uniform Building Code. Permit fees shall be updated as
needed and can be obtained through the Building Inspection
Department.
B. A fee shall be required for a permit to an individual doing any work on
or in any building owned by the Village, and a permit shall be procured
before the commencement of any work on or in such building.
§ 16.04.015 GRAFTON CODE § 16.04.050
1.01:392
§ SPS 320.10, Wis. Adm. Code, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
If upon inspection it is found that the construction is in compliance with
this chapter, the Building Inspector shall authorize the concealment of the
work. If the construction is incomplete or not strictly in accordance with
this chapter, orders shall be issued to the individual, firm or corporation
conducting the same to make the necessary changes or additions within
30 days. However, if it is determined that an imminent lack of safety or
current danger exists, the Building Inspector may issue a forty-eight-hour
correction order. No individual, firm or corporation shall conceal any work
before inspection or fail to comply with any order of the Building Inspector.
Upon completion of the work in a building, a final inspection shall be
required. If the work is not complete, the Building Inspector shall notify
the individual doing the work of any additional work to be done. If such
work is not done within 30 days after such notice, any individual, firm or
corporation failing to comply with the order of the Building Inspector shall
be fined according to Chapter 1.12, Citations, of the Code of the Village
of Grafton. No permit shall be issued until all fees due and payable for
inspections have been paid and all lawful orders of the Building Inspector
complied with.
§ 16.04.060. Occupancy inspections and permits required.
No person, firm, business or corporation shall occupy any owned, rented
or leased building, structure, premises or space, except residential
occupancies, without first having obtained an occupancy inspection and
permit. The Building Inspector may waive the occupancy inspection if it has
been determined that the premises has been inspected within the previous
twelve-month period.
§ 16.04.065. Architectural Review Board approvals. [Amended by
Ord. No. 002, 2007]
Except in the case of approved residential developments with master plans,
no Architectural Review Board one- or two-family building plan approval
shall be valid for a period longer than six months unless a building permit
is issued and construction is actually begun within that period and is
thereafter continuously pursued to completion. An extension of time may be
approved by the Architectural Review Board in six-month increments.
§ 16.04.070. Inspections for Class B and Class B combination
intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage licenses.
Section 5.16.050B.1 and 2 of the Municipal Code shall become a part of this
chapter by reference.
§ 16.04.080. Prohibited practices.
It shall be unlawful to:
A. Permit construction waste or debris generated during the construction
process to litter or remain on the construction site uncontained.
§ 16.04.050 CODE ADOPTION § 16.04.080
1.01:393
Suitable containers are portable dumpsters or containment within the
structure under construction. [Amended by Ord. No. 006, 1997]
B. Permit access to any construction site without a graveled or paved
access drive in place, sufficient in length and width to prevent sediment
from being tracked onto Village streets. Material deposited onto Village
streets shall be removed by the end of the workday. [Amended by Ord.
No. 006, 1997]
C. Permit the burial or burning of construction waste or debris.
[Amended by Ord. No. 006, 1997]
D. Interfere with the Building Inspector in the discharge of his duties.
E. Construct, install, operate, locate or use an outdoor wood furnace
which is marketed for primary or supplemental hearing of, or is used to
provide heat to, any building or structure or equipment within the
Village. [Amended by Ord. No. 004, Series 2006]
F. Conduct work on a one- or two-family structure without first having
obtained a license, certification or registration as required by Ch. SPS
305, Wis. Adm. Code. Exception: A homeowner, after obtaining the
required permits, may conduct work on a one- or two-family structure
that is owned by said homeowner without obtaining a license,
certification or registration as required by Ch. SPS 305, Wis. Adm.
Code, unless further restricted by Chapter 16.08 or 16.12 of this title.
[Amended by Ord. No. 002, Series 2007; 8-20-1012 by Ord. No.
009-2012]
G. Conduct construction, plumbing, electrical, heating, ventilating or airconditioning
work on a site or structure without having made total
payment of all applicable impact or assessment fees which are due to
the Village within 14 days of the issuance of any applicable permits.
Stop-work orders and citations shall be used for enforcement of this
section. [Amended by Ord. No. 002, 2007]
H. Engage in the construction business or offer to engage in the
construction business that affects public buildings, places of
employment and one- and two-family dwellings, public swimming pools,
and water attractions unless the person or entity holds a registration
issued by the Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services
as a registered building contractor. "Construction business" means a
trade that installs, alters or repairs any building element, component,
material or device that is regulated under the Commercial Building
Code, Chs. SPS 360 to 366; the Uniform Dwelling Code, Chs. SPS 320 to
325; the Electrical Code, Ch. SPS 316; the Plumbing Code, Chs. SPS
381 to 387; or the Public Swimming Pools and Water Attractions Code,
Ch. SPS 390, Wis. Adm. Code. The term does not include the delivery of
building supplies or materials or the manufacture of a building product
not on the building site. [Amended by Ord. No. 007, 2009;
8-20-1012 by Ord. No. 009-2012]
§ 16.04.080 GRAFTON CODE § 16.04.080
1.01:394
§ 16.04.090. Unsafe devices and systems. [Amended by Ord. No.
A-003-93, 1993]
The Building Inspector shall have the authority to seal and tag unsafe
devices or systems or order the disconnection of unsafe devices or systems
which are found to be in an unsafe condition. No individual, firm or
corporation shall reconnect any device or system thus sealed and tagged or
disconnected until verbal or written authorization is given by the Building
Inspector. It shall be unlawful to remove, alter or tamper with any device or
system which has been sealed and tagged or disconnected by orders of the
Building Inspector. Use of any such sealed or tagged device or system or
removal of any seal or tag shall be unlawful under penalty of this chapter.
§ 16.04.100. Underground tanks.
§ 16.04.110. Violations and penalties. [Amended by Ord. No. 004,
2004]
In addition to any other penalty imposed or restitution required, any person
who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
I. Allow the unmaintained exterior condition(s) of abandoned, unoccupied
or foreclosed structures, properties or premises to exist. The owner of
said abandoned, foreclosed structures, properties or premises will be
notified by certified mail or electronic means that said unmaintained
exterior conditions shall be removed or corrected within a specified
period of time by the Building Inspector. Should the exterior
condition(s) not be corrected within the specified period of time, the
Building Inspector or Police Chief, at his discretion, may issue a citation
for violation of this section or direct the Public Works Director to take
appropriate action to correct the conditions or hire/contract to correct
the conditions. Any costs incurred as a result of corrective action taken
will be paid by the owner or assessed as a special charge on the tax roll.
[Added 3-17-2014 by Ord. No. 007-2014]
A. Permit required. A permit shall be required for all tank servicing
activities, such as but not limited to removal out of service, installation,
abandonment, etc.
B. Permit application. A permit application shall be completed by the
certified installer/remover prior to permit issuance. All applicable
information shall be supplied as indicated on the application form as
well as any other information required by the Grafton Fire Department
or Building Inspector.
C. Tank servicing. Tank servicing activities shall be conducted under the
immediate supervision of the Grafton Fire Department and/or statecertified
tank inspector and in accord with the provisions of Ch. ATCP
93, Flammable, combustible and hazardous liquids, Wis. Adm. Code.
[Amended by Ord. No. A-003-93, 1993; at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
§ 16.04.080 CODE ADOPTION § 16.04.110
1.01:395
thereof, forfeit not less than $200 nor more than $1,000 together with the
costs of prosecution and, in default in payment of such forfeiture and costs
of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until the forfeiture and
costs are paid, but not exceeding 60 days.
Chapter 16.08
ELECTRICAL CODE
§ 16.08.010. Title. [Amended by Ord. No. A-003-93, 1993]
This chapter shall be known as the "Electrical Code of the Village of
Grafton" and will be referred to in this chapter as "this code" or "this
chapter."
§ 16.08.015. Documents adopted. [Amended by Ord. No. 006, 1997;
8-20-1012 by Ord. No. 009-2012]
The National Electrical Code latest edition, Chs. SPS 305 and 316, Wis.
Adm. Code, and all the amendments as prescribed by the Department of
Safety and Professional Services (DSPS), are hereby adopted.
§ 16.08.020. Purpose. [Amended by Ord. No. A-003-93, 1993]
The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard life and property by regulating
and providing for the inspection of the installation and maintenance of
electrical wiring, equipment, devices and systems, and providing for the
licensing of individuals, firms and corporations undertaking electrical work,
and fixing a penalty for violation of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 16.08.030. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. No. A-003-93, 1993]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms and words shall be
interpreted as having the following meanings.
ELECTRICAL SYSTEM — All wires, equipment or devices installed for the
purpose of conducting, supplying or safeguarding electrical current.
ELECTRICAL WORK — Any act in connection with the installing, altering or
maintaining of an electrical system, which act ordinarily requires the use of
tools.
WIRING — Includes the wires and other devices incident to the means for
safely conducting or supplying electrical current.
§ 16.08.040. Electrical Inspector office created; qualifications.
[Amended by Ord. No. 004, 2004]
A. There is created the office of Electrical Inspector of the Village.
B. The office of Electrical Inspector shall be held by a suitable and
competent person(s), knowledgeable and well versed in approved
§ 16.04.110 GRAFTON CODE § 16.08.040
1.01:396
§ 16.08.050. Electrical Inspector duties.
The Electrical Inspector shall have the general management and control
of all matters pertaining to electrical inspection and shall enforce all state
laws and Village ordinances relating thereto. Where requirements of the
state laws and regulations and the provisions of this chapter conflict, the
stricter requirements shall govern, except one- and two-family residences
built after June 1, 1980. It shall be unlawful to interfere with the Electrical
Inspector in the discharge of his duties.
§ 16.08.060. Recordkeeping. [Amended by Ord. No. A-002-92, 1992]
There shall be kept by the Village a complete record of all applications
and permits, regularly numbered in the order of their issue, and of all
inspections made and other official work performed under the provisions
of this chapter, so arranged as to afford prompt information concerning
electrical installations.
§ 16.08.070. Right of entry.
The Electrical Inspector or an authorized agent shall have the power and
authority at all reasonable hours, for any proper purpose, to enter any
public or private building or premises in the discharge of official duties,
or for the purpose of making any inspection or test of the electrical wires,
equipment or devices contained therein. The Inspector or his agent shall be
given prompt access to any premises upon request made to the owner or
person in immediate charge of the premises.
methods of electrical construction and the statutes of the state relating
to electrical work, the rules and regulations issued by the Department
of Safety and Professional Services and the Public Service Commission
of Wisconsin, and the National Electrical Code. This person(s) shall also
be a state-certified Electrical Inspector as required by the Department
of Safety and Professional Services. [Amended by Ord. No. 027,
2004, Ord. No. A-003-93, 1993; 8-20-1012 by Ord. No. 009-2012]
C. The Electrical Inspector shall be appointed by the Village Board for a
term of two years or until a successor shall be duly appointed and
qualified. The Electrical Inspector shall receive as compensation a fee
as hereinafter provided for as the Village Board shall from time to time
determine. All supplies necessary for this office shall be furnished by
the Village. The Electrical Inspector shall be subject to removal from
office at the pleasure of the Village Board.
D. The Electrical Inspector shall not be involved in any circumstances or
activities which could be construed as a conflict of interest as defined in
§ 2.46.050 in the Ethics Chapter of the Municipal Code.
§ 16.08.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.08.080
1.01:397
§ 16.08.080. Discontinuance of electrical operation. [Amended by
Ord. No. A-003-93, 1993]
The Electrical Inspector shall have the authority to seal and tag unsafe
electrical devices and systems or order the disconnection of all electrical
service from any electrical system which is found to be in an unsafe
condition and to order the disconnection of electric service in cases of
emergency and where such electrical currents are dangerous to life or
property or may interfere with the work of the Fire Department. No
individual, firm or corporation shall reconnect any device or system thus
sealed and tagged or disconnected until verbal or written authorization is
given by the Electrical Inspector. Use of any such sealed or tagged device
or system or removal of any seal or tag shall be unlawful under penalty of
this chapter.
§ 16.08.090. Periodic inspections.
§ 16.08.100. Occupancy inspections and permits required.
[Amended by Ord. No. 003-93, 1993]
No person, firm, business or corporation shall occupy any owned, rented
or leased building, structure, premises or space, except residential
occupancies, without first having obtained an occupancy inspection and
permit. The Electrical Inspector may waive the occupancy inspection if
it has been determined that the premises has been inspected within the
previous twelve-month period.
§ 16.08.110. Inspections for Class B and Class B combination
intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage licenses.
Section 5.16.050B.1 and 2 of the Municipal Code shall become a part of this
chapter by reference.
A. The Electrical Inspector shall periodically visit and inspect such places
especially occupied by the public, such as places of amusement and
places of assemblage, and make a thorough examination of all electrical
wires, equipment and devices maintained or installed, and where found
to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition, the individual, firm or
corporation owning, using, operating or installing same shall be notified
to place them in a safe condition. The necessary repairs or changes
shall be completed within 30 days. However, if it is determined that an
imminent lack of safety or current danger exists, the Electrical
Inspector may issue a forty-eight-hour correction order. After the
receipt of such notice, each day which shall elapse after the expiration
of such period shall constitute a separate offense, and the Electrical
Inspector is authorized to order the discontinuance of electrical service
to such defective electrical system until it has been repaired, removed
or changed as directed by the Electrical Inspector. Failure to obey any
such order shall subject the individual, firm or corporation to
disconnection and the penalties provided in this chapter.
§ 16.08.080 GRAFTON CODE § 16.08.120
1.01:398
§ 16.08.120. (Reserved)22
§ 16.08.130. Permit required; exceptions. [Amended by Ord. No.
A-029-93, 1993]
§ 16.08.140. Permit fees. [Amended by Ord. No. A-029-19, 1993;
3-21-2016 by Ord. No. 005-2016; 7-1-2019 by Ord. No. 012-2019]
§ 16.08.150. Temporary work.
A permit for temporary work shall not exceed 90 days unless approved by
the Electrical Inspector. Permits for temporary work may be granted by
the Electrical Inspector for installation of open work and exposed wiring,
lights, power for building operations, display, decorative lighting, etc., for
use for a limited period, subject to discontinuance and complete removal at
expiration, and subject to condemnation and revocation within such period.
§ 16.08.160. Emergency work. [Amended 9-16-2019 by Ord. No.
016-2019]
In emergency work, the individual, firm or corporation doing or causing
such work to be done shall report the same to the Electrical Inspector
immediately after beginning work, and shall obtain a permit for such work
no later than the next business day after commencement of the installation.
A. No electrical wiring or other electrical equipment shall be installed,
altered or repaired without first securing a permit. The applications for
such permit shall state clearly the work planned and its location. Any
work requiring a building permit shall require an electrical permit,
providing that electrical work is to be done.
B. Exceptions.
1. Any individual, firm or corporation manufacturing or repairing
electrical apparatus and equipment and employing a competent
electrician shall not be required to have a permit.
2. A permit may not be required for minor repair work, as determined
by the Electrical Inspector.
A. The Building Inspector shall maintain a Schedule of Permit Fees of the
Wisconsin Uniform Building Code. Permit fees shall be updated as
needed and can be obtained through the Building Inspection
Department.
B. A fee shall be required for a permit issued to a licensee for doing any
electrical work on or in any building owned by the Village, and a permit
shall be procured before the commencement of any work on or in such
building.
22.Editor's Note: Original § 16.08.120, Electrical license, as amended, was repealed at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption).
§ 16.08.120 CODE ADOPTION § 16.08.170
1.01:399
§ 16.08.170. Inspections. [Amended by Ord. No. 027, Series 2004;
8-20-1012 by Ord. No. 009-2012]
Upon the completion of the wiring in or on any building, and before any
wiring is to be hidden from view, it shall be the duty of the individual,
firm or corporation doing the same to notify the Electrical Inspector. The
inspection shall be made in accord with the provisions of § SPS 320.10, Wis.
Adm. Code, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. If upon inspection
it is found the installation is in compliance with this chapter and does
not constitute a hazard to life or property, the Electrical Inspector shall
authorize the concealment of the wiring or connection for electrical service.
If the installation is incomplete or not strictly in accordance with this
chapter, orders shall be issued to the individual, firm or corporation
installing the same to remove all hazards and make the necessary changes
or additions within 30 days. However, if it is determined that an imminent
lack of safety or current danger exists, the Electrical Inspector may issue
a forty-eight-hour correction order. No individual, firm or corporation shall
conceal any electrical work before inspection or fail to comply with any
order of the Electrical Inspector. Upon completion of the electrical work
in a building, a final inspection shall be required. If the installation is not
complete, the Electrical Inspector shall notify the individual doing the work
of any additional work to be done. If such work is not done within 30 days
after such notice, any individual, firm or corporation failing to comply with
the order of the Electrical Inspector shall be fined according to Chapter
1.12, Issuance of Citations, of the Code of the Village of Grafton. No permit
shall be issued to any licensee until all fees due and payable for electrical
inspection have been paid and all lawful orders of the Electrical Inspector
complied with.
§ 16.08.180. Certificate/affidavit of inspection. [Amended by Ord.
No. 004, Series 2004]
Electrical service shall not be energized by the local utility until such
service installation has been inspected. Upon inspection, a written
certificate of inspection will be submitted to the local utility, and only after
such certificate has been received may the electrical service be energized.
In occupied buildings where a permit for lighting fixtures has been issued,
the Electrical Inspector may authorize the installation of meters for electric
service after wiring has been inspected and approved.
§ 16.08.190. Stop-work orders. [Amended by Ord. No. A-003-93,
1993]
The Electrical Inspector may order work stopped on the construction,
installation, alterations or repair of wiring or electrical work when such
work is conducted in violation of this chapter. Work so stopped shall not
be resumed except with written permission of the Electrical Inspector,
provided that, if the stop-work order is oral, it shall be followed by a written
order within a reasonable period of time. Removal of any such order is
unlawful.
§ 16.08.170 GRAFTON CODE § 16.08.200
1.01:400
§ 16.08.200. Construction requirements.
§ 16.08.210. (Reserved)23
§ 16.08.220. (Reserved)24
§ 16.08.230. Violations and penalties. [Amended by Ord. No.
A-029-93, 1993; Ord. No. 004, Series 2004]
In addition to any other penalty imposed or restitution required, any person
who violates any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
forfeit not less than $200 nor more than $1,000 together with the costs
of prosecution and, in default in payment of such forfeiture and costs of
prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until the forfeiture and
costs are paid, but not exceeding 60 days.
Chapter 16.12
PLUMBING CODE
§ 16.12.010. State regulations adopted. [Amended by Ord. No. 006,
Series 1997; Ord. No. 004, Series 2004]
§ 16.12.020. Plumbing defined.
In this chapter, "plumbing" means and includes:
A. Generally. No certificates of inspection shall be issued unless the
electric light, power or heating installation and all other electrical
apparatus connected with it are in strict conformity with the provisions
of this chapter.
B. Electric signs. Electrically illuminated signs shall not be hung or
erected until after inspection and approval by the Electrical Inspector,
unless such signs have otherwise been approved.
A. Chapter 145, Wis. Stats.; the State Plumbing Code, Chs. SPS 381
through 384 and SPS 305, Wis. Adm. Code, are adopted and by
reference made a part of this chapter with the same force and effect as
though set out in full. Failure to comply with any of the provisions of
such regulations shall constitute a violation of this chapter, punishable
according to the penalties provided in this chapter. [Amended
8-20-1012 by Ord. No. 009-2012
B. A copy of the State Plumbing Code shall be on file in the offices of the
Plumbing Inspector.
23.Editor's Note: Former § 16.08.210, Revocation of license, as amended, was repealed
3-17-2014 by Ord. No. 007-2014.
24.Editor's Note: Former § 16.08.220, Board of Electrical Examiners, as amended, was
repealed 3-17-2014 by Ord. No. 007-2014.
§ 16.08.200 CODE ADOPTION § 16.12.020
1.01:401
§ 16.12.030. Plumbing Inspector office created. [Amended by Ord.
No. 004, Series 2004; 8-20-1012 by Ord. No. 009-2012]
The office of Plumbing Inspector shall be held by a suitable and competent
person, knowledgeable and well-versed in approved methods of plumbing
construction and the statutes of the state relating to plumbing work, the
rules and regulations issued by the Department of Safety and Professional
Services. This person shall also be a state-certified Plumbing Inspector as
required by the Department of Safety and Professional Services.
§ 16.12.040. Plumbing Inspector duties.
The Plumbing Inspector shall have the general management and control
of all matters pertaining to plumbing inspection and shall enforce all state
laws and Village ordinances relating thereto. It shall be unlawful to interfere
with the Plumbing Inspector in the discharge of his duties.
§ 16.12.050. Right of entry.
A. All piping, fixtures, appliances, equipment, devices and appurtenances
in connection with the water supply, water distribution and drainage
systems, including hot water storage tanks, water softeners, water
heaters and treatment devices connected with such water and drainage
systems, and the installation thereof;
B. The construction, connection or installation of any drain or waste piping
system from the outside or proposed outside foundation walls of any
building to the mains or other sewerage system terminal within bounds
of or beneath an area subject to easement for highway purpose,
including private domestic sewerage treatment and disposal systems,
and the alteration of any such systems, drains or waste piping;
C. The water service piping from the outside or proposed outside
foundation walls of any building to the main or other water utility
service terminal within bounds of or beneath an area subject to
easement for highway purposes and its connections;
D. The water pressure systems other than municipal systems, as provided
in Ch. 281, Wis. Stats.;
E. A plumbing and drainage system so designed, and vent piping so
installed as to keep the air within the system in free circulation and
movement; to prevent with a margin of safety unequal air pressure of
such force as might blow, siphon or affect trap seals or retard the
discharge from plumbing fixtures or permit sewer air to escape into the
building; to prohibit cross-connection, contamination or pollution of the
potable water supply and distribution systems; and to provide an
adequate supply of water to properly serve, cleanse and operate all
fixtures, equipment, appurtenances and appliances served by the
plumbing system.
§ 16.12.020 GRAFTON CODE § 16.12.050
1.01:402
§ 16.12.060. Plumbing permits.
The Plumbing Inspector or his authorized agent shall prepare suitable forms
for permit applications and permits, shall take applications and issue to
qualified applicants permits as required for all work contemplated by this
chapter, and shall maintain suitable records of the permits issued.
§ 16.12.070. Recordkeeping.
There shall be kept by the Village a complete record of all applications
and permits, regularly numbered in the order of their issue, and of all
inspections made and other official work performed under the provisions
of this chapter, so arranged as to afford prompt information concerning
plumbing installations.
§ 16.12.080. Stop-work orders. [Amended by Ord. No. A-003-93,
1993]
The Plumbing Inspector may order work stopped on the construction,
installation, alterations or repair of plumbing when such work is being done
in violation of this chapter. Work so stopped shall not be resumed, except
with written permission of the Plumbing Inspector, provided that, if the
stop-work order is an oral one, it shall be followed by a written order within
a reasonable period of time. Removal of any such order is unlawful.
§ 16.12.090. Plumbing permits required.
No work contemplated by this chapter shall be started until a permit
therefor has been obtained from the Plumbing Inspector or his authorized
agent, provided that no permit shall be required for minor repairs to faucets
or the removal of stoppages in solid and waste pipes.
§ 16.12.100. Plumbing permit application.
The application shall be in writing upon forms which the Plumbing
Inspector shall provide and shall include the name of the owner and the
description of the property on which the work is to be done, along with such
pertinent information as the Plumbing Inspector may require, and shall
A. The Plumbing Inspector or an authorized agent shall have the power
and authority at all reasonable hours for any proper purpose to enter
any public or private building or premises in the discharge of official
duties or for the purpose of making any inspection or test of the
plumbing equipment or devices contained therein. The inspector or his
agent shall be given prompt access to any premises upon request made
to the owner or person in immediate charge of the premises.
B. If consent for entry to personal or real properties which are not public
buildings or to portions of public buildings which are not open to the
public for inspection purposes has been denied, the Plumbing Inspector
shall obtain a special inspection warrant under § 66.0119, Wis. Stats.
§ 16.12.050 CODE ADOPTION § 16.12.100
1.01:403
state that the property owner and the applicant will be bound by and subject
to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 16.12.110. Permit issuance, term, suspension and revocation.
When the Plumbing Inspector is satisfied that the work proposed by the
applicant can be done in conformity with the provisions of this chapter,
and after the appropriate fees have been paid to him, he shall issue the
permit. Such permit shall be good for the continuous performance of the
work named thereon. A permit shall automatically expire when work ceases
for a period of 60 days without good and reasonable cause for same and
shall automatically expire on completion of the work for which it was issued,
provided that the Plumbing Inspector may, upon notice, suspend or revoke
such permit for violation of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 16.12.130. Appeals for failure to issue, suspension and revocation.
Any person directly interested who is aggrieved by the decision of the
Plumbing Inspector to refuse to issue a permit or to suspend, or revoke
such permit, or to have work stopped under § 16.12.080 of this chapter
may obtain review of such determination under the administrative review
procedures set forth in Chapter 2.38, Administrative Review, of the Code of
the Village of Grafton.
§ 16.12.140. Permit fees. [Amended 3-21-2016 by Ord. No.
005-2016; 7-1-2019 by Ord. No. 012-2019]
§ 16.12.170. Street openings.
A street opening permit must be applied for and received in accordance
with Chapter 11.16, Street and Sidewalk Openings, of this Code, before
excavating in any street, alley or other public way to repair, alter or install
plumbing, and the applicant must pay the appropriate fee as provided in
Chapter 11.16, Street and Sidewalk Openings, and shall comply with all
regulations.
§ 16.12.190. Sump pumps and building storm sewers.
A. The Building Inspector shall maintain a Schedule of Permit Fees of the
Wisconsin Uniform Building Code. Permit fees shall be updated as
needed and can be obtained through the Building Inspection
Department.
B. A fee shall be required for a permit issued to an individual doing any
work on or in any building owned by the Village, and a permit shall be
procured before the commencement of any work on or in such building.
A. In new subdivisions or planned unit developments where a storm sewer
is installed, building storm sewers shall also be installed to receive
sump pump discharges.
§ 16.12.100 GRAFTON CODE § 16.12.190
1.01:404
§ 16.12.200. Reports to Department. [Amended by Ord. No. 004,
Series 2004; 8-20-1012 by Ord. No. 009-2012]
Section 145.04(3), Wis. Stats., requires reports by city or metropolitan
sewerage district authorities to the Department of Safety and Professional
Services of failure of state-licensed plumbers to qualify as journeymen or
master plumbers and of willful violations of plumbing regulations.
§ 16.12.220. Emergency work.
In emergency work, the individual, firm or corporation doing or causing
such work to be done shall report the same to the Plumbing Inspector
immediately after beginning work and shall obtain a permit for such work
within 24 hours of the commencement of such work, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays. All work shall be done in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 16.12.230. Inspections. [Amended by Ord. No. A-003-93, 1993;
Ord. No. 006, Series 1997; Ord. No. 027, Series 2004]
Upon the completion of the plumbing in or on any building and before any
plumbing is to be hidden from view, it shall be the duty of the individual,
firm or corporation doing the same to notify the Plumbing Inspector. The
inspection shall be made by the end of the next workday of the time such
notice is received, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. However, in
the case of a one- or two-family home, the inspection shall be conducted
in accord with the provisions of § SPS 320.10, Wis. Adm. Code, excluding
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. If upon inspection it is found that the
installation is in compliance with this chapter and does not constitute
a hazard to life or property, the Plumbing Inspector shall authorize the
concealment of the plumbing. If the installation is incomplete or not strictly
in accordance with this chapter, orders shall be issued to the individual,
firm or corporation installing the same to remove all hazards and defects
and make the necessary changes or additions within 30 days. However, if
it is determined that an imminent lack of safety or current danger exists,
the Plumbing Inspector may issue a forty-eight-hour correction order. No
individual, firm or corporation shall conceal any plumbing work before
inspection or fail to comply with any order of the Plumbing Inspector. Upon
completion of the plumbing work in a building, a final inspection shall be
required. If the installation is not complete, the Plumbing Inspector shall
notify the individual doing the work of any additional work to be done. If
B. Roof water drainage into the building storm sewer system in
conjunction with the sump-pump-discharged water is prohibited.
C. Sump pump and roof water drainage may be discharged into one
common building storm sewer pipe only after the Village Department of
Public Works has determined that the municipal storm sewer system
has the capacity to allow this connection. If allowed, the building storm
sewer and riser shall then be sized accordingly.
§ 16.12.190 CODE ADOPTION § 16.12.230
1.01:405
such work is not done within 30 days after such notice, any individual, firm
or corporation failing to comply with the order of the Plumbing Inspector
shall be fined according to Chapter 1.12, Issuance of Citations, of the Code
of the Village of Grafton. No permit shall be issued to any plumber until all
fees due and payable for plumbing inspection have been paid and all lawful
orders of the Plumbing Inspector complied with.
§ 16.12.240. Occupancy inspections and permits required.
[Amended by Ord. No. A-003-93, 1993]
No person, firm, business or corporation shall occupy any owned, rented
or leased building, structure, premises or space, except residential
occupancies, without first having obtained an occupancy inspection and
permit. The Plumbing Inspector may waive the occupancy inspection if
it has been determined that the premises has been inspected within the
previous twelve-month period.
§ 16.12.250. Inspections for Class B and Class B combination
intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage licenses.
Section 5.16.050B.1 and 2 of the Municipal Code shall become a part of this
chapter by reference.
§ 16.12.260. Unsafe devices or systems. [Amended by Ord. No.
A-003-93, 1993]
The Plumbing Inspector shall have the authority to seal and tag unsafe
devices or systems or order the disconnection of all water service from any
plumbing device or system which is found to be in an unsafe condition. No
individual, firm or corporation shall reconnect any device or system thus
sealed and tagged or disconnected until verbal or written authorization is
given by the Plumbing Inspector. It shall be unlawful to remove, alter or
tamper with any device or system which has been sealed and tagged or
disconnected by orders of the Plumbing Inspector. Use of any such sealed
or tagged device or system or removal of any seal or tag shall be unlawful
under penalty of this chapter.
§ 16.12.270. Violations and penalties. [Amended by Ord. No.
A-029-93, 1993; Ord. No. 004, Series 2004; at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the general penalty in Ch. 1.08 of this
Code.
Chapter 16.20
PRIVATE ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 16.12.230 GRAFTON CODE § 16.20.010
1.01:406
§ 16.20.010. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ALARM SYSTEMS — Any device designed for the detection of an
unauthorized entry on the premises or for alerting others of the commission
of an unlawful act, or both, or for the detection of a fire, and when actuated,
gives a signal, visual and/or audible, or transmits or causes to be
transmitted a signal.
COMMERCIAL BUILDING — All structures whose primary use is not as a
dwelling and more than 50% of the floor space is not used as a dwelling.
FALSE ALARM — A signal from an alarm system, a telephone call to or
other contact with a fire or police department, resulting in response by the
department when an emergency situation does not exist.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity.
PRIVATE RESIDENCE — Any structure that is primarily used as a dwelling.
RESIDENTIAL ALARM SYSTEM — A system that gives a signal either
visual, audible or by electronic means, either within the immediate area of
the structure or to a remote or central receiving station other than directly
to the Police Department console.
§ 16.20.020. Permits for industrial, commercial and residential
systems.
A. A permit shall be required for each residential, industrial or commercial
alarm on premises within the Village on the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter or installed after such effective date.
B. A twenty-five-dollar permit fee shall be paid at the time of filing an
application for permit.
C. As to those alarm systems now on the premises in the Village, a permit
shall be obtained within 90 days after the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter. As to the alarm system installed after
the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, a permit
shall be received before the system is installed. A permit under this
chapter is not required for an alarm system which gives a signal, visual
or audible, or both, solely within the interior of the building in which it
is located.
D. The issuing authority shall be the Chief of Police.
E. Applications for all permits required in this chapter shall be filed with
the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall prescribe the form of
application and request such information as is necessary to evaluate
and act upon the permit application. The Chief of Police shall deny a
permit if the alarm system for which it is sought does not comply with
§ 16.20.010 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.020
1.01:407
§ 16.20.030. Requirements.
§ 16.20.040. Prohibitions.
§ 16.20.050. Prohibited systems.
this chapter, the application has not been properly completed, or no
filing fee has been submitted.
F. Any person required by this chapter to have a permit, who has been
denied such a permit by the Chief of Police, shall have a right to appeal
that decision to the Village Board. The procedure shall be the same as
set forth in § 16.20.060C.
A. All alarm systems installed within the Village shall have the
Underwriters' Laboratory approval and be Class A approved and be in
compliance with National Fire Protection Association regulations.
B. The Chief of Police may grant an exception to this requirement if the
alarm system is under testing by the Underwriters' Laboratory; in
which case, the alarm system can be installed for a period not to exceed
six months and shall then be removed or disconnected, unless an
extension of time is granted by the Chief of Police or Underwriters'
Laboratory approval has been received.
C. Any person or corporation owning, leasing or operating a private alarm
system shall maintain by contract a maintenance service agreement,
and such equipment shall be inspected at regular intervals a minimum
of four times a year. The contract shall also make available during hours
such system is in operation, a representative to respond to the location
of the alarm, whenever transmitted. Such representative shall be
required to arrive within 60 minutes from the time of the original alarm.
D. All systems should have an alternate source of power in the event of a
public utility source interruption.
A. No person shall install an alarm system or use or possess an operative
alarm system without having a permit in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
B. No person owning, using or possessing any alarm system shall cause or
permit the giving of a false alarm, whether intentional, accidental or
otherwise.
A. Certain alarm systems include a dialer, so that when the system is
actuated the dialer automatically dials the police station using the
regular telephone lines and repeatedly gives its recorded message.
Such equipment shall be prohibited in the Village. An exception is made
for elevator emergency phones.
B. No person, firm or corporation shall use or cause to be used any
telephone or electronic device or attachment that automatically selects
§ 16.20.020 GRAFTON CODE § 16.20.050
1.01:408
§ 16.20.060. Revocation of permits and applications.
§ 16.20.070. Liability of Village.
It is understood that, by a request for application or permit and by the
subsequent issuance thereof, the Village shall be relieved of all liability as
a result of any action arising from the installation of or operation of or
response to any alarm system in the Village; and, further, the Chief of Police
a public trunk telephone line or the Police Department, Fire
Department or any other department, bureau, office, officer or
employee of the Village and then reproduces a prerecorded message to
report a burglary, fire or other emergency. However, such systems may
be installed if they are connected to telephone lines other than those
prohibited.
C. A system in operation on the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this chapter, which is in violation of this section, shall be modified so
that it is no longer in violation or be disconnected in operation not later
than 90 days after the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted,
unless otherwise given special permission by the Chief of Police.
A. Before a permit issued pursuant to this chapter or an application
received pursuant to this chapter may be revoked, a hearing must be
held before the Chief of Police. Notice setting forth the time, place and
nature of the hearing shall be sent by mail or delivered to the party at
the address shown on the permit or application not less than seven days
prior to such hearing.
B. The Chief of Police may revoke a permit on the following grounds:
1. The application for a permit contains a statement of a material fact,
which statement is false;
2. A licensee has repeatedly failed to comply with the provisions of
this chapter;
3. An alarm system repeatedly actuates false alarms;
4. Repeated delay in response to any alarm by service representative.
C. A person may appeal the decision of the Chief of Police by filing a
written notice of appeal with the Village Clerk within 10 days after the
decision. Such appeal shall be heard by the Village Trustees within 30
days after the filing of the appeal, and that body may affirm, amend or
reverse the decision or take other action deemed appropriate. An
appeal timely taken suspends the revocation until the Board of Trustees
gives its decision. The Village Clerk shall give written notice of the time
and place to the appellant. Such notice shall be given by registered or
certified mail or personal delivery not less than seven days before the
hearing. In conducting the hearing, the Village Board shall not be
limited by the technicals of evidence.
§ 16.20.050 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.070
1.01:409
of the Village shall also be relieved of any liability resulting from the lawful
disconnection of any alarm system in the Village.
§ 16.20.080. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
forfeit not less than $100 nor more than $300 together with the costs
of prosecution. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
Chapter 16.24
PROPERTY RECORD MAINTENANCE
§ 16.24.010. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for compliance with § 70.32(1),
Wis. Stats., which requires that all properties that are issued building
permits within the Village of Grafton are field reviewed, described and
valued by "actual view." Each building permit requires assessment
personnel to initially process existing records or create new records,
physically review on site the purpose of each building permit to document
all property description additions and/or alterations, and process the
information gathered in the field to determine an assessed value.
§ 16.24.020. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms and words shall be
interpreted as having the following meanings:
COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL BUILDING — A building or structure that
houses a business or industrial use, enterprise or activity at a greater scale
than home occupation or involving the manufacturing of, distribution of,
retail or wholesale marketing of, goods or services.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, cooking and sanitation.
MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — A single building or structure
containing more than one dwelling unit under single ownership and in
which the owner rents or leases the right to occupy any of the dwelling units
to a tenant(s).
RESIDENTIAL — Used by occupants as a home, abode, domicile or dwelling
that has housekeeping and cooking facilities for the occupants only. A
residential property may have multiple dwelling units.
RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM — A multiple dwelling or development
containing individually owned dwelling units and jointly owned and shared
areas and facilities.
§ 16.20.070 GRAFTON CODE § 16.24.030
1.01:410
§ 16.24.030. Required property record maintenance fees.
Every person receiving an approved building permit from the Village in
which said permit requires the Village Assessor to physically view on site
any descriptive property change in an effort to maintain the property record
shall pay a property record maintenance fee in accord with § 16.24.040.
§ 16.24.040. Schedule of fees. [Amended by Ord. No. 004, Series
2008; Ord. No. 005, Series 2009; 3-21-2016 by Ord. No. 003-2016]
Residential:
Residential (1- and 2-family)
New $290
Residential additions $90
Condominiums: (3 or more units)
New $450 + $85/unit
Residential additions $90
Accessory structures $35
Other $35
Multifamily (3 or more units)
New $525 + $85/unit
Residential additions $90
Accessory structures $35
Other $35
Commercial/Industrial
New — base fee (up to 5,000 square feet,
gross)
$580
Over 5,000 square feet, gross —
maximum $5,000
$0.06/square foot
Additions — base fee (up to 2,500 square
feet, gross)
$290
Over 2,500 square feet, gross —
maximum $2,500
$0.03/square foot
Accessory structures $60
Swimming pools, fireplace $25
Other $35
§ 16.24.050. Fee increases.
The schedule of fees imposed in this chapter may be adjusted at any time
when costs are increased by the State of Wisconsin Department of Revenue
or the Village assessment contractor.
§ 16.24.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24.050
1.01:411
Title 17: (Reserved)
Title 18: Subdivisions
Chapter 18.04
PURPOSE
§ 18.04.010. Purpose.
In order to promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare; to
legally implement and influence the development of the Village; to further
the orderly layout and use of land; to facilitate adequate provision for
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds and other
public requirements; to lessen congestion in streets and highways; to
secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light
and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration
of population; and to facilitate the further resubdivision of larger tracts
into smaller parcels of land, it shall be the purpose of this title to regulate
and control the subdivision of land within the corporate limits and
extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of the Village. These regulations
are made with reasonable consideration, among other things, of the
character of the Village with a view of conserving the value of buildings
placed upon land, providing the best possible environment for human
habitation, and for encouraging the most appropriate use of land
throughout the Village.
Chapter 18.08
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 18.08.010. Statutes adopted by reference. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
The provisions contained in Ch. 236, Wis. Stats., governing the subdivision
and platting of land, and such other state laws as may apply, and any
revisions or amendments thereof enacted by the State Legislature; the
rules of the Department of Safety and Professional Services, relating to lot
size and lot evaluation if the subdivision is not served by a public sewer
and provision for such service has not been made; and the rules of the
Department of Transportation, contained in Ch. Trans 233, Wis. Adm. Code,
relating to safety of access and preservation of the public interest and
investment in the streets if the subdivision abuts on a state trunk highway
or connecting street, are all made a part of this title with the same force and
effect as if here set out in full verbatim, except that where the provisions of
this title are more restrictive the provisions of this title shall apply.
§ 16.24.050 GRAFTON CODE § 18.08.020
1.01:412
§ 18.08.020. Surveying and platting.
Any division of land within the Village or its extraterritorial plat approval
jurisdiction which results in a subdivision as defined in this title shall be,
and any other division may be, surveyed and a plat thereof made, approved
and recorded as required by this title and by Ch. 236, Wis. Stats.
§ 18.08.030. Unplatted subdivisions.
Any division of land other than a subdivision within the Village or its
extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction, of which a plat has not been
approved and recorded, shall be surveyed and a certified survey map of
such division approved and shall be recorded with the Register of Deeds as
required by §§ 18.16.090 through 18.16.120 of this title and Ch. 236, Wis.
Stats.
§ 18.08.040. Exemptions.
The provisions of this title shall not apply to:
Chapter 18.12
DEFINITIONS
§ 18.12.010. General interpretation.
In this title, all terms used which are defined in Ch. 236, Wis. Stats., shall
have the same meaning as ascribed thereto in that chapter and as that
chapter may hereafter be amended, unless otherwise defined in this title
or unless the context and/or subject matter clearly indicates otherwise.
All words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
includes the plural and the plural the singular; the word "person" includes
associations, copartnerships or corporations; and the term "shall" is
mandatory while the word "may" is permissive.
§ 18.12.020. Definitions.
As used in this title, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this chapter.
ALLEY — A public way affording secondary means of access to abutting
property.
A. Transfers of interests in land by will or pursuant to court order;
B. Leases for a term not to exceed 10 years, mortgages, or easements;
C. The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining
property if additional lots are not thereby created and the lots resulting
are not reduced below the minimum sizes required by this title or other
applicable laws or ordinances.
§ 18.08.020 CODE ADOPTION § 18.12.020
1.01:413
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — A line within a lot or parcel of land designated
on a plat of a proposed subdivision, which creates a zone between itself and
any abutting street line, within which the erection of an enclosed structure
or portion thereof is prohibited.
BUTT LOTS — Lots the rear lot lines of which abut the side lot lines of
other lots platted in the same block, not separated by an alley or other open
space.
CORRECTION INSTRUMENTS — Any recordable document correcting
distance, angles, directions, bearings, chords, block or lot numbers, street
names and shall include all other details concerning the corrected item(s)
shown on a recorded plat.
CROSSWALK — A public right-of-way across a block to be used by
pedestrians and/or for underground utilities.
EASEMENT — A quantity of land set aside or over or under which liberty,
privilege or advantage in land without profit is dedicated, and is distinct
from ownership of the land, is granted either to the public, a particular
person, or a combination of both.
FINAL PLAT — A map or chart of a subdivision which has been accurately
surveyed, clearly and definitely showing the streets, alleys, blocks, lots and
other divisions thereof in such a manner that the same can be clearly and
distinctly identified.
LOT — A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a unit
for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of ownership or for building
development.
LOT WIDTH — The width of a parcel of land measured along the minimum
building setback line.
MASTER PLAN — Refers to the composite of the functional and geographic
elements of the Village's Comprehensive Plan or any segment thereof in the
form of plans, maps, charts and textual material as adopted by the Village in
the street or transportation plan, Official Map, master sanitary sewer plan,
master storm sewer plan, master water main plan, or master established
grade plan, or a combination of any or all of them.[Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
MINIMUM STREET WIDTH — All streets having widths specified on the
master plan or Official Map, and no full street shall be less than 60 feet
wide, unless the Village Board otherwise permits by ordinance.
MUNICIPALITY or VILLAGE — The Village of Grafton.
OFFICIAL MAP — Refers to the official street plan as adopted by the Village,
providing for the locations and widths of all types of streets.
OUTLOT — A portion of a subdivision or other land division not of standard
"lot" size, but provided as a remnant of the subdivision, the intention of
which is to either redivide it in the future into lots or combine it with one or
more other adjacent outlots or lots in other subdivisions or land divisions to
create buildable lots.
§ 18.12.020 GRAFTON CODE § 18.12.020
1.01:414
OWNER or SUBDIVIDER — Any firm, association, partnership, private
corporation, public or quasi-public corporation, or a combination of any
of them, or other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the
land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to
subdivide the same.
PLAN COMMISSION — The Village Plan Commission.
PLAT — A map of a subdivision of land.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — A map showing the salient features of a proposed
subdivision submitted to an approving authority for purposes of preliminary
consideration.
PROTECTIVE COVENANTS — Contracts or agreements, whether recorded
or unrecorded, entered into between private parties and impose a
restriction on the use of all private property or with private parties and
the Village with a subdivision for the benefit of property owners or the
public, which provide mutual protection against undesirable aspects of
development which would tend to impair stability of values and which may
be enforced, either by private parties or by the Village.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT — Public sewer, water mains, stormwater relief
provisions, highways and parkways, sidewalks, streetlighting, and shall
include all other public improvements reasonable to be required by the
Village Board or the Plan Commission, and shall not be limited because of
express enumeration, whether or not such improvements are shown on the
Official Map.
RECORDING A PLAT — The filing of the original of the final plat with the
Register of Deeds.
SIGHT DISTANCE — A minimum sight distance affording clear visibility
along the center line of all major streets.
STREET — A public thoroughfare affording access to abutting property.
MAJOR STREET — A public thoroughfare capable of accommodating
continuity of fast or heavy traffic.
A.
COLLECTOR STREET — A street which will carry traffic from minor
streets to a major street system and includes principal entrance streets
of developed areas and the primary circulating streets within a
developed area.
B.
MINOR STREET — A street used primarily for access to the abutting
properties.
C.
CUL-DE-SAC — A minor street having one opened end and being
terminated at the other by a turnaround.
D.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET SERVICE DRIVE OR FRONTAGE DRIVE
— Minor streets which are parallel to and/or in the immediate vicinity
of a primary street which have for their purpose the relief of such
thoroughfare from the local service of abutting properties.
E.
§ 18.12.020 CODE ADOPTION § 18.12.020
1.01:415
SUBDIVISION — A division of a lot, parcel or tract of land by the owner
thereof or his agent for the purpose of sale or of building developments,
where:
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS — The guides, principles and
specifications for the preparation of subdivision plans, indicating, among
other things, the minimum and maximum dimensions of the various
elements set forth in the preliminary plat.
VILLAGE ATTORNEY — The Village Attorney of the Village of Grafton.
VILLAGE BOARD — The Village Board of the Village of Grafton.
VILLAGE CLERK AND/OR ADMINISTRATOR — The Village Clerk and/or
Village Administrator of the Village of Grafton.
VILLAGE ENGINEER — The Village Engineer of the Village of Grafton.
Chapter 18.16
PROCEDURE
§ 18.16.010. Preliminary consultation.
The subdivider may, before submitting a plat for official filing, consult or
meet with the Plan Commission and its staff for advice and assistance. This
step does not require formal application, fee or filing of a plat with the Plan
Commission or Village Board, but may include a preliminary sketch.
§ 18.16.020. Preliminary plat required.
Any person or firm contemplating the subdivision of land within the Village,
before submitting a final plat for approval, shall be required to file with
the Village Clerk at least 10 days prior to a regular meeting of the Plan
Commission 20 black or blue line prints of a preliminary plat conforming to
the Comprehensive Plan, Official Map and the subdivision design standards
of this title.
HALF STREET — A street bordering one or more property lines of a
tract of land in which the developer has dedicated part of the ultimate
right-of-way width in accordance with the requirements of § 18.20.070
of this title.
F.
The act of division creates five or more parcels or building sites each of
1 1/2 acres or less in area; or
A.
Five or more parcels or building sites each of 1 1/2 acres or less in area
are created by successive divisions within a period of five years; or
B.
C. The act of division involves the creating of a new street.
§ 18.12.020 GRAFTON CODE § 18.16.030
1.01:416
§ 18.16.030. Preliminary plat; official filing.
The submission of the prints of the preliminary plat shall constitute official
filing, and the Village Clerk shall note on each print the date filed and shall
forthwith forward copies to the following:
§ 18.16.040. Preliminary plat; official approval.
§ 18.16.050. Preliminary plat; additional filing.
Nothing contained in this title shall prohibit the filing of additional
preliminary plats, regardless of whether the first one has been approved.
The subdivider may refile to the Village Clerk corrected copies of the
rejected plat.
§ 18.16.060. Preliminary plat; engineering data requirements.
The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor on
tracing cloth or paper of good quality at a scale of not more than 100 feet to
one inch and shall show correctly on its face:
A. Two copies for each of the state agencies required to review the plat to
the Department of Administration, in accordance with § 236.12, Wis.
Stats.;
B. Four copies to the county planning agency, if required;
C. One copy for the official file of the Village;
D. One copy each for the Village Planner, six Plan Commission members
and the Plan Commission Chair;
E. Two copies to the Village Engineer.
A. The Plan Commission shall, within 90 days of the submission of the
preliminary plat to such body, review the plat and negotiate with the
subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of
public improvements which will be required; and approve, approve
conditionally, or reject the plat. The subdivider and his surveyor shall be
notified in writing of any conditions of approval or the reasons for
rejection. Pursuant to § 236.12, Wis. Stats., no approval shall be
granted until it has been certified that there is not objection to the plat
by any agency authorized to object. Failure of the Plan Commission to
act within 90 days shall constitute an approval of the preliminary plat,
unless other authorized agencies object to the plat. [Amended by Ord.
No. 006, 1994]
B. Approval of the preliminary plat shall entitle the subdivider to final
approval of the layout shown by such plat if the final plat conforms
substantially to the preliminary plat and all conditions of approval have
been met.
A. Date, scale and North point;
§ 18.16.030 CODE ADOPTION § 18.16.060
1.01:417
B. The title, in accordance with the Village standard for titling
subdivisions, under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded;
C. The name and address of the owner, the subdivider, and surveyor
preparing the plat;
D. Location of the proposed subdivision by government lot, quarter
section, township, range and county;
E. Exact length and bearings of the exterior boundaries of the proposed
subdivision, and the approximate acreage therein;
F. Location and names of adjacent subdivisions;
G. Zoning on and adjacent to the proposed subdivision;
H. Location, widths and names of any adjacent existing highways, streets,
alleys or other public ways, easements, railroad and utility rights-ofway,
parks and cemeteries;
I. A small-scale drawing of the section or government subdivision of the
section in which the subdivision lies, with the location of the subdivision
indicated thereon;
J. The approximate location, size and elevations within the proposed
subdivision and in the adjoining streets or property of any existing
sewers, water mains, culverts, drain pipes including farm drain tile and
electric conduits proposed to be used on the property to be subdivided;
or direction and distance to nearest water and sewer mains if not
adjacent or within tract to be divided;
K. The location of existing property lines, streets, drives, buildings,
watercourses, utilities, railroads and other similar features within the
tract being subdivided;
L. The water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at the date of survey
and approximate high and low water elevations, all referred to USGS
datum;
M. Locations, widths, and names of all proposed streets and rights-of-way
such as alleys and easements, and all parks and other open spaces;
street names shall be as provided by the Village;
N. Approximate dimensions of all lots together with proposed lot and block
numbers, or consecutive lot numbers;
O. Approximate dimensions of all parcels of land proposed to be dedicated
to public use and the conditions of such dedication if any;
P. Proposed building setback lines;
Q. Approximate radii of all curves and length of tangents;
§ 18.16.060 GRAFTON CODE § 18.16.060
1.01:418
§ 18.16.070. Preliminary plat; additional requirements.
In addition, the Plan Commission may require any or all of the following on
a preliminary plat:
§ 18.16.080. Final plat. [Amended by Ord. No. 005, Series 1999;
9-16-2011 by Ord. No. 021-2011]
R. Source of domestic water supply and type of sewage disposal, locations
of sites for community domestic water facilities, and/or community
sewage treatment or handling facilities, and all subject to the rules and
regulations of the State of Wisconsin Department of Safety and
Professional Services;
S. Contours at vertical intervals of not more than five feet where the slope
is greater than 10% and not more than two feet where the slope is less
than 10%. Elevations shall be marked on such contours based on
USCGS datum.
A. Profiles showing existing ground surface and proposed street grades
including extensions for a reasonable distance beyond the limits of the
proposed subdivision. Elevations shall be based on USCGS datum;
B. A draft of a protective covenant whereby the subdivider proposes to
regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed
development.
A. In order to ensure that the final plat is acceptable for processing, it
shall be submitted initially by the Village Clerk to the Village Engineer
for checking.
B. The final plat and such copies thereof as shall be required shall be
submitted to the Village Clerk not later than 36 months after the
approval of the preliminary plat. The Village Board may refuse to
approve such final plat if not submitted within such specified time. This
provision shall apply to plats that have received preliminary plat
approval as of June 2, 2010, or after.
C. Within two days after the filing of any final plat with the Village Clerk,
legible copies thereof furnished by the subdivider at his expense shall
be forwarded by the Clerk to the following agencies:
1. One copy to the official file of the Village;
2. Two copies to the Plan Commission;
3. Two copies to the Village Engineer;
4. Two copies to the Department of Administration as set forth in Ch.
236, Wis. Stats.;
5. Four copies to the county planning agency, if required; and
§ 18.16.060 CODE ADOPTION § 18.16.080
1.01:419
§ 18.16.090. Land divisions other than subdivisions; procedure.
The subdivider shall first consult with the Plan Commission regarding the
requirements of this chapter before submission of his plat or map. Following
consultation, 10 copies of a final plat in the form of a certified survey map
shall be submitted to the Plan Commission, which shall approve, approve
conditionally, or reject the map within 90 days. The subdivider shall be
notified in writing of any conditions of approval or the reasons for rejection.
§ 18.16.100. Land divisions other than subdivisions; requirements.
6. If the subdivision abuts or adjoins a state trunk highway or
connecting street, two copies to the Department of Transportation.
D. The Plan Commission shall review and refer the final plat with its
recommendations to the Village Board within 30 days of its submission,
unless the time is extended by the Board.
E. The Village Board shall approve or reject the final plat within 60 days of
its submission, unless the time is extended by agreement with the
subdivider and the time of such extension is entered upon the minutes
of the Board. Reasons for rejection shall be stated in the minutes of the
Board meeting, and a copy thereof or a written statement of such
reasons shall be supplied the subdivider and his surveyor.
F. The Village Clerk shall certify on the face of the plat that the copies
referred to above were forwarded as required and the date thereof, and
that no objections to the plat have been filed within a twenty-day limit
set by § 236.12(4), Wis. Stats., or if filed, have been met.
G. The Village Attorney may require the subdivider to furnish an abstract
of title or, at the option of the subdivider, title insurance or certificate of
title certified to the date of submission of the plat for approval to
ascertain the fact that all parties having an interest in such lands have
signed the owners' certificate on the plat.
H. Where the developer chooses to follow the optional procedure in
processing the plat as provided by § 236.12(6), Wis. Stats., the Village
Clerk and Plan Commission shall modify their procedure and the
wording of the necessary certificate and approval accordingly.
I. A duplicate tracing, at the size specified by the Village Engineer, of the
final recorded plat shall be filed with both the Village Engineer and the
Utility Director.
A. To the extent reasonably practicable, the plat shall comply with the
provisions of this title hereinafter stated relating to general
requirements and design standards and required improvements.
B. The survey shall be performed and the map prepared by a registered
surveyor.
§ 18.16.080 GRAFTON CODE § 18.16.100
1.01:420
§ 18.16.110. Land other than subdivisions; certificates.
§ 18.16.120. Land other than subdivisions; recording.
Following approval of the certified survey map, it shall be filed for record
with the Register of Deeds, and a duplicate tracing as specified by the
Village Engineer shall be filed with the Village Engineer.
Chapter 18.20
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 18.20.010. General requirements.
The proposed subdivision shall conform to:
C. All corners shall be monumented in accordance with § 236.15(1)(c) and
(d), Wis. Stats.
D. The final plat shall be prepared in accordance with § 236.20(2)(a), (b),
(c), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k), and (l), Wis. Stats., on durable white
paper 8 1/2 inches wide by 14 inches long. All lines shall be made with
nonfading black ink to a scale of not more than 100 feet to one inch.
A. The map shall include the certificate of ownership and the certificate of
the surveyor who surveyed and mapped the parcel, typed, lettered or
reproduced legibly with nonfading black ink, giving a clear and concise
description of the land surveyed by bearings and distances,
commencing with some corner marked and established in the U.S.
Public Land Survey or some corner-providing reference to a corner
marked and established in the U.S. Public Land Survey. Such certificate
shall include the statement of the surveyor to the effect that he has fully
complied with the requirements of this chapter.
B. The certificate of approval of the Plan Commission shall be typed,
lettered or reproduced legibly with nonfading black ink on the face of
the map.
A. The provisions of Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin Statutes, which are
adopted by reference;
B. All applicable ordinances of the Village;
C. Design and construction standards as established by the Village;
D. The Comprehensive Plan of the Village;
E. The Official Map of the Village;
F. The rules of the State Department of Transportation, as may be
promulgated from time to time, whenever in the opinion of that
Department the proposed subdivision abuts existing or proposed state
§ 18.16.100 CODE ADOPTION § 18.20.010
1.01:421
§ 18.20.020. Streets; design and location.
The streets shall be designed and located in relation to existing and planned
streets, to reasonable circulation of traffic within the subdivision and
adjoining lands, to topographical conditions, to runoff of stormwater, to
public convenience and safety, in their appropriate relations to the proposed
uses of the area to be served.
§ 18.20.030. Streets; conformance to Official Map.
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets
shall conform to the Official Map and to the street and highway widths
established by ordinance.
§ 18.20.040. Streets; arrangement.
§ 18.20.050. Streets; railroad rights-of-way.
Wherever the proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to a railroad
right-of-way or limited access highway, provisions shall be made on each
side of such right-of-way for streets approximately parallel to and at a
distance suitable for appropriate use of the land and between such streets
and the right-of-way, but not less than 150 feet. Such distance, where
trunk highways or connecting streets, and for the preservation of the
public interest and investment in such highway or street.
A. Major streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and
proposed system of major streets and highways and, insofar as
practicable, shall be continuous and in alignment with existing, planned
or platted streets with which they are to connect.
B. Collector streets shall be properly related to the mass transportation
system, to special traffic generators such as schools, churches and
shopping centers, and to the major streets into which they feed.
C. Minor streets shall be designed to reasonably conform to the
topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to permit efficient
storm and sanitary sewerage systems, and to require the minimum
street area necessary to provide safe and convenient access to abutting
property. Minor street locations and street grades shall be established
wherever practicable in such a manner to avoid excessive grading and
to avoid the excessive removal of tree growth and general leveling of
the topography.
D. Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to
be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical
conditions, or unless in the opinion of the Plan Commission such
extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the
layout of the subdivision or for the advantageous development of the
adjacent tracts.
§ 18.20.010 GRAFTON CODE § 18.20.050
1.01:422
desirable and practicable, shall be determined with due consideration of the
minimum distance required for the future separation of grades by means of
appropriate approach gradients.
§ 18.20.060. Streets; major streets and highways.
Provision shall be made for serving lots of residential use abutting major
streets and highways by either the use of: a) marginal access streets;
b) backing lots to the primary street with a screen planting contained
in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line; c) deeper lots
fronting on the primary street with rear service alleys. These methods
are recommended for the purpose of providing adequate protection of
residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
§ 18.20.070. Streets; width. [Amended by Ord. No. A-002-91, 1991;
Ord. No. 020-94, 1994; Ord. No. 020, Series 2006; Ord. No. 002,
Series 2018]
The right-of-way and roadway width shall be of the widths specified on the
Official Map or Master Plan, or if no widths are specified there, they shall
be the widths specified below:
Right-of-Way
Roadway
(curb face to curb face)
Boulevard 120 feet or wider Dual 34-foot pavements with a
24-foot median, or as
recommended by the State
Highway Commission
Major street 100 feet 48 feet
Collector 80 feet 44 feet
Minor street 60 feet 32 feet
Half street 1/2 total right-of-way of
proposed street
Cul-de-sac street 60 feet 32 feet (50-foot radius)
Marginal access
street
40 feet 26 feet
Alleys:
Residential 24 feet 20 feet
Commercial or
industrial
32 feet 30 feet
§ 18.20.080. Streets; grades. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
The grade of major and collector streets shall not exceed 6%, and the grade
of other streets shall not exceed 10%, unless necessitated by exceptional
§ 18.20.050 CODE ADOPTION § 18.20.080
1.01:423
topography and approved by the Plan Commission. The minimum grade
of all streets shall be no less than 1/2% and shall not be permitted for
long sustained distances. Grades of pedestrianways or crosswalks shall not
exceed 15% unless steps of an acceptable design are to be constructed.
§ 18.20.090. Streets; horizontal curves.
Where there is a section in horizontal center lines within a given block at
any given point in excess of 10°, a curve shall be inserted with a radius of
not less than:
§ 18.20.100. Streets; vertical curves. [Amended by Ord. No.
A-456-84, 1984]
Different connecting street gradients shall be connected with vertical
parabolic curves. Minimum length in feet of these curves shall provide a
stopping sight distance of not less than 200 feet. All changes in street
grades shall be connected by vertical curves of a minimum length
equivalent in feet to 30 times the algebraic difference in the rates of grade
for streets, provided that no curve of less than 50 feet in length need be
used.
§ 18.20.110. Streets; tangents.
Tangents of at least 100 feet in length shall be introduced between reverse
curves on major and collector streets.
§ 18.20.120. Street names.
New street names shall not duplicate the names of existing streets, but
streets that are continuations of others already in existence and named shall
bear the names of the existing streets.
§ 18.20.130. Culs-de-sac. [Amended by Ord. No. A-003-91, 1991]
Cul-de-sac streets shall be not more than 700 feet in length measured along
their center lines from the streets of origin to the ends of their right-of-way,
unless specifically permitted by Plan Commission approval. Each cul-de-sac
shall have terminus of nearly circular shape with the minimum right-of-way
diameter being 120 feet and the minimum outside curb diameter of 90 feet.
§ 18.20.140. Half streets.
Where a half street exists adjacent to the subdivision the other half of the
street shall be dedicated by the subdivider. Platting of new half streets
A. Major street: 300 feet;
B. Collector street: 300 feet;
C. Minor streets: 100 feet.
§ 18.20.080 GRAFTON CODE § 18.20.140
1.01:424
along property lines shall not be permitted except by approval of the Plan
Commission.
§ 18.20.150. Reserve strips.
Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where
their control is definitely placed in the Village under conditions approved by
the Plan Commission.
§ 18.20.160. Intersections.
§ 18.20.170. Alleys.
§ 18.20.180. Easements. [Amended by Ord. No. 022, Series 2000]
Easements shall be provided for any overhead or underground utility
service, including storm sewers or stormwater drainage and detention
where necessary. Public utility easements shall be a minimum of 12 feet
wide, six feet of same being on each of the adjacent lots or all 12 feet on
one lot where necessary, except where wider easements are required by
the Village Engineer. Easements shall be established at the rear of each
lot and along such other lot lines as to provide continuity or alignment
from block to block. At deflection points in these easements, if overhead
utility lines are contemplated, additional easements shall be established
A. Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and not more
than two streets shall intersect at one point unless approved by the Plan
Commission.
B. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
avoided. Where streets intersect major streets, their alignment shall be
continuous.
A. Alleys shall be provided in all commercial and industrial districts,
except that the Plan Commission may waive this requirement where
other definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as
off-street loading and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses
proposed.
B. Alleys shall not be approved in residential areas unless necessary
because of topography, necessary to provide for the separation of
through and local traffic for residential land uses abutting major streets
and highways, or other exceptional circumstances.
C. The width of the right-of-way for residential alleys shall be not less than
24 feet, and the width of the right-of-way for commercial and industrial
alleys shall be not less than 32 feet.
D. Dead-end alleys are prohibited except under very unusual
circumstances, and crooked and "T" alleys shall be discouraged. Where
dead-end alleys are unavoidable, they shall be provided with adequate
turnaround facilities at the dead end.
§ 18.20.140 CODE ADOPTION § 18.20.180
1.01:425
for pole-line anchors. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse,
drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater
easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines
of such watercourse and such further width or construction, or both, as
will be adequate for the purpose. Wherever possible, it is desirable that
the drainage be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks and
adequate width for maximum potential volume of flow.
§ 18.20.190. Blocks.
§ 18.20.200. Lots generally.
The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location
of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated.
In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be shown for all natural
features such as tree growth, watercourses, historic spots or similar
conditions.
§ 18.20.210. Lot dimensions.
A. The maximum block lengths in residential areas shall not exceed 1,800
feet. The minimum block lengths shall be 900 feet unless approved by
the Plan Commission. The minimum distance between parallel street
center lines shall be 286 feet.
B. No specific rule concerning the shape of blocks is made, but blocks
must fit readily into the overall plan of the subdivision, and their design
must evidence consideration of topographical conditions, surface
drainage, lot planning, traffic flow, public open-space areas and water
and sewerage requirements.
C. Blocks intended for commercial, industrial and institutional use must be
designated as such, and the plan must show adequate off-street areas to
provide for parking, loading docks and such other facilities as may be
required to accommodate motor vehicles.
D. Pedestrian crosswalks not less than 12 feet wide may be required by the
Plan Commission where deemed desirable to provide convenient
pedestrian circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping
centers, transportation and other community facilities.
A. Width and area of lots shall conform with lot width and area
requirements set forth in the Zoning Ordinance and in no case shall a
lot in a residential district have less than a minimum width of 70 feet at
the minimum building setback line and a minimum area of 8,000 square
feet. [Amended by Ord. No. 022, 2000]
B. Depth of lots shall be in accordance with Plan Commission
requirements, but residential lots shall be not less than 110 feet in
depth for interior lots and 90 feet in depth for corner lots.
§ 18.20.180 GRAFTON CODE § 18.20.210
1.01:426
§ 18.20.220. Corner lots.
Corner lots shall be designed to permit full setback on both streets as
required by the applicable zoning district requirements.
§ 18.20.230. Lots access. [Amended by Ord. No. 022, Series 2000]
Every lot shall front or abut on a dedicated public street right-of-way for
a minimum of 40 feet along cul-de-sac bulbs and 60 feet along all other
street segments. Lots with an access only to private drives or streets shall
be permitted only with Plan Commission approval.
§ 18.20.240. Lot lines.
Side lot line shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines.
§ 18.20.250. Large lots.
Where lots are created of a size larger than normal for the area, the Plan
Commission may require that the plat be so designed as to allow for the
possible future resubdivision of such lots into normal sizes compatible with
the area.
§ 18.20.260. Lots; municipal boundaries.
Lots shall follow municipal boundary lines whenever practicable rather than
cross them.
C. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and
industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street
service and parking facilities required by the type of use and
development contemplated.
D. Residential lots abutting on major streets and highways shall be platted
with sufficient depth to permit adequate separation between the
buildings and such trafficways.
E. Butt lots shall be platted at least five feet wider than the average
interior lots in developments containing lots less than 12,000 square
feet in area.
F. Lots abutting upon a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream
shall be an additional depth or width as required to provide an
acceptable building site.
G. Excessive depth in relation to width of lots shall be avoided. A
proportion of two to one shall normally be considered as a desirable
maximum for lot widths of 80 feet or more.
§ 18.20.210 CODE ADOPTION § 18.20.270
1.01:427
§ 18.20.270. Double frontage lots.
Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided except where
necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic
arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and
orientation.
§ 18.20.280. Sidewalks and pedestrian trails. [Amended by Ord. No.
A-007, 1992]
Sidewalks shall be provided within a subdivision in accordance with Title
11, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places, of the Code of the Village of
Grafton and/or plans approved by the Village Plan Commission along with
the subdivision plat.
Chapter 18.24
A. Sidewalks.
1. Five-foot-wide concrete sidewalks shall normally be constructed on
one side of all frontage and both sides of all streets within
developments.
2. Sidewalks must be constructed along streets if they provide a link
between developments or link developments with support facilities
such as schools, shopping centers, employment centers, parks and
other public recreational facilities.
3. The Plan Commission may exempt the following streets from
sidewalk construction: residential culs-de-sac, loop streets
(eyebrows) or dead-end streets serving eight or fewer residences
and less than 400 feet in length; commercial or industrial streets
that provide access only to businesses within the immediate area.
The Commission may allow the construction of sidewalks on only
one side of all other culs-de-sac and dead-end streets.
4. Sidewalk construction shall be in accordance with plans submitted
by the developer along with subdivision street plans and profiles. In
addition, wider than standard sidewalks may be required by the
Plan Commission in the vicinity of schools, commercial areas and
other places of public assemblage.
B. Pedestrian trails. Pedestrian trails may be allowed or required in lieu of
or in addition to sidewalks within duplex, multifamily and planned
developments. Such trails shall be constructed of bituminous asphalt
materials and shall be at least five feet wide. Where such trails are also
to be used as bikeways, they shall be a minimum of eight feet wide.
Such trails may be allowed in lieu of sidewalks when, due to unique
subdivision design and/or terrain, they will provide a more convenient
link between the subdivision with schools, shopping centers,
employment centers and/or amenities.
§ 18.20.270 GRAFTON CODE § 18.20.280
1.01:428
PUBLIC AREAS
§ 18.24.010. Purpose.
In order that adequate public lands and open space sites may be properly
located and preserved as the Village of Grafton develops, the following
provisions are established.
§ 18.24.020. Public sites and open spaces.
A. Dedication of lands. Whenever any subdivision, or certified survey map
is certified, signed, acknowledged, and recorded as prescribed in
§ 236.29, Wis. Stats., or a condominium under the provisions prescribed
in Ch. 703, Wis. Stats., every donation of land to the public intended for
the streets, alleys, ways, commons or other public uses as designated
on said subdivision, certified survey map, or condominium shall be
deemed sufficient conveyance to vest the fee simple title with the
Village of Grafton for the public benefit.
B. Suitability of land for public use. Whenever a certified survey map,
subdivision plat, condominium, or multiple-family dwelling
development includes a proposed dedication of land to public use and it
is found that such land is not required or not suitable for public use, the
Plan Commission may recommend to the Village Board to either refuse
to approve such dedication or require the rearrangement of lots in the
proposed certified survey map, subdivision plat, condominium, or
multiple-family dwelling development.
1. The location and suitability of all land to be dedicated are subject to
review and final acceptance by the Village.
2. Lands unsuitable for residential development or conventional
construction methods may be dedicated to fulfill required
obligations only upon written approval by the Village Board.
C. Size of land for public use. The area of each parcel of land proposed as a
dedication of land for public use shall be of such minimum dimensions,
as determined by the Plan Commission, so as to be functionally usable.
D. Location. Whenever a certified survey map, subdivision plat,
condominium, or multiple-family dwelling development includes a
proposed dedication of land to public use, said dedicated land shall be
located and sited with sensitivity to surrounding development and
existing and planned land uses.
E. Drainageways, stormwater detention and retention basins and other
public ways or public access to navigable lakes or streams.
1. Whenever a tract of land to be subdivided as a subdivision, divided
by a certified survey map, or developed as a condominium includes
lands designated to be owned by the public, to include
drainageways, stormwater detention and retention basins, and
§ 18.20.280 CODE ADOPTION § 18.24.020
1.01:429
other public ways or public access to navigable lakes or streams
which have been designated or graphically delineated on the
adopted County Development Plan, and/or local comprehensive
plans or adopted plan components, or as required by the State
of Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under § 236.16(3),
Wis. Stats., or required by the Village of Grafton or the appropriate
municipality, said public way shall be made a part of the subdivision
plat, certified survey map, or condominium and dedicated by the
subdivider or condominium developer in the location and
dimensions indicated on said plan or map and as set forth in this
title.
2. Whenever a tract of land to be subdivided as a subdivision, divided
by a certified survey map, developed as a condominium, or
developed as a commercial/retail use, there shall be land (outlot)
designated for stormwater quality, which could comprise of a
detention and/or retention basin. These water quality ponds or
devices shall remain private, and the developer shall create an
association through which all property owners will own a share of
the outlot, and this association shall be responsible for the
maintenance. The developer shall grant the Village a stormwater
easement and enter into an agreement that requires the formation
of an association for continual maintenance of these ponds/devices;
the Village shall have the right to do the maintenance and assess
these costs to the association. [Amended by Ord. No. 004, Series
2005]
3. Subdivisions or certified survey maps abutting on a navigable lake
or stream shall, according to the provisions of § 236.16(3), Wis.
Stats., provide access at least 60 feet wide to the low-water mark so
that there will be public access which is connected to existing
public roads at least at one-half-mile intervals as measured along
the lake or stream shore, except where greater intervals and wider
access is approved, and excluding shore areas where public parks
or open space and streets or roads on either side of a stream are
provided. Such access shall be dedicated to the Village of Grafton.
F. Parks or playgrounds. Whenever a tract of land to be divided by either
certified survey map or subdivision plat or developed as a condominium
within the jurisdiction of this title encompasses all or any part of a park
or playground that has been designated on a duly adopted Village of
Grafton, county or regional comprehensive plan or comprehensive plan
component pursuant to § 62.23(6), Wis. Stats., said park or playground
shall be made a part of that certified survey map, subdivision plat, or
condominium and dedicated or reserved by the subdivider or
condominium developer in the locations and dimensions indicated on
said plan and according to the procedures set forth in this section.
G. Substitution of private recreation and open space lands for required
public recreational and open space land reservations or dedications not
permitted. The substitution of private recreation and open space lands
§ 18.24.020 GRAFTON CODE § 18.24.020
1.01:430
for required public recreational and open space land reservations or
dedications under this title shall not be permitted.
H. Reservation and/or dedication of suitable sites of adequate area for
future schools, parks, playgrounds, drainageways, and other public
purposes. In the design of a subdivision plat, certified survey map,
condominium, or multiple-family dwelling development zoned for
residential uses, due consideration shall be given to the reservation
and/or dedication of suitable sites of adequate area for future schools,
parks, playgrounds, drainageways, and other public purposes.
1. Provision of public park areas (not including drainageways,
schools, and lands for other public purposes) shall be based upon
the per capita standards (i.e., the type of park area needed per
1,000 persons served) set forth in the adopted Village of Grafton
Comprehensive Plan, or elements thereof (including the Village of
Grafton Park and Open Space Plan), as follows:
Community Park:
For park site = 2.2 acres per 1,000
persons
For playfield and playground
associated with park site
= 0.9 acre per 1,000 persons
Neighborhood Park:
For park site = 1.7 acres per 1,000
persons
For playfield and playground
associated with park site
= 1.6 acres per 1,000
persons
Subneighborhood Park:
Playground = 0.35 acres per 1,000
persons
Playfield = 0.39 acres per 1,000
persons
Vest Pocket Park:
Playground = 0.35 acres per 1,000
persons
Total public outdoor recreation
land dedication required
= 7.49 acres per 1,000
persons
§ 18.24.020 CODE ADOPTION § 18.24.020
1.01:431
The determination of the persons per household or dwelling unit
shall be based upon the average number of persons per household
as reported in the most recent U.S. Census for the Village of
Grafton, Wisconsin. (Note: In 1990, there were 2.74 persons per
household in the Village of Grafton.) Based upon these adopted
Village Comprehensive Plan standards, the amount of land to be
dedicated for public outdoor recreation lands, including public
parks and playgrounds, shall be according to those rates set forth
in Subsection K of this section.
2. If designated on the county development plan, Village
Comprehensive Plan or plan component, Official Map, or
component neighborhood or subarea development plan, such park
areas shall be made a part of the certified survey map, subdivision
plat, condominium, or multiple-family dwelling development as
stipulated in this section.
3. If not so designated, consideration shall be given in the location of
such sites to the preservation of scenic and historic sites, young or
mature woodlands, wetlands, lakes and ponds, watercourses,
watersheds, drainageways, steep slopes, and ravines.
I. Selection of options. The Plan Commission shall, at the time of
reviewing the certified survey map, preliminary plat, condominium, or
multiple-family dwelling development, recommend to the Village Board
one of the following options and record such recommendation in the
minutes of the meeting at which the certified survey map, preliminary
plat, condominium, or multiple-family dwelling development is
presented for approval. The Village Board, at the time of reviewing the
certified survey map, preliminary plat, condominium, or multiple-family
dwelling development and after reviewing the recommendation of the
Plan Commission, selects one the following options and records such
selection in the minutes of the meeting at which the certified survey
map, preliminary plat, condominium, or multiple-family dwelling
development is presented for approval:
1. Dedicate open space lands designated on the county development
plans, Village Comprehensive Plan or plan component; or
2. Reserve such open space lands and pay a public outdoor recreation
land site fee in conformance with Chapter 3.44, Impact Fees, of the
Code, as established pursuant to the requirements of § 66.0617,
Wis. Stats., as amended; or
3. Where no open space lands are directly involved, pay a public
outdoor recreation land site fee in conformance with Chapter 3.44,
Impact Fees, of the Code, as established pursuant to the
requirements of § 66.0617, Wis. Stats. as amended.
J. Exemptions. Subject to the requirements and provisions of Chapter
3.44, Impact Fees, of the Code, established pursuant to the
§ 18.24.020 GRAFTON CODE § 18.24.020
1.01:432
requirements of § 66.0617, Wis. Stats., as amended, where a lot, parcel
or dwelling unit for which dedication or fee in lieu of dedication has
once been paid is further divided or additional dwelling units created,
dedication or payment in lieu of dedication shall be required only for
the additional lots, parcels or dwelling units created. No lot or dwelling
unit which is fully developed for residential purposes at the time of
the creation of the subdivision, certified survey map, condominium, or
multiple-family dwelling development shall be required to pay a public
outdoor recreation land site fee. Lots or parcels designated as "outlots,"
as defined by this title, shall not be counted as lots or parcels for which
a land dedication is required or to provide a fee in lieu of dedication.
Lots or parcels designated as "outlots" may, however, be dedicated
or reserved as public sites as long as their intended public use is so
designated on the face of the subdivision plat, certified survey map,
condominium, or multiple-family dwelling development.
K. Dedication of site option.
1. Determination of the amount of land to be dedicated. Whenever a
proposed playground, park, or other public open space land
designated on the county's development plan, Village's
Comprehensive Plan, neighborhood unit development or subarea
plan, or other Comprehensive Plan component is encompassed, all
or in part, within a tract of land to be divided by either a certified
survey map or subdivision plat or is a part of a condominium or
multiple-family dwelling development, the public lands shall be
made a part of the certified survey map, preliminary plat,
condominium, or multiple-family dwelling development and shall
be dedicated to the public by the subdivider or condominium
developer at the following rates for the provision of the following
public outdoor recreation lands:
Community Park:
For park site = 0.006028 acre per dwelling
unit
For playfield and playground
associated with park site
= 0.002466 acre per dwelling
unit
Neighborhood park:
For park site = 0.004658 acre per dwelling
unit
For playfield and playground
associated with park site
= 0.004384 acre per dwelling
unit
Subneighborhood park:
Playground = 0.000959 acre per dwelling
unit
Playfield =0.0010686 acre per dwelling
unit
§ 18.24.020 CODE ADOPTION § 18.24.020
1.01:433
Vest pocket park:
Playground = 0.000959 acre per dwelling
unit
Total public outdoor recreation
land dedication required
= 0.0205226 acre per
dwelling unit
2. Maximum period of land reservation. Any such proposed lands in
excess of the rate established herein shall be reserved for a period
not to exceed five years, unless extended by mutual agreement, for
purchase by the public agency having jurisdiction at undeveloped
land prices. If the lands in excess of the established rate are not
acquired within the five-year period as set forth herein, the land
will be released from reservation to the property owner.
3. Stormwater detention/retention areas or basins, wetlands,
shoreland wetlands, and/or floodplains not qualified for meeting
land area requirements. Areas used or required for stormwater
detention or retention areas or basins, wetlands, shoreland
wetlands, and/or floodplains shall not qualify for meeting the land
area requirements set forth herein for the dedication of suitable
public outdoor recreation lands. If such sites are dedicated for
public use, they shall be in addition to suitable land area that meets
the land area dedication requirements set forth herein.
L. Reservation of site options. Whenever a proposed playground, park, or
other public open space land designated on the county's development
plan, Village's Comprehensive Plan, neighborhood unit or subarea
development plan, or other Comprehensive Plan component is
encompassed, all or in part, within a tract of land to be divided by either
a certified survey map or subdivision plat or is a part of a condominium
or multiple-family dwelling development, and whenever the subdivider
or condominium developer is given the option to dedicate or reserve
public sites and open spaces by the Plan Commission, the public lands
shall be made a part of the certified survey map, preliminary plat,
condominium, or multiple-family dwelling development and reserved
for a period not to exceed five years, unless extended by mutual
agreement, for purchase by the public agency having jurisdiction at
undeveloped land prices.
1. For reserved lands.
a. The subdivider or condominium developer shall pay a public
outdoor recreation land site fee under the requirements and
provisions of the Village of Grafton impact fee ordinance(s),25
established pursuant to § 66.0617, Wis. Stats., as amended, at
the time of application for final plat, condominium, or multiplefamily
dwelling development approval. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
25.Edotpr's Note: See Ch. 3.44, Impact Fees, of the Code.
§ 18.24.020 GRAFTON CODE § 18.24.020
1.01:434
b. Restrictive covenants shall be placed on plats identifying the
outlots reserved, along with the date of release from the
restrictions.
2. Reserved lands will be released from reservation to the owner if the
lands in excess of the established rate are not acquired within the
five-year period.
M. Public outdoor recreation land site fee option. See the requirements
and provisions of the Village of Grafton impact fee ordinance(s),26
established pursuant to § 66.0617, Wis. Stats., as amended.
N. Public pedestrian access.
1. Where a certified survey map, preliminary plat, condominium, or
multiple-family dwelling development abuts a public use area, such
as a park, lake, stream, hunting grounds, or any similar type of
public recreational area, the subdivider or condominium developer,
at the option of the Village of Grafton and/or the appropriate
municipality, shall provide a pedestrian access easement at least 20
feet wide at approved distance intervals connecting such public
area with a public street.
2. If it is deemed to be in the public interest by the Village of Grafton
or the appropriate municipality to reserve additional area for
proper development of the public access thoroughfare, the
subdivider or condominium developer of a certified survey map,
preliminary plat, condominium, or multiple-family dwelling
development shall reserve for acquisition by the Village of Grafton
or the municipality in which the land is located, a tract of land
adjacent to the thoroughfare which, in the judgment of the Village
of Grafton or the appropriate municipality, will adequately serve
the public interest. Such tract shall be reserved for a period of five
years from the date of recordation of the certified survey map, final
plat, or condominium, and if not acquired within that time, it shall
be released to the owner.
3. The dedication of land for public purposes, such as parkways or
recreational corridors, parks, playgrounds, open space sites,
rights-of-way or easements, becomes effective at the time of
approval and/or recording of the certified survey map, preliminary
plat, condominium, or multiple-family dwelling development.
4. On lands reserved for eventual public acquisition, no building or
development is permitted during the period of reservation.
a. The reservation period shall not be longer than five years
unless arranged otherwise with the subdivider.
26.Edotpr's Note: See Ch. 3.44, Impact Fees, of the Code.
§ 18.24.020 CODE ADOPTION § 18.24.020
1.01:435
Chapter 18.28
REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS
§ 18.28.010. Monuments.
All subdivisions shall be monumented as required by § 236.15, Wis. Stats.
§ 18.28.020. Improvements required. [Amended by Ord. No. 039,
Series 1995]
No final plat shall be approved by the Plan Commission or Village Board
unless the subdivider provides and dedicates the following facilities and
improvements within the time required by the Village Board.
b. Land so reserved must be shown on the final plat, certified
survey map, condominium or multiple-family dwelling
development plans.
O. Minimum site preparation required of dedicated public sites. When
public sites are dedicated as public sites, as described herein, the
subdivider or developer (as applicable) shall, at a minimum, be required
to:
1. Properly grade and contour the public site for proper drainage and
for the anticipated use of the area.
2. Cover areas to be seeded with a minimum of four inches of quality
topsoil. Said topsoil furnished for the park site shall consist of
natural loam, sandy loam, silt loam, silty clay loam, or clay loam
humus-bearing soils adapted to the sustenance of plant life, and
such topsoil shall be neither excessively acid nor excessively
alkaline.
3. Provide such improvements to the public site as may be agreed
upon and as set forth in the subdivider's agreement between the
Village and the subdivider or developer.
4. If the subdivider or developer (as applicable) fails to satisfy the
requirements of this section, the Village Board may contract said
completion and bill such costs to the subdivider or developer (as
applicable) following written notice to the subdivider or developer
(as applicable) of noncompliance. Failure of the subdivider or
developer (as applicable) to pay such costs may result in the
immediate withholding of all building permits for the subdivision,
certified survey map, condominium, or multiple-family dwelling
development until such costs are paid.
§ 18.24.020 GRAFTON CODE § 18.28.030
1.01:436
§ 18.28.030. Street and site grading. [Amended by Ord. No. 039,
Series 1995]
The subdivider shall have prepared, in accordance with requirements and
standards of the Village, plan and profile drawings together with typical
street cross-sections and specifications which indicate the proposed
established grades of all the streets shown on the plat. The subdivider shall
also have prepared a master site grading plan for the entire subdivision.
This plan shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements and
standards of the Village Board and shall show existing and proposed
elevations of all lot corners, control points and building locations. The plan
shall also indicate positive control of all storm drainage in and adjacent
to the plat. The cost of the preparation of such plans shall be paid by
the subdivider. After approval of these plans by the Village Engineer, the
subdivider shall grade or cause to be graded the full width of the right-ofway
of the proposed streets in accordance with the approved drawings. The
full width of the right-of-way shall also include that area between marginal
access streets and major streets and shall be graded and prepared for
seeding under the supervision of the Village-approved inspector. All stumps
and trees which cannot be saved, boulders and other similar items shall be
removed. The subdivider shall also cause to be graded the entire subdivision
lot area in accordance with the master site grading plan. Upon completion
of all street and subdivision grading, the subdivider shall supply the Village
with a document prepared by his engineer or surveyor certifying that the
completed grading work is in compliance with the master site grading plan.
The cost of all required grading work, supervision, certification, inspection
and engineering fees shall be paid for by the subdivider.
§ 18.28.040. Stormwater management. [Amended by Ord. No. 039,
Series 1995; Ord. No. 008, Series 1998; Ord. No. 025, Series 2006]
All subdivisions shall be provided with adequate stormwater management
facilities as specified in this section. The cost of all stormwater management
facilities shall be paid by the subdivider, including construction, engineering
and inspection, except as noted in § 18.28.180.
A. Storm sewers.
1. Storm sewers and storm sewer laterals shall be provided to serve
every lot, except where lots directly abut platted drainageways or
stormwater retention facilities, in which case lots may drain
directly to those facilities.
2. Storm sewers shall be designed to accommodate the ten-year
recurrence interval storm, except in arterial streets, where they
shall be designed to accommodate the fifty-year recurrence
interval storm.
3. Storm sewers and appurtenances shall be constructed in
accordance with the Village of Grafton "Standard Specifications for
Development Construction."
§ 18.28.030 CODE ADOPTION § 18.28.040
1.01:437
§ 18.28.050. Storm drainage.
Where the subdivision is not within reasonable access to adequate
stormwater outfall facilities, the subdivider shall have prepared plan and
profile construction drawings and shall cause to have installed adequate
stormwater drainage facilities, including necessary road ditches, street
and driveway culverts, spillways, checks, storm sewers, inlet leads, inlet
basins and open drainage channels, all of which shall be constructed within
publicly dedicated streets or easements and shall be subject to the
requirements of the Village Engineer.
§ 18.28.060. Erosion and sedimentation control. [Amended by Ord.
No. A-494-86, 1986; Ord. No. 039, Series 1995]
Erosion and sediment control practices shall conform to Chapter 23.04,
Control of Construction Site Erosion Resulting from Land-Disturbing
Construction Activities, of the Code.
§ 18.28.070. Sanitary sewer. [Amended by Ord. No. 039, Series
1995; Ord. No. 010, Series 2006]
The subdivider shall have plan and profile drawings and specifications
prepared in accordance with the Village master sanitary sewer plan for
the installation of sanitary sewerage facilities, including lateral house
connections for each lot in the subdivision, extended to the lot line. Upon
approval of the plans by the Village Engineer, the subdivider shall cause
to be installed in accordance with the Village of Grafton's Standard
Specifications for Development Construction all facilities required, and the
cost for such installation, including inspection, supervision and engineering
fees, including the costs incurred for updating the Village GIS mapping,
shall be paid for by the subdivider.
§ 18.28.080. Water mains. [Amended by Ord. No. 039, Series 1995;
Ord. No. 010, Series 2006]
The developer of any subdivision annexed to the Village shall have prepared
plans and profile drawings and specifications for the installation of water
main facilities in accordance with the Village master water main plan and
B. Flood protection.
1. Subdivisions shall be designed so that all structure openings are at
least two feet above the one-hundred-year floodplain elevation.
Overflow routes shall be established to provide relief during storm
events which exceed design conditions.
C. Stormwater retention.
1. Stormwater from the subdivision shall be managed in accordance
with the requirements of Chapter 23.01, Control of Post-
Construction Runoff, of the Code.
§ 18.28.040 GRAFTON CODE § 18.28.080
1.01:438
all utility studies, including the water main, pipe fittings, valves, hydrants,
lateral house connections for each lot in the subdivision, extended to the lot
line. Upon approval of the plans by the Village Engineer, the subdivider shall
cause to be installed in accordance with the Village of Grafton Standard
Specifications for Development Construction all facilities required, and the
cost of same, including inspection, supervision and engineering fees,
including the costs incurred for updating the Village GIS mapping, shall be
paid for by the subdivider.
§ 18.28.090. Street surfacing. [Amended by Ord. No. A-455-84,
1984; Ord. No. 039, Series 1995]
After completion of the grading and construction of sewer and water
improvements in the street areas, the subdivider shall surface or cause to
be surfaced the required roadway to the width indicated in § 18.20.070 of
this title and shall install portland cement concrete or bituminous concrete
pavement and granular base course of a thickness appropriate for the
anticipated vehicle usage on the street and available subgrade soil support,
consistent with good engineering practice and in accordance with the
Village of Grafton Standard Specifications for Development Construction.
The design of the pavement, including granular base course, shall be
subject to review and approval by the Village Engineer.
§ 18.28.100. Sidewalks. [Amended by Ord. No. 039, Series 1995]
The subdivider shall install concrete sidewalks in accordance with the
specifications adopted by the Village Board along both sides of all streets
and boulevards shown on the plat. The cost of the sidewalk, required
inspection, supervision and engineering fees shall be paid for by the
subdivider.
§ 18.28.110. Curbs and gutters. [Amended by Ord. No. 039, Series
1995]
The subdivider shall install concrete curbs and gutters along both sides of
all streets and boulevards shown on the plat in accordance with the Village
of Grafton Standard Specifications for Development Construction. The cost
of the curb and gutter, required inspection, supervision and engineering
fees shall be paid for by the subdivider.
§ 18.28.130. Pedestrianways.
The subdivider shall install concrete sidewalks in pedestrianways along
either or both sides of streets where required by the Village Board.
§ 18.28.140. Street trees. [Amended by Ord. No. 039, Series 1995;
Ord. No. 023, Series 1996]
The subdivider shall pay an amount into the street tree fund sufficient for
the installation of one street tree for each 40 feet of street frontage in the
subdivision. As each lot is developed, the Village shall install street trees
§ 18.28.080 CODE ADOPTION § 18.28.140
1.01:439
in accordance with § 11.32.050 of the Code. The amount of the street tree
payment shall be determined by the Village Engineer and be included in the
subdivider's agreement.
§ 18.28.150. Streetlights. [Amended by Ord. No. 039, Series 1995;
Ord. No. 009, Series 2004]
Streetlights shall be installed on all streets within the Village of Grafton.
The Village Engineer, with the consent of the Chief of Police, shall
determine the location of the streetlights within residential subdivisions.
All commercial, business, arterial and collector roads shall be designed
in accordance with the American National Standard Practice for Roadway
Lighting. The location and type shall be approved by the Village Engineer.
The cost for supplying and installing the required streetlights shall be paid
for by the subdivider. If other than the Village standard lighting units are
requested, a maintenance cost shall also be required of the subdivider.
§ 18.28.160. Street signs. [Amended by Ord. No. 039, Series 1995]
Street and traffic control signs of a size and type approved by the Village
Engineer shall be provided at the locations specified by the Village
Engineer. The cost of supplying and installing the required signs shall be
paid for by the subdivider.
§ 18.28.170. Public utilities. [Amended by Ord. No. 039, Series
1995]
All utility lines for telephone, cable TV and electric service shall be placed
in rear lot line easements where practicable and side lot line easements
where necessary. All telephone, cable TV, electric and gas service lines
shall be placed underground entirely throughout a subdivision area, unless
otherwise approved by the Village Board. Conduits or cables shall be placed
within easements or dedicated public ways in a manner which will not
conflict with other municipal underground services; proposed utility layouts
shall be shown on copies of the preliminary plat supplied by the subdivider
to the appropriate utilities. These layouts shall be reviewed and approved
by the Village Engineer prior to the completion of the final plat.
§ 18.28.180. Large-capacity sewer mains. [Amended by Ord. No.
A-525-89, 1989]
Where sewer mains of larger capacity than normally necessary to serve
the subdivision, as delineated in the preliminary plat, are required by the
respective system plan, the subdivider shall be required to pay for the
proportionate benefit of the installation to his subdivision as established by
the Village Board in accordance with § 3.36.040 of the Code.
§ 18.28.140 GRAFTON CODE § 18.28.181
1.01:440
§ 18.28.181. Large-capacity water mains. [Amended by Ord. No.
A-525-89, 1989]
Where water mains of larger capacity than normally necessary to serve
the subdivision, as delineated in the preliminary plat, are required by the
respective system plan, the subdivider shall be required to pay for the
proportionate benefit of the installation to his subdivision as established by
the Village Board.
§ 18.28.190. Sewerage lift facilities.
Where sanitary sewer lift stations and force mains are required to lift
sewerage to a higher elevation and to the gravity sewer system, the
subdivider shall have the plan and profile drawings and specifications
prepared for the installation of such sewerage lift facilities. Such
installation and the inspection, supervision and engineering fees shall be
paid for by the subdivider unless otherwise determined by the Village
Board.
§ 18.28.200. Dedication of facilities.
Where directed by the Village Board, the subdivider shall deed to a public
or private utility or cooperative the facilities of the community sewerage
treatment plant and/or community well system.
§ 18.28.210. Financial guarantee. [Amended by Ord. No. 039, Series
1995]
In the event the facilities and improvements enumerated in this chapter
have not been fully installed at the time the plat is submitted for final
approval, the subdivider shall file with the Director of Administrative
Services an irrevocable letter of credit from a responsible bank, savings and
loan association or other financial institution, duly licensed and authorized
to do business in the state, which irrevocable letter of credit shall be in
an amount equal to the cost of making the necessary public improvements.
Such irrevocable letter of credit shall be approved by the Village Attorney
and shall be of an amount determined by the Village Engineer to amply
cover the cost of completing such facilities and improvements or, in the
event of an improved staged development as provided in § 18.28.240, an
amount ample to cover the cost of completing such portion or part of the
subdivision. Such irrevocable letter of credit shall provide that it may be
drawn upon the sole authorization of the Director of Administrative Services
without any other approval or authorization.
§ 18.28.220. Engineer's approval. [Amended by Ord. No. 039, Series
1995]
The adequacy of all facilities and improvements listed in this chapter and
their proper installation shall be subject to approval of the Village Engineer.
The subdivider shall pay to the Village all such costs incurred by the
§ 18.28.181 CODE ADOPTION § 18.28.220
1.01:441
Village Engineer. Such amounts shall be included in the financial guarantee
provided for in § 18.28.210.
§ 18.28.230. Approval of improvements.
All such facilities and improvements as described in this chapter shall
be subject to the requirements, inspection and approval of the Village
Board, Village Engineer and other agencies empowered with approval. Such
installations shall be performed in accordance with the master plans and
general specifications of the Village.
§ 18.28.240. Partial improvements.
In all instances where it appears to be satisfactory to the Village Board that
the whole of a platted subdivision cannot immediately be fully improved
with respect to the installation of all storm and sanitary sewers and related
facilities and street improvements, by reason of unavoidable delay in the
acquisition of lands necessary for such improvements, or by reason of the
unavoidable delay in obtaining necessary engineering data and information,
or for some other good reason or cause, the Village Board may, in its
sole discretion, authorize the subdivider to proceed with the installation
of improvements required under this title on a portion or part of the
subdivision, and in such event, the requirements of this title shall apply to
that portion or part thereof authorized for immediate improvement.
§ 18.28.250. Dedication of facilities and improvements.
All facilities and improvements installed prior to the final approval of the
plat shall be considered dedicated to the Village, along with streets and
other public areas, upon approval of the plat. Facilities and improvements
completed under written contracts or agreements with the Village after the
approval of the plat shall be considered dedicated upon their approval and
acceptance and release of the subdivider from the requirements of such
contracts or agreements.
Chapter 18.32
SUBDIVISIONS CREATED BY SUCCESSIVE DIVISIONS
§ 18.32.010. Assessor's plat in lieu of final plat.
Where it is not practicable to require that a final plat of a subdivision
created by successive divisions be filed in accordance with this title, the
Village Board may in lieu thereof order an assessor's plat to be made under
§ 70.27, Wis. Stats., and may assess the cost thereof as provided in such
section or to the subdivider.
§ 18.28.220 GRAFTON CODE § 18.32.020
1.01:442
§ 18.32.020. Compliance required.
Regardless of the type of plat filed, any such subdivision shall comply with
all provisions of this title to the extent that they may reasonably be applied.
Chapter 18.36
DEDICATIONS
§ 18.36.010. Effect of recording on dedications.
When any plat is certified, signed, acknowledged and recorded as
prescribed by Ch. 236, Wis. Stats., every donation or grant to the public
or any person, society or corporation marked or noted as such on the plat
shall be deemed a sufficient conveyance to vest the fee simple of all parcels
of land so marked or noted and shall be considered a general warranty
against such donors, their heirs and assigns to the donees for their use for
the purposes therein expressed and no other; and the land intended for the
streets, alleys, ways, commons or other public uses as designated on the
plat shall be held by the Village in which the plat is situated in trust to and
for such uses and purposes.
§ 18.36.020. Dedications to public accepted by approval.
When a final plat of a subdivision has been approved by the Village and
all other required approvals are obtained and the plat is recorded, such
approval shall constitute an acceptance for the purpose designated on the
plat of the uses of all lands shown thereon as dedicated to the public,
including street dedications (§ 236.29, Wis. Stats.).
Chapter 18.40
RESTRICTIONS FOR PUBLIC BENEFIT
§ 18.40.010. Restrictions for public benefit.
Any restriction placed on platted land by covenant, grant of easement or in
any other manner, which was required by a public body or which names a
public body as grantee, promisee or beneficiary, shall vest in the Village the
right to enforce the restriction at law or in equity against anyone who has or
acquires an interest in the land subject to the restriction. Such restriction
may be released or waived in writing by the Village having the right of
enforcement.
Chapter 18.44
ADOPTION OF MORE RESTRICTIVE PROVISIONS
§ 18.32.020 CODE ADOPTION § 18.44.010
1.01:443
§ 18.44.010. Provisions adopted.
To accomplish the purposes of Chapter 18.04 of this title, inasmuch as the
Village has established a planning agency, the Village Board, pursuant to
§ 236.45, Wis. Stats., adopts additional platting requirements which are
deemed more restrictive than the general provisions of such statutes, and
no plat shall be approved by the Plan Commission nor shall the same
be entitled to be recorded unless such plat complies with such additional
requirements as may appear in this title.
Chapter 18.48
FEES
§ 18.48.010. Preliminary plat filing fee.
To defray the cost of administrative burden resulting from the act of
subdividing land within the Village, administrative fees as set by the Village
Board shall be paid by each subdivider submitting a preliminary plat for
consideration and approval at the time of plat submission.
§ 18.48.020. Final plat filing fee.
To defray the cost of administrative burden resulting from the act of
subdividing land within the Village, administrative fees as set by the Village
Board shall be paid by each subdivider submitting a final plat for
consideration and approval at the time of plat submission.
§ 18.48.030. Certified survey map filing fee.
To defray the cost of administrative burden resulting from the costs
associated with the review, copying and recording of the certified survey
map, an administrative fee as set by the Village Board shall be paid by the
owner at the time of submittal of the certified survey map.
Chapter 18.52
INSPECTION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
§ 18.52.010. Inspection of public improvements within subdivisions.
All required land improvements to be installed under the provisions of this
title shall be subject to inspection at all times by the Village Engineer or
other authorized person or department, and no underground improvement
shall be covered until the subdivider, his agents, servants or contractors
have first obtained permission to cover any underground installation from
the department authorized to make such inspection.
Chapter 18.56
§ 18.44.010 GRAFTON CODE § 18.52.010
1.01:444
BUILDING PERMIT ISSUANCE
§ 18.56.010. Issuance of building permits.
Building permits shall be issued upon completion of the following: A
building permit shall be issued by the Village Building Inspector for the
construction of any building, structure or improvement of land, or any lot
within a subdivision or other land division as defined in this title which as
been approved for platting or dividing upon completion of all requirements
of this title, or upon the award and completion of a contract for the
construction of all underground improvements and the gravel base course
for the streets has been installed. All building permits shall be subject to the
approval of the Village Building Inspector and Village Engineer.
Chapter 18.60
OCCUPANCY PERMIT ISSUANCE
§ 18.60.010. When issued.
An occupancy permit shall be granted by the Village Building Inspector
for the use of any structure within a subdivision approved for platting
or replatting when the required utility and public improvement facilities
have been installed, made ready to service the property, and approved by
the Village, and roadways providing access to the subject lot or lots have
been constructed or are in the course of construction and are suitable for
vehicular traffic.
Chapter 18.64
VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
§ 18.64.010. Variations and exceptions.
The Plan Commission may recommend variations from these requirements
in specific cases which in its opinion do not affect the general plan or the
intent of this title where undue hardship may result by strict compliance.
Such recommendation shall be communicated to the Village Board or
governing county authorities in writing, substantiating the recommended
variation. The Village Board may approve variations from these
requirements in specific cases which in its opinion do not adversely affect
the general plan or the spirit of this title.
Chapter 18.68
RECORDING PLATS
§ 18.52.010 CODE ADOPTION § 18.68.010
1.01:445
§ 18.68.010. Recordation.
A preliminary or final plat of any subdivision shall be entitled to be recorded
in the Recorder's office when it has been approved in the manner prescribed
in this title and offered for record with 12 months after the date of the last
approval of the plan and within 36 months after the first approval.
Chapter 18.72
PENALTIES
§ 18.72.010. Forfeiture for improper recording.
Any person causing his final plat to be recorded without submitting such
plat for approval as required in this title, or who fails to present the same
for record within the time prescribed after approval, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the general penalty in Chapter 1.08 of this Code.
§ 18.72.020. Transfer of lots in unrecorded plats.
Any subdivider or his agent who offers or contracts to convey, or conveys,
any subdivision as defined in § 236.02(12), Wis. Stats., or lot or parcel which
lies in a subdivision as defined in § 236.02(12), Wis. Stats., knowing that the
final plat thereof has not been recorded, may, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to the general penalty in Chapter 1.08 of this Code.
§ 18.72.030. Failure to place monuments.
Any owner, surveyor or subdivider who fails to place monuments as
prescribed by this title when subdividing land shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the general penalty in Chapter 1.08 of this Code.
§ 18.72.040. Removing or disturbing monuments.
Any person who knowingly removes or disturbs any monument or survey
marker within the Village without permission of any governing authority
or who fails to report such disturbance or removal shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the general penalty in Chapter 1.08 of this Code.
§ 18.72.050. Failure to replace removed or disturbed monument.
Any person who fails to properly replace any monument or survey marker
removed or disturbed by him, when ordered to do so by any officer of the
Village, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the general penalty in
Chapter 1.08 of this Code.
§ 18.72.060. Additional penalties.
Any person who shall fraudulently or maliciously mislead the Village or any
of its officers, agents or employees in relation to any fact, information or
other matter pertinent to subdivision of land as contained in this title, with a
§ 18.68.010 GRAFTON CODE § 18.72.060
1.01:446
view to obtaining any benefit, privilege or other consideration, or who shall
falsify any statement required to be made upon any application for a plat
approval, or who shall misrepresent any material part of a subdivision plat
filed or pending before the Village Board or the Plan Commission or any
department of the Village charged with the administrative functions of land
subdividing, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the general penalty
in Chapter 1.08 of this Code.
Title 19: Zoning
Chapter 19
ZONING
Title 20: Signs
Chapter 20.04
SIGNS
§ 20.04.010. Permits and fees required. [Amended 8-4-2014 by Ord.
No. 015-2014]
§ 20.04.020. General provisions. [Amended by Ord. No. 016, Series
2005]
A. No sign shall hereafter be located, erected, moved, reconstructed,
extended, enlarged, converted or structurally altered without a sign
permit and applicable fee, with the following exceptions:
1. Those signs excepted in § 20.04.020.
2. The temporary sign permit fee for any nonprofit, religious or
government event held in the Village of Grafton shall be waived. All
organizations shall submit a completed permit application for each
signage event.
B. The sign shall also meet all the structural requirements of the Building
Code.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SIGN — Any object, device, display, structure or part thereof, either
independently or in conjunction, situated outdoors and in view of the
general public, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or
attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization,
business, product, service, event or location by any means, including
words, letters, figures, logos, symbols, fixtures, projected images, inwindow
signs, window decals, or perforated window films. Signs do not
§ 18.72.060 CODE ADOPTION § 20.04.020
1.01:447
include the flag or emblem of any nation, organization of nations, state,
city, religious, fraternal or civic organization; also merchandise and
pictures or models of products or services incorporated in a window
display, works of art which in no way identify a product, or scoreboards
located on athletic fields. Building colors and outline lighting which do
not convey a logo or message specific to the use are not considered
signs. Traffic control and other public agency signs located within
a right-of-way are not included within this definition and are not
regulated by the provisions of this title.[Amended 8-4-2014 by Ord.
No. 015-2014]
B. Sign purposes.
1. Advertising: A sign that has as its purpose to promote, advertise or
sell a product or service obtainable on the premises upon which the
sign is located and a sign whose intent is not merely limited to
identifying the premises.
2. Auxiliary: A sign which provides special information such as price,
hours of operation, or warning, and which does not include brand
names or information regarding product lines or services.
Examples of such signs include signs which list prices of gasoline,
up to one price listing sign per type of fuel, which must be
displayed on a single structure.
3. Community/public information: A permanent sign approved with a
conditional use permit which may have changeable copy and which
is limited to the display of information of interest to the general
community regarding scheduled public events and public activities
and in no way relates to a commercial activity.
4. Directional: A sign which indicates only the name, logo (if under
one square foot), and/or direction of a pedestrian or traffic facility,
or a particular building within a complex of structures, on the
property on which said facility or building is located.
5. Group: A sign displaying the collective name of a group of uses
such as the title of a shopping center, office park, or industrial park
and its tenants. Refer to § 20.04.150 of this chapter.
6. Identification: A sign indicating the name and/or address of the
project, property owner, tenant and/or manager of the property;
address and name and phone number of the property manager.
7. Temporary: A sign or advertising display (including festoons,
pennants, banners, pinwheels and similar devices) intended to be
displayed for a certain period of time. Included in the definition of
"temporary signs" are retailers' signs temporarily displayed for the
purpose of informing the public of a sale or special offer. If a sign
display area is permanent but the message displayed is subject to
periodic changes, that sign shall not be considered as temporary. A
mobile or portable sign shall not be considered a temporary sign or
§ 20.04.020 GRAFTON CODE § 20.04.020
1.01:448
used for such a purpose. A changeable copy sign or an electronic
message sign shall not be considered a temporary sign.
C. Sign types.
1. Awning: A type of projecting, on-building sign consisting of a fabric
or fabric-like sheathing material.
2. Animated or moving: Any sign that, through the use of moving
structural elements, flashing or sequential lights, lighting
elements, or other automated method, results in movement or
change of sign image or text. The presentation of pictorials and
graphics on signs displayed in a progression of frames which give
the illusion of motion, including but not limited to the illusion of
moving objects, moving patterns or bands of lights, or expanding or
contracting shapes.
3. Changeable copy: A sign or portion thereof designed to
accommodate frequent message changes, composed of characters,
letters or illustrations and that can be changed or rearranged
manually without altering the face or surface of such sign. Also
referred to as "reader boards."
4. Electronic message: Signs with alphabetic, pictographic or
symbolic informational content that can be changed or altered on a
fixed display screen composed of electrically illuminated segments.
Includes LED displays, electronic signs, LED video displays, and
electronic variable message signs.
5. Freestanding: A self-supporting sign resting on or supported by
means of poles, standards or any other type of base on the ground.
This type of sign includes monument signs and pole (pylon) signs.
6. Ground. A type of freestanding sign whose bottom edge is located
within one foot of a ground-mounted pedestal and whose top edge
is located at a height as measured from grade. Also referred to as a
"monument sign."
7. Individual channel letter: Channel letters are individual extruded
metal structures with plastic faces, and typically include internal
neon or LED illumination, that form a sign. Also referred to as a
"skeleton letter wall sign" in this chapter.
8. Kiosk: A bulletin board located on a property or building for posting
temporary information or posters, notices and announcements.
9. Marquee: A type of projecting, on-building sign sheltering the
entrance and/or entrance approaches of a theater, auditorium,
fairground, museum or other use, which advertises present and
scheduled events.
10. Menu board: A portable sign displaying the type and price of food
and beverages sold in connection with dining, or a freestanding
§ 20.04.020 CODE ADOPTION § 20.04.020
1.01:449
§ 20.04.025. Number of freestanding signs permitted on parcels.
[Amended by Ord. No. 016, Series 2005]
All parcels shall be limited to one freestanding sign, regardless of the
number of users on the site or the number of street frontages abutting the
property. A corner property requesting an additional freestanding sign must
apply for a sign variance before the Plan Commission. Shopping center and
multiple-tenant commercial building sites shall comply with § 20.04.150 of
this chapter.
§ 20.04.030. Determination of surface area of signs. [Amended by
Ord. No. 019, Series 2004; Ord. No. 016, Series 2005]
sign permanently affixed to the ground in connection with placing
an order from a vehicle at a drive-through restaurant.
11. Mobile: A sign mounted on a frame or chassis designed to be easily
relocated, including vehicles and/or trailers whose principal
commercial use is for signage.
12. Monument: See "ground" sign type.
13. Pole or pylon: A type of freestanding sign whose bottom edge is
located more than one foot above a ground-mounted pedestal. Also
referred to as a "pole sign."
14. Portable: A sign that is not permanently affixed to a structure or the
ground.
15. Projecting: A type of on-building sign, other than a wall sign, which
is attached to and projects more than one foot, generally
perpendicular, from a structure or building face.
16. Reader board: See "changeable copy" sign type
17. Wall: A type of on-building sign mounted parallel to a building
facade or other vertical building surface.
18. Window:
a. A sign located within a building that is attached to the inside
face of an exterior window and visible from the exterior of the
building.
b. A sign not attached to the window, but so placed within the
building so as to convey its message to viewers located outside
but in close proximity of the building.
A. The surface area for all signs, except skeleton letter wall signs, shall
include all of the display area of the sign. All structural elements such
as frames, pylons or braces shall not be included in the computation of
surface area. However, if the structural elements are decoratively
§ 20.04.020 GRAFTON CODE § 20.04.030
1.01:450
§ 20.04.040. Signs permitted in residential districts. [Amended by
Ord. No. 042, Series 2000; Ord. No. 016, Series 2005]
All signs are prohibited in all residential and agricultural districts, except
the following signs, which are permitted subject to the following
regulations:
covered, the covered area shall be included in the computation of
surface area.
B. The gross surface area of a skeleton letter wall sign consisting of
individual letters and/or symbols shall be determined as follows: The
combined areas of the smallest rectangles which encompass each word,
letter, figure, emblem, and other element of the sign message.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code
Adoption)]
C. Each sign face or display area used for advertising or identification
purposes shall be included in determining the total surface area of a
sign.
A. Signs over show windows or doors of a nonconforming business
establishment announcing, without display or elaboration, only the
name and occupation of the proprietor, and not to exceed two feet in
height and 10 feet in length.
B. Real estate signs.
§ 20.04.030 CODE ADOPTION § 20.04.040
1.01:451
1. Real estate signs which advertise the sale, rental or lease of
premises upon which they are temporarily located only may be
placed in any district. A real estate sign shall not exceed eight
square feet in area;
2. Real estate signs shall be limited to one sign for each lot, except
corner lots, where two signs, one facing each street, shall be
permitted. Real estate signs shall be removed within seven days of
the sale or lease of the subject property;
3. Subdivision entrance signs shall be allowed at the main entrance(s)
to a subdivision with a maximum area of 32 square feet and shall
not be located in the right-of-way. Temporary real estate open
house directional signs may be located on private property only
with owner permission. Directional signs may also be posted in the
right-of-way between the curb and sidewalk or, in the absence of
curb or sidewalk, within three feet of the edge of the road;
4. All temporary real estate directional signs must be removed the
same day posted, immediately after closing of the open house;
5. A twenty-five-dollar fee will be charged if violated. Confiscated
signs will be available for owner pickup at the Grafton Police
Station;
6. Temporary flags or banners may be displayed to promote the sale
or rental of model homes or apartments for the duration of their
use as models only after authorization by the Building Inspector.
C. Name, occupation and warning signs not to exceed two square feet,
located on the premises.
D. Bulletin boards for public, charitable or religious institutions not to
exceed 16 square feet in area, located on the premises.
E. Memorial signs, tablets, names of buildings and date of erection, when
cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of metal and affixed
flat against a structure.
F. Official signs, such as traffic-control signs, parking restrictions,
information, notices and directional signs not to exceed six square feet
in area.
G. Temporary signs or banners for promotion of events sponsored by civic
clubs, churches, schools or other nonprofit organizations may be
erected in any district for a period of up to three weeks. Temporary
rummage sale signs may be located only on the lot or parcel on which
the rummage sale is occurring or may be placed on other private
property, provided the property owner's permission is given. Rummage
sale signs shall not exceed eight square feet in area and shall be in
place only during the daily hours of operation of the rummage sale.
§ 20.04.040 GRAFTON CODE § 20.04.040
1.01:452
§ 20.04.050. Signs permitted in C-2 and C-3 Business Districts and
Industrial Districts. [Amended by Ord. No. 013, Series 2000; Ord.
No. 042 Series 2000; Ord. No. 016, Series 2005]
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, signs are permitted in the C-2
and C-3 Business Districts and Industrial Districts subject to the following
regulations. For shopping center and multitenant commercial buildings see
§ 20.04.150 of this chapter.
H. Election campaign signs may be located only on private property in any
district, provided the property owner's permission is given. Election
campaign signs may not be located on public property or within public
rights-of-way. Election campaign signs shall be erected during an
election campaign period, as that term is defined in § 12.04, Wis. Stats.,
and shall be removed within seven days following an election. If said
signs are not removed during the seven-day period, the Building
Inspector may initiate having the signs removed, and the cost of such
removal shall be chargeable to the owner of the property on which the
sign is located. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1.01, Code Adoption)]
I. Changeable copy signs and electronic message signs shall not be
permitted in residential districts.
A. Wall signs placed against or painted on the exterior walls of principal
and accessory buildings shall not extend more than 12 inches outside of
a building wall surface and shall not exceed 250 square feet in area for
any one premises. [Amended 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 015-2014]
B. Projecting signs fastened to, suspended from, or supported by
structures shall not exceed 50 square feet in area for any one premises;
shall not extend more than six feet into any required yard; shall not
extend more than six feet into any public right-of-way; shall not be less
than 10 feet from all side lot lines; and shall not be less than 10 feet
above the sidewalk, nor 15 feet above a driveway or an alley.
C. Ground or pole signs are permitted in commercial and industrial
districts only after review and approval by the Director of Planning and
Development or Plan Commission prior to the issuance of a building
permit. Ground or pole signs shall not exceed 100 square feet in area on
one side and shall not exceed 200 square feet in area on all sides for any
one premises, and shall not exceed 24 feet in height. Ground or pole
signs shall be located as indicated in § 20.04.060. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
D. Directional ground signs giving direction to businesses conducted on
the premises on which the sign is located shall be permitted but shall
not extend into the right-of-way.27
27.Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, regarding roof signs, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 015-2014.
§ 20.04.040 CODE ADOPTION § 20.04.050
1.01:453
§ 20.04.055. Signs permitted in C-1 Neighborhood Business
District, I Institutional District and PR Park and Recreation
District. [Amended by Ord. No. 035, Series 2000; Ord. No. 016,
E. Permanent window signs shall be placed only on the inside of
commercial buildings and shall not exceed 25% of the window bank
unbroken by architectural features such as columns or building
facades, as determined by the Director of Planning and Development.
[Amended 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 015-2014]
F. Temporary signs or banners, but not to exceed a period of 30 days.
G. Real estate signs which advertise the sale, rental or lease of premises
upon which they are temporarily located only may be placed in any
district. A real estate sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. Real
estate signs shall be limited to one sign for each lot, except corner lots
where two signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted. Real estate
signs shall be removed within seven days of the sale or lease of the
subject property. Temporary real estate open house directional signs
shall be located only on private property, provided the property owner's
permission is given, and are permitted only during open house hours.
Temporary flags or banners may be displayed to promote the sale or
lease of industrial or business property only after authorization by the
Building Inspector.
H. Election campaign signs may be located only on private property in any
district, provided the property owner's permission is given. Election
campaign signs may not be located on public property or within public
rights-of-way. Election campaign signs shall be erected during an
election campaign period, as that term is defined in § 12.04, Wis. Stats.,
and shall be removed within seven days following an election. If said
signs are not removed during the seven-day period, the Building
Inspector may initiate having the signs removed, and the cost of such
removal shall be chargeable to the owner of the property on which the
sign is located. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1.01, Code Adoption)]
I. Signs for automated teller machines (ATMs) are allowed only to the
extent that the permitted ATM sign type, location, number and area,
combined with the signage provided for the principal use of the
premises, do not exceed the maximum type, location, number and area
of signs allowed per premises under this title.
J. Changeable copy signs and electronic message signs shall be permitted
in the C-2 and C-3 Business Districts and the Industrial District by a
special message reader board permit to be reviewed by the Plan
Commission. In reviewing the permit request, the Plan Commission
may approve or deny any application, subject but not limited to
architectural design, size, interference with surrounding development,
area, size, shape, height, lighting, traffic and location, any adverse
impact, and compliance with all standards for message reader boards.
§ 20.04.050 GRAFTON CODE § 20.04.055
1.01:454
Series 2005; 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 015-2014; 3-6-2017 by Ord. No.
004-2017]
Signs are permitted in the C-1 Neighborhood Business, the I Institutional
and the PR Park and Recreation Districts, subject to the following
regulations:
A. Wall signs. Wall signs placed against or painted on the exterior walls of
principal and accessory buildings shall not extend more than 12 inches
from the outside of a building wall surface and shall not exceed 48
square feet in area for any one premises. No wall sign shall extend
above the roof or parapet line.
B. Ground signs. One ground-mounted sign (not including a pole sign or
pylon sign) may be installed on any one premises. The maximum area of
such a ground sign shall be 32 square feet for one side and 64 square
feet for both sides, and the maximum height shall be nine feet.
C. Directional ground signs. On-premises directional ground signs may be
erected giving directions to areas such as employee or visitor parking
only and shall not extend into the road right-of-way. The maximum size
of each such directional sign shall be two square feet per side or four
square feet for all sides, and the maximum height shall be three feet.
D. Special event signs. Temporary signs or banners for promotion of
events sponsored by civic clubs, churches, schools or other nonprofit
organizations may be erected, provided that such signs are located on
the site of the event and do not total more than 32 square feet for any
one premises at any one time. Such signs shall not be erected more
than three weeks before the event and shall be removed not more than
five days after the completion of the event.
E. Other temporary signs. Temporary construction signs, real estate signs,
and election campaign signs shall be permitted in accordance with the
provisions of § 20.04.040B and H.
F. Prohibited signs. Specifically prohibited signs included billboards and
other off-premises advertising signs, projecting signs, roof signs, pole
or pylon signs, vehicle signs, balloons, inflatable advertising devices,
inflatable signs, pennants, and flashing or moving signs or beacons.
G. Changeable copy signs and electronic message signs shall be permitted
in the C-1 Neighborhood Business District, the I Institutional District,
and the PR Park and Recreation District by a special message reader
board permit to be reviewed by the Plan Commission. In reviewing the
permit request, the Plan Commission may approve or deny any
application, subject but not limited to architectural design, size,
interference with surrounding development, sign area, size, shape,
height, lighting, traffic and location, any adverse impact, and
compliance with all standards for message reader boards.
§ 20.04.055 CODE ADOPTION § 20.04.060
1.01:455
§ 20.04.060. Location of ground or pole signs and bulletin boards.
[Amended by Ord. No. 042, Series 2000]
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, in all commercial, industrial,
office, business park, park and recreation, agriculture and industrial zoning
districts ground or pole signs and bulletin boards shall be set back a
minimum of 10 feet from the front lot line. In the case of corner lots, signs
shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from each lot line facing a street.
Signs shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from interior side lot lines
and rear lot lines. No portion of a ground or pole sign display area or its
structural or component parts shall encroach or extend into the minimum
setback areas indicated in this section.
§ 20.04.065. Measurement of height of ground or pole signs.
[Amended by Ord. No. 024, Series 1999]
The height of ground or pole signs shall be measured as the vertical
distance between the established grade and the highest portion of the sign
or supporting structure. The established grade may not be artificially raised
in the area beneath the ground or pole sign for the primary purpose of
increasing the prominence or perceived height of the sign.
§ 20.04.070. Downtown signage overlay restrictions. [Amended by
Ord. No. 019, Series 2004; Ord. No. 016, Series 2005]
All signs in the CBD and other downtown districts. All signs in the CBD
District, C-1 District, M-1 District and PUD districts within the area defined
by the Grafton Downtown Master Plan shall meet those requirements set
forth in this section.
A. Approval required. Any new, replacement, or relocated sign intended
for installation for a period exceeding 30 days shall be permitted only
after the specific size, design, appearance, and location have been
approved by the Planning and Development Department following
submittal of a complete application with required application materials
specified by the Director of Planning and Development. [Amended
8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 015-2014]
B. Minimum standards. All new and replacement signs, including
temporary signs, shall at a minimum meet the requirements of
§ 20.04.050 applicable to signs permitted in business and industrial
districts and all other applicable sections of this chapter. Where the
provisions in this section are more restrictive, these more restrictive
provisions shall prevail.
C. Downtown design guidelines. The design guidelines for signage
included in the Grafton Downtown Master Plan, adopted by the Plan
Commission on February 23, 1999, and from time to time amended,
shall be used as additional criteria in the review and approval of signs
within the CBD district and other downtown districts within the area
covered by the Downtown Master Plan. The Planning and Development
§ 20.04.060 GRAFTON CODE § 20.04.070
1.01:456
Department may waive compliance with one or more of these design
guidelines, provided it finds that:
1. The sign is in conformance with the overall goals and desired
downtown theme expressed in the Downtown Master Plan; and
2. The sign demonstrates excellence in materials, design, texture,
color, scale and relationship to building architecture.
D. Sign lighting. All sign lighting shall be exterior to the sign, except that
solid wood or metal lettering with lighting behind each letter to create a
halo effect is also permitted. All sign light fixtures of over 100 watts
shall be shielded from all points on the adjacent public street pavement.
Sign lighting shall otherwise be in conformance with § 19.05.0400 of
the Zoning Ordinance.28
E. Permitted signs. The following standards are requirements for
permitted signs intended for installation for a period exceeding 30
days:
1. On-building signs. On-building signs include signs mounted flat
onto an exterior wall, awning mounted or integrated signs, and
projecting signs, but do not include window signs.
a. Only building facades facing the front yard and/or street side
yard may be used for on-building signage.
b. There shall be not more than one square foot of on-building
sign area for every one lineal foot of exposed exterior length of
the wall on which the sign will be placed. No one on-building
sign shall be greater than 48 square feet for all combined sign
faces seen at any one time (24 square feet for projecting signs).
c. In cases where more than one business occupies a single
building, the assignment of on-building sign area to the various
businesses shall be at the discretion of the property owner.
This allocation shall be specified in the application to the
Planning and Development Department.
d. Only one side of any projecting sign shall be counted in the
calculation of total permitted on-building sign area. There shall
not be more than one projecting sign per occupant along each
facade.
e. No one dimension of any on-building sign shall be greater than
a multiple of five times the other dimension, except for awning
signs less than eight square feet.
28.Editor's Note: This reference is to the Village's Zoning Code which is accessible on the
Village's website.
§ 20.04.070 CODE ADOPTION § 20.04.070
1.01:457
2. Ground signs. Ground signs are signs permanently affixed directly
to the ground or to monuments, posts or other structures that are
permanently affixed directly to the ground.
a. A maximum of one ground sign per lot shall be permitted, not
including directional and informational signs.
b. There shall not be more than 32 square feet of ground sign
area for all combined sign faces seen at one time, not including
directional and informational signs or permitted temporary
signs.
c. In cases where more than one business occupies a single lot,
the assignment of maximum permitted ground sign area to the
various businesses shall be at the discretion of the property
owner and shall be specified in the application to the Village.
d. The maximum height of any ground sign shall be nine feet.
Ground-mounted structures taller than nine feet that were in
existence before January 1, 2005, may be used for the
placement of new ground signs or the continuation of
previously existing signs without requiring a variance until
January 1, 2015.
e. The minimum setbacks for ground signs shall be as specified in
§ 20.04.060.
3. Window signs. The gross surface area of all permanent and
temporary window signs visible from public rights-of-way, including
directional and informational signs, shall not exceed 30% of the
area of the window bank unbroken by architectural features such
as columns or building facades but including mullions, as
determined by the Director of Planning and Development.
[Amended 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 015-2014]
4. Directional and informational signs. Directional and informational
signs, which include such signs as parking lot signs, entrance
signs, memo boards, "open" and "closed" signs, and hours-ofoperation
signs, have a primary function of providing essential
information as opposed to business identification or advertising. No
directional or informational sign shall exceed four square feet for
all combined sign faces seen at any one time. All requested
directional and informational signs shall be specified within an
application to the Village and shall be compatible with other
signage for the business.
5. Banner signage of decorative parking lot light poles. Banner type
signage attached to architectural styled light poles in private
parking lots and brackets may be permitted in the downtown,
based upon the review and determination by the Planning and
Development staff that the signage fits in with the intent of the
Downtown Master Plan. The Planning and Development
§ 20.04.070 GRAFTON CODE § 20.04.070
1.01:458
Department may deny such signage based upon its design, size,
amount, placement or any other issue pertinent, as determined by
the Planning and Development staff.
6. A-frame signs. A-frame or sandwich board type signs are only
allowable in the CBD district and subject to approval of the
Planning and Development Department, based on design, size,
placement, submittal of a signed agreement indemnifying the
Village of Grafton or adjacent right-of-way designee of any liability
associated with the sign, and compliance with all other
requirements. [Amended 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 015-2014]
a. One A-frame sign is allowed by permit per business, standing
no more than four feet in height, with each sign surface not
exceeding eight square feet.
b. A-frame signs can only be placed within the linear building
frontage of the business or entity it represents and can only
advertise that business.
c. A-frame signs can only be displayed during the business hours
of the entity it represents.
d. A-frame signs must be professionally built of durable materials
such as wood or plastic composites that mimic wood and must
be framed around the edges.
e. A-frame signs must be placed so as not to block building
entrances, exits, sidewalks or other traveled right-of-way
areas, and on private property when available. If there is no
private location for an A-frame sign, only then will public rightof-
way be considered for placement.
f. A-frame signs must be adequately weighted or anchored to
prevent movement by wind or other elements.
g. A-frame signs must have identifiable information, including the
name, address and telephone number of the business
advertised, permanently inscribed on the inside of the sign.
F. Prohibited signs. Specifically prohibited signs in the CBD district, C-1
District, M-1 District, and PUD districts within the area covered by the
Grafton Downtown Master Plan include:
1. Billboards and other off-premises advertising signs;
2. New or replacement signs projecting above the roofline of a
building;
3. New or replacement on-building signs located on a building facade
that faces a rear yard or interior side yard, except for facades that
have a rear parking lot or facades that have a side or rear business
entry;
§ 20.04.070 CODE ADOPTION § 20.04.070
1.01:459
4. New on-building signs painted directly on a building wall, except
for painted signs installed prior to the adoption of this chapter,
preserved or restored as a historic building feature and for murals
without elements of business or product advertising;
5. New or replacement signs that are both internally illuminated and
surfaced with plastic, vinyl or other translucent material, except for
community information signs otherwise designed in accordance
with the design guidelines for signage included in the Grafton
Downtown Master Plan;
6. Neon signs, except for "open" and "closed" signs;
7. Trailer or vehicle signs;
8. Inflatable signs and advertising devices;
9. Pennant strips;
10. Changeable message signs, except for community information
signs and A-frame signs designed in accordance with the design
guidelines for signage included in the Grafton Downtown Master
Plan;
11. More than one temporary sign or banner on one lot at any one time;
12. Electronic message signs as defined by § 20.04.020 of this chapter.
G. Nonconforming signs in CBD district and other downtown districts. Any
sign constructed in accordance with ordinances and other applicable
laws in effect on the date of its construction, but which by reason of its
type, size, height, location, design, materials, method of illumination,
number of signs, or construction is not in conformance with this
chapter or variances allowed under § 20.04.160, shall be considered a
legal nonconforming sign. Any legal nonconforming sign shall either be
eliminated or made to conform with the requirements of this chapter
upon the occurrence of one or more of the following events:
1. When any proposed change, repair or maintenance would
constitute an expense of more than 50% of the lesser of the original
value or replacement value of the sign; or
2. When the design, logo or message on the face of the sign
considered or proposed accompanies a change in the ownership,
name or type of use; or
3. When the sign is considered or proposed for relocation; or
4. When any new sign is proposed on the lot where the nonconforming
sign is located; or
5. After January 1, 2015.
§ 20.04.070 GRAFTON CODE § 20.04.070
1.01:460
§ 20.04.075. Signage requirements in C-4 District. [Amended by
Ord. No. 021, Series 1996; Ord. No. 024, Series 1999; Ord. No. 016,
Series 2005]
Signs located in the C-4 District shall meet those requirements set forth
below. This section does not apply to shopping centers and multitenant
buildings as regulated by § 20.04.150 of this chapter.
H. Within one month of approval of this section and within one month of
January 1, 2014, the Village shall notify in writing all property owners in
the CBD district, C-1 District, M-1 District, and PUD districts within the
area covered by the Grafton Downtown Master Plan of the
requirements for nonconforming signs.
A. Parcels of land five acres or greater in area.
1. Wall signs. Wall signs placed against or painted on the exterior
walls of principal and accessory buildings shall not extend more
than 12 inches outside of a building wall surface and shall not
exceed a total of 60 feet per sign face and 180 square feet in area
for any one premises. Signage copy shall be limited to business
name, logo or operation. No wall sign shall extend above the roof or
building parapet line. Maximum wall sign height shall be 24 feet.
[Amended 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 015-2014]
2. Ground or pole signs. One ground or pole sign may be permitted
only after review and approval by the Director of Planning and
Development or Plan Commission for message reader boards prior
to the issuance of a building permit. Ground or pole signs shall not
exceed 100 square feet in area on one side and shall not exceed a
total of 200 square feet in area on all sides for any one premises
and shall not exceed 20 feet in height. Ground or pole signs shall be
set back from any existing or planned public street right-of-way a
minimum distance of 50 feet, except that the setback from any such
right-of-way may be reduced to 25 feet under the following
circumstances: the sign shall not exceed 60 square feet in area on
one side and 120 square feet in area for any one premises, the sign
shall be a monument (not pole) sign, and the sign height shall not
exceed 10 feet. Signage copy shall be limited to business name,
logo or operation.
B. Parcels of land less than five acres in area but greater than two acres in
area.
1. Wall signs. Wall signs placed against or painted on the exterior
walls of principal and accessory buildings shall not extend more
than 12 inches outside of a building wall surface and shall not
exceed 60 square feet per sign face and a total of 120 square feet in
area for any one premises. Signage copy shall be limited to
business name, logo or operation. No wall sign shall extend above
§ 20.04.070 CODE ADOPTION § 20.04.075
1.01:461
the roof or building parapet line. Maximum wall sign height shall
be 20 feet. [Amended 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 015-2014]
2. Ground or pole signs. One ground or pole sign may be permitted
only after review and approval by the Director of Planning and
Development or Plan Commission for message reader boards prior
to the issuance of a building permit. Ground or pole signs shall not
exceed 60 square feet in area on one side and shall not exceed a
total of 140 square feet in area on all sides for any one premises
and shall not exceed 20 feet in height. Ground or pole signs shall be
set back from any existing or planned public street right-of-way a
minimum distance of 50 feet, except that the setback from any such
right-of-way may be reduced to 25 feet under the following
circumstances: the sign shall not exceed 36 square feet in area on
one side and 72 square feet in area for any one premises, the sign
shall be a monument (not pole) sign, and the sign height shall not
exceed 10 feet. Signage copy shall be limited to business name,
logo or operation.
C. Parcels of land less than two acres in area.
1. Wall signs. Wall signs placed against or painted on the exterior
walls of principal and accessory buildings shall not extend more
than 12 inches outside of a building wall surface and shall not
exceed 40 feet per sign face and a total of 80 square feet in area for
any one premises. Signage copy shall be limited to business name,
logo or operation. No wall sign shall extend above the roof or
building parapet line. Maximum wall sign height shall be 20 feet.
[Amended 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 015-2014]
2. Ground or pole signs. One ground or pole sign may be permitted
only after review and approval by the Director of Planning and
Development or Plan Commission for message reader boards prior
to the issuance of a building permit. Ground or pole signs shall not
exceed 40 square feet in area on one side and shall not exceed a
total of one 100 square feet in area on all sides for any one
premises and shall not exceed 20 feet in height. Ground or pole
signs shall be set back from any existing or planned public street
right-of-way a minimum distance of 50 feet, except that the setback
from any such right-of-way may be reduced to 25 feet under the
following circumstances: the sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in
area on one side and 64 square feet in area for any one premises,
the sign shall be a monument (not pole) sign, and the sign height
shall not exceed 10 feet. Signage copy shall be limited to business
name, logo or operation.
D. Directional ground signs. Directional ground signs giving direction to
businesses conducted on the premises on which the sign is located shall
be permitted but shall not extend into the right-of-way. The maximum
size of directional ground signs shall not exceed three square feet in
area each. Maximum height shall be 36 inches.
§ 20.04.075 GRAFTON CODE § 20.04.075
1.01:462
§ 20.04.077. Signage requirements in PID, O and BP Districts.
[Amended by Ord. No. 013, Series 2000; Ord. No. 042, Series 2000;
Ord. No. 016, Series 2005]
Signs located in the PID, O and BP Districts shall meet those requirements
set forth below.
E. Window signs. Window signs shall be limited to a maximum area not to
exceed 25% of the window bank, not to exceed 60 square feet,
unbroken by architectural features such as columns or building facades
but including mullions as determined by the Director of Planning and
Development. [Added 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 015-2014]
F. Prohibited signs. Specifically prohibited signs include projecting signs,
billboards, roof signs, pylon signs, flashing or moving signs or beacons,
bench signs, trailer signs, banner signs on poles or buildings, vehicle
signs, balloons, inflatable advertising devices, inflatable signs, and
pennants.
G. Changeable copy signs and electronic message signs shall be permitted
in the C-4 Freeway Interchange Business District by a special message
reader board permit to be reviewed by the Plan Commission. In
reviewing the permit request, the Plan Commission may approve or
deny any application, subject but not limited to architectural design,
size, interference with surrounding development, area, size, shape,
height, lighting, traffic and location, any adverse impact, and
compliance with all standards for message reader boards.
A. Wall signs. One wall sign on the exterior wall or within a window of a
principal building may be provided. The maximum area of such a wall
sign shall be 150 square feet and the maximum height shall be three
feet. In a multitenant building, each tenant may share a portion of the
maximum total of 150 square feet of wall signage. On a corner lot, each
exterior wall facing a public street may share a portion of the maximum
total of 150 square feet of wall signage.
B. Ground signs. One ground-mounted sign per premises (not including a
pole sign or pylon sign) may be provided. The maximum area of such a
ground-mounted sign shall be 50 square feet per side or 100 square feet
for both sides, and the maximum height shall be nine feet.
C. Directional ground signs. On-premises directional ground signage may
be allowed, giving directions to areas such as employee or visitor
parking and shipping or loading zones. The maximum size of each such
directional sign shall be two square feet per side or four square feet for
both sides. Such directional signs shall not be located in a thirty-foot
minimum setback area.
D. Temporary construction signs and banners, real estate signs, and
election campaign signs shall be permitted in accordance with the
provisions of § 20.04.050.
§ 20.04.075 CODE ADOPTION § 20.04.077
1.01:463
§ 20.04.080. Prohibited signs. [Amended by Ord. No. 019, Series
1997]
E. Specifically prohibited signs include billboards and other off-premises
advertising signs, roof signs, pole or pylon signs and flashing or moving
signs or beacons, and changeable copy signs and electronic message
signs, except for bank and financial institutions located within the
district, which are allowed to comply with the C-1 Neighborhood
Business District regulations for message reader board signage.
A. Any sign which is not permanently fastened, anchored on a permanent
foundation or painted on another structure shall be considered a
prohibited sign. Portable signs are specifically prohibited in all districts
with the exceptions of those in Subsection E and signs allowed in other
sections of this chapter.
B. Any sign or banner constructed, placed or painted in any residential,
commercial or industrial district without first obtaining a required
permit shall be considered a prohibited sign. Signs or banners not
located in conformance with chapter, permit or approval conditions
shall be considered a prohibited sign except for signs allowed in other
sections of this chapter.
C. Any sign or banner which is not removed within 90 days of the
discontinuance of business operations or activities at the premises shall
be considered, for the purposes of this chapter, a prohibited sign. See
§ 20.04.170, Closed business signs or abandoned signs. [Amended
8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 015-2014]
D. Any sign or banner located within the public right-of-way shall be
considered a prohibited sign.
E. Signs exempt from this section are:
1. Traffic control signs or signs located in the right-of-way which are
allowed by § 11.20.025.
2. Signs or banners to advertise a public, civic or social event of a
charitable or not-for-profit organization which does not exceed four
days in length. Such signs or banners shall not be placed more than
14 days prior to and shall be removed within five days after the
event and shall be located in compliance with required setbacks.
F. Roof signs shall be considered prohibited signs. [Added 8-4-2014 by
Ord. No. 015-2014]
G. Permanent inflatable, flags or "feather" signs that advertise any product
or business shall be considered prohibited signs. One temporary
inflatable, flag or "feather" sign per business or event shall be
permitted. [Added 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 015-2014]
§ 20.04.077 GRAFTON CODE § 20.04.080
1.01:464
§ 20.04.090. Facing residential district.
No sign except those permitted in § 20.04.040 shall be permitted to face a
residential district within 100 feet of such district boundary.
§ 20.04.100. Design and placement.
Signs shall not resemble, imitate or approximate the shape, size, form or
color of railroad or traffic signs, signals or devices. Signs shall not obstruct
or interfere with the effectiveness of railroad or traffic signs, signals or
devices. No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent
free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape, and no sign
shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape. No sign shall be placed so
as to obstruct or interfere with traffic visibility.
§ 20.04.110. Existing signs. [Amended by Ord. No. 019, Series 2004;
Ord. No. 016, Series 2005]
Except as otherwise provided in § 20.04.070G for the downtown area only,
as defined by the Village of Grafton Downtown Master Plan, signs lawfully
existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified
in this chapter may be continued although the type, use, size, height,
design, materials, method of illumination, number of signs, construction or
location does not conform with the provisions of this chapter. However, it
shall be deemed a legal nonconforming use or structure, and the provisions
of § 19.03.1000 of the Zoning Ordinance29 shall apply or § 20.04.070G, if
applicable.
§ 20.04.120. Signs within public right-of-way. [Amended by Ord. No.
016, Series 2005; 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 015-2014]
Prior to the issuance of a sign permit for any sign located completely or
partially within a public right-of-way, a bond or liability insurance policy
with limits not to exceed $20,000 or as determined by the Plan Commission
shall be obtained. The required bond or insurance policy shall be renewed
annually for the life of the sign. Should the liability policy or bond lapse, the
H. Prohibited signs or banners may be removed within 10 days of a notice
of violation at the direction of the Building Inspector. The notice of
violation shall include a "notice of intent to remove," stating that,
should the prohibited sign not be removed by the owner or his agent
within 10 days, the sign will be removed by the Inspection Department
and costs for removal, storage and disposal will be assessed to the
property owner. Prohibited signs removed by the Department may be
disposed of at the discretion of the Building Inspector after 45 days of
removal. Said disposal may include destruction, sale, sale at auction or
any other means deemed necessary.
29.Editor's Note: This reference is to the Village's Zoning Code which is accessible on the
Village's website.
§ 20.04.080 CODE ADOPTION § 20.04.120
1.01:465
sign shall be removed by the Village, with the removal expenses covered by
the bond and/or assessed to the owner.
§ 20.04.130. Exterior lighting and prohibition of flashing signs.
[Amended by Ord. No. 013, Series 2000]
The use of flashing or revolving lights, other than traffic-control lights,
is specifically prohibited in all districts. This prohibition shall apply to all
signs.
§ 20.04.140. Changeable copy and electronic message signs
(including video displays). [Amended by Ord. No. 016, Series 2005;
Ord. No. 020, Series 2010; 12-2-2019 by Ord. No. 021-2019]
A. Number and type.
1. Monument signs: One free-standing changeable copy sign or
electronic message sign that is part of a monument sign as defined
in § 20.04.020 of this chapter shall be permitted on a parcel, unless
otherwise approved within a planned unit development or by
§ 20.04.150 regulating shopping center and multiple-tenant
commercial buildings.
2. Window signs: One window changeable copy sign or electronic
message sign per business on building facades with customer
entrances shall be permitted in the C-2 Zoning District, the C-4
Zoning District, and commercial and mixed use Planned Unit
Developments in areas traditionally zoned C-2 and C-4 with
approval from the Plan Commission. These signs may not be
positioned or oriented or have content that can be read from any
public or private street.
B. Sign size.
1. Monument signs: All free-standing monument signs with
changeable copy and electronic message components shall comply
with the requirements outlined in the following table. Said signs
shall be architecturally integrated into the ground sign, including
the exterior casing or frame. All monument changeable copy and
electronic message signs approved by the Plan Commission after
July 18, 2005, shall be limited to two lines of text.
§ 20.04.120 GRAFTON CODE § 20.04.140
1.01:466
Zoning District
Maximum Area of
Changeable Copy
and Electronic
Message Signs
Maximum Sign
Size
(square feet)
CBD Central
Business
In accordance with
§ 20.04.070;
changeable copy
only allowed
Various
C-1 Neighborhood
Business
Not allowed to
exceed 20% of the
total sign area
100
C-2 Community
Business
Not allowed to
exceed 20% of the
total sign area
100
C-3 Commercial
Service Business
Not allowed to
exceed 20% of the
total sign area
100
C-4 Freeway
Interchange
Business
Not allowed to
exceed 20% of the
total sign area
Various
O Office Not permitted,
except for banks or
financial institutions
(see C-1)
100
BP Business Park Not permitted,
except for banks or
financial institutions
(see C-1)
100
M-1 Industrial Not allowed to
exceed 20% of the
total sign area
100
PID Planned
Industrial
Not permitted 100
I Institutional Not to exceed 50%
of the maximum sign
area
32
PR Park and
Recreation
Not to exceed 50%
of the maximum sign
area
32
NOTES:
(1) Maximum size is subject to the review and approved of the
Building Inspector, Police Department, and Department of
Public Works.
§ 20.04.140 CODE ADOPTION § 20.04.140
1.01:467
(2) See § 20.04.075 of this chapter for the maximum sign size in
the C-4 Freeway Interchange Business District.
(3) Message reader board cannot be constructed without
primary monument signage.
2. Windows signs. The maximum area of a window changeable copy
and electronic message sign shall be eight square feet. The
maximum size regulations for permanent windows signs in
§§ 20.04.050 and 20.04.075 shall also apply.
C. Copy size height requirements. The height of the letters installed or
used on all free-standing monument changeable copy signs and
electronic message signs shall conform to the minimum values outlined
in the following table.
Posted Roadway Speed Limit
30 mph 35 mph 40 mph 45 mph 50+ mph
Distance
from
Center
Line to
Sign
(feet)
Height of Lettering1
(inches)
40 4 4 4 6 6
50 5 6 6 6 6
60 6 6 6 9 9
100 9 9 9 9 9
NOTES:
1 All signage intended to be viewed from Interstate 43 shall utilize
letters with a minimum height of nine inches.
D. Illumination.
1. Color. Multicolored message or multicolored video displays on freestanding
monument signs with changeable copy and electronic
message components shall be permitted pursuant to the approval
of the Plan Commission.
2. Intensity. All changeable copy signs or electronic message signs
shall comply with § 19.05.0400, Lighting standards of the Zoning
Code. The lighting intensity for all electronic message signs shall
be uniform and avoid excessive glare.
E. Message interval. Scrolling messages shall have a minimum interval of
two seconds. Animated signs or messages shall not be permitted.
§ 20.04.140 GRAFTON CODE § 20.04.140
1.01:468
§ 20.04.150. Shopping center and multiple-tenant commercial
building regulations.
A shopping center or multiple-tenant commercial building may provide
the following signage: This section shall not apply to structures and uses
regulated under § 20.04.075 of this chapter.
F. Portable/temporary signs. Portable changeable copy signs or electronic
message signs shall not be permitted on a parcel unless utilized for a
community-sponsored event for a period not to exceed 10 days.
G. Exemptions. Signs that do not exceed five square feet and display only
current time and/or temperature may be exempted from the regulations
of this section, subject to the approval of the Plan Commission.
A. Master identification signage. Master identification signage may be
provided which displays the name of the shopping center and may also
include information, such as, but not limited to, names or lists of
individual stores, hours of operation and/or special sales information.
One master identification sign may be permitted along each arterial
street abutting a shopping center. Each such master identification sign
shall not exceed 300 square feet in total area and 30 feet in height, and
the location shall be approved by the Plan Commission prior to the
issuance of a sign permit.
B. Exterior wall signage. One exterior wall sign may be provided for each
individual tenant business in a shopping center which has an exterior
storefront wall or enclosed perimeter walkway. The maximum area of
each individual tenant's wall sign shall be computed using a factor of
75% of the tenant's exterior storefront width, but no such exterior wall
sign shall exceed 100 square feet in area and two feet in height. If a
tenant's store is at a corner and has two exterior storefront walls, one
separate exterior wall sign may be permitted on each exterior wall. The
maximum area of each such sign shall also be computed using a factor
of 75% of each storefront width, but no such sign shall exceed 100
square feet in area and two feet in height. [Amended by Ord. No.
003-94, 1994]
C. Supermarket signage. In the case of multiple-tenant shopping centers
where a supermarket food store is a tenant, the supermarket shall be
considered as if it was a separate structure and shall be entitled to
provide: 1) its own freestanding ground sign, which shall not exceed
200 square feet in area and 24 feet in height, and 2) one exterior wall
sign not exceeding 250 square feet in area for each exterior facade. If a
supermarket food store has a sign which is part of a master
identification sign as described in Subsection A of this section, a
separate freestanding ground sign shall not be allowed.
D. Directional signage. A shopping center may provide directional signage
located on site which provides instructions or directions and does not in
any way advertise a business. This includes, but is not limited to, signs
§ 20.04.140 CODE ADOPTION § 20.04.150
1.01:469
§ 20.04.160. Variances.
The Plan Commission may, in its judgment, waive or vary the provisions of
this chapter where it would further the public interest.
§ 20.04.170. Closed business signs or abandoned signs. [Added
8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 015-2014]
such as those identifying entrances, exits, parking areas, telephones
and restrooms. Each such sign shall not exceed eight square feet in
area, and their number and location(s) shall be subject to approval by
the Building Inspector.
E. Interior signage. Signs located within the interior of a shopping center
which are not visible from any public right-of-way shall be regulated by
the shopping center landlord or management entity regarding size and
placement of signs. However, such interior signage is not exempt from
structural, electrical or material code regulations in other applicable
building codes. A sign permit shall be obtained prior to the erection of
an interior sign.
F. Interior window signs. In shopping center tenant spaces with windows
on exterior walls, the interior window area may be used for temporary
window signs installed only on the interior of the window. The total area
of such window signage visible from the exterior shall not exceed 20%
of the total window area of each tenant space. Such window signage
shall not be placed on door windows or other windows needed to be
clear for pedestrian safety. Such interior window signs shall not require
a sign permit. [Amended by Ord. No. A-526-89, 1989].
G. Changeable copy signs and electronic message signs shall be permitted
by a special message reader board permit to be reviewed by the Plan
Commission. In reviewing the permit request, the Plan Commission
may approve or deny any application, subject to, but not limited to,
architectural design, size, interference with surrounding development,
area, size, shape, height, lighting, traffic and location, any adverse
impact, and compliance with all standards for message reader boards.
[Amended by Ord. No. 016, Series 2005]
A. Signs for closed or vacant businesses. Signs for businesses that have
closed or for vacant tenant spaces shall comply with the following
standards:
1. Identification signs for a business or use that is no longer in
operation shall be removed by the property owner within 90 days of
the closing or vacancy. Box-type signs shall be required to be
replaced with a blank identification sign. No inner workings or
lighting of signs shall be allowed to be exposed. Sign structures
which comply with the provisions of this Code may remain in place.
§ 20.04.150 GRAFTON CODE § 20.04.170
1.01:470
Title 21: Floodplain Zoning
Chapter 21.04
FLOODPLAIN ZONING
§ 21.04.010. Statutory authorization.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authorization in §§ 61.35, 62.23 and
the requirements in § 87.30, Wis. Stats.
§ 21.04.020. Finding of fact.
Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains and rivers of the
Village of Grafton would impair the public health, safety, convenience,
general welfare and tax base.
§ 21.04.030. Statement of purpose.
This chapter is intended to regulate floodplain development to:
2. Any business maintaining or possessing a nonconforming sign that
becomes vacant or is closing operations must remove the
nonconforming sign(s) and sign structure(s) within 90 days of
closing or becoming vacant.
B. Abandoned signs. A sign that was constructed, painted, installed or
maintained in conformance with a permit under this chapter, but which
is abandoned or in disrepair, may be removed by the Village at the
owner's expense. The property owner and the sign owner shall be
provided with notice of intent to remove the sign at least 30 days prior
to its removal. The owner may file a written objection to removal of the
sign during this thirty-day period. The Village will delay removal of the
sign until 90 days from receipt of the written objection to allow for the
repair of the sign.
A. Protect life, health and property;
B. Minimize expenditures of public funds for flood control projects;
C. Minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the
taxpayers;
D. Minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain;
F. Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the floodplain;
G. Discourage the victimization of unwary land and home buyers;
§ 20.04.170 CODE ADOPTION § 21.04.030
1.01:471
§ 21.04.040. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Floodplain Zoning Chapter for the
Village of Grafton, Ozaukee County, Wisconsin."
§ 21.04.050. General provisions.
H. Prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage and
result in conflicts between property owners; and
I. Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable
alternative to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the
floodplain.
A. Areas to be regulated. This chapter regulates all areas that would be
covered by the regional flood or base flood.
B. Official maps and revisions. The boundaries of all floodplain districts
are designated as floodplains or A Zones on the maps listed below and
the revisions in the Village of Grafton, Ozaukee County, Floodplain
Appendix. Any change to the base flood elevations (BFE) in the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) or on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) must
be reviewed and approved by the DNR and FEMA before it is effective.
No changes to regional flood elevations (RFEs) on non-FEMA maps
shall be effective until approved by the DNR. These maps and revisions
are on file in the office of the Building Inspector, Village of Grafton,
Ozaukee County. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the
most restrictive information shall apply.
1. Official Maps:
a. Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), panel numbers
55089CO177F, 55089CO178F, 55089CO179F, 55089CO183F,
55089CO186F, 55089CO187F, 55089CO191F, dated December
4, 2007; with corresponding profiles that are based on the
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated December 2007; approved
by the DNR and FEMA. [Amended by Ord. No. 002, Series
2008]
2. Official maps based on other studies. [Amended by Ord. No. 010,
Series 2008; Ord. No. 020, Series 2008]
a. Ulao Creek floodplain amendment. Study: Bonestroo, Rosene
Anderlik/Mike Steiner; original study: 1998; revised profiles:
map dated April 5, 1999. (Village Board adoption: Ordinance
No. 013, Series 1999/6-7-1999. DNR approval letter:
3-23-2000.)
b. Milwaukee River floodplain amendment — Grafton Dam to
Limekiln Dam. Study: Earth Tech/Charles Boehm; Profiles:
1-31-2002. (Village Board adoption: Ordinance No. 015, Series
§ 21.04.030 GRAFTON CODE § 21.04.050
1.01:472
2002/6-3-2002. DNR approval letter: 2-11-2002 and
3-15-2004.)
c. Rathke Property floodplain amendment. Study: Bonestroo,
Rosene Anderlik/Matthew Bednarski and Mustafa Emir
Profiles: 2-26-2002. (Village Board adoption: Ordinance No.
013, Series 2003/6-2-2003. DNR approval letter: 7-12-2002/
2-12-2003 and 3-15-2004.)
d. Bertram Valley floodplain amendment and flood storage
district. Study: Bonestroo, Rosene Anderlik/Mustafa Emir
Profiles: 10-11-2001. (Village Board adoption: Ordinance No.
005, Series 2002. DNR approval letter: 10-31-2001 and
3-15-2004.)
e. Dam failure analysis for the Milwaukee River dams —
Milwaukee River Dam Break Hazard Map, Dam Break Hazard
Profiles and Floodway Data. Study: Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources Profiles: 10-4-2007. (Village Board
adoption: Ordinance No. 010, Series 2008. DNR approval
letter: October 15, 2007.)
f. Floodway encroachment analysis for the gateway
development. Study: Bonestroo Rosene Anderlik, Inc., Maps/
Profiles: 3-10-2008. (FEMA LOMR) Village Board adoption:
6-2-2008. DNR approval letter: 3-13-2008. FEMA approval
letter: 5-29-2008.
3. These maps and profiles, respectively, are the Official Floodplain
Zoning Maps and profiles. These maps are on file in the office of the
Zoning Administrator.
C. Establishment of districts. The regional floodplain areas are divided
into four districts, as follows:
1. The Floodway District (FW) is the channel of a river or stream and
those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to
carry the regional floodwaters.
2. The Flood-Fringe District (FF) is that portion of the floodplain
between the regional flood limits and the floodway.
3. The General Floodplain District (GFP) is those areas that have been
or may be covered by floodwater during the regional flood.
4. The Flood Storage District (FSD) is that area of the floodplain
where storage of floodwaters is calculated to reduce the regional
flood discharge.
D. Locating floodplain boundaries. Discrepancies between boundaries on
the Official Floodplain Zoning Map, and actual field conditions shall be
resolved using the criteria in Subsection D(1) or (2) below. If a
significant difference exists, the map shall be amended according to
§ 21.04.050 CODE ADOPTION § 21.04.050
1.01:473
§ 21.04.280. The Zoning Administrator can rely on a boundary derived
from a profile elevation to grant or deny a land use permit, whether
or not a map amendment is required. The Zoning Administrator shall
be responsible for documenting actual predevelopment field conditions
and the basis upon which the district boundary was determined and for
initiating any map amendments required under this section. Disputes
between the Zoning Administrator and an applicant over the district
boundary line shall be settled according to § 21.04.240C and the
criteria in Subsection D(1) and (2) below.
1. If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile elevations shall
determine the district boundary. The regional or base flood
elevations shall govern if there are any discrepancies.
2. Where flood profiles do not exist, the location of the boundary shall
be determined by the map scale, visual on-site inspection and any
information provided by the Department.
E. Removal of lands from floodplain. Compliance with the provisions of
this chapter shall not be grounds for removing land from the floodplain
unless it is filled at least two feet above the regional or base flood
elevation, the fill is contiguous to land outside the floodplain, and the
map is amended pursuant to § 21.04.280.
F. Compliance. Any development or use within the areas regulated by this
chapter shall be in compliance with the terms of this chapter, and other
applicable local, state, and federal regulations.
G. Municipalities and state agencies regulated. Unless specifically
exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns and counties are required to
comply with this chapter and obtain all necessary permits. State
agencies are required to comply if § 13.48(13), Wis. Stats., applies. The
construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways
and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation are exempt
when § 30.2022, Wis. Stats., applies.
H. Abrogation and greater restrictions. This chapter supersedes all the
provisions of any municipal zoning chapter enacted under § 61.35 or
87.30, Wis. Stats., which relate to floodplains. If another chapter is
more restrictive than this chapter, that chapter shall continue in full
force and effect to the extent of the greater restrictions, but not
otherwise. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair
any existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. If this chapter
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
I. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter are the minimum requirements liberally construed in favor
of the Village Board and are not a limitation on or repeal of any other
powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. If a provision of this chapter,
required by Ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code, is unclear, the provision shall
be interpreted in light of the standards in effect on the date of the
§ 21.04.050 GRAFTON CODE § 21.04.050
1.01:474
§ 21.04.060. General standards applicable to all floodplain districts;
hydraulic and hydrologic analyses.
Except as allowed in Subsection C below, no floodplain development shall:
adoption of this chapter or in effect on the date of the most recent text
amendment to this chapter.
J. Warning and disclaimer of liability. The flood protection standards in
this chapter are based on engineering experience and scientific
research. Larger floods may occur or the flood height may be increased
by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply or
guarantee that non-floodplain areas or permitted floodplain uses will be
free from flooding and flood damages. Nor does this chapter create
liability on the part of, or a cause of action against, the Village of
Grafton or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that
may result from reliance on this chapter.
K. Severability. Should any portion of this chapter be declared
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of this chapter shall not be affected.
L. Annexed areas. The Ozaukee County floodplain zoning provisions in
effect on the date of annexation shall remain in effect and shall be
enforced by the Village of Grafton for all annexed areas until the Village
of Grafton adopts and enforces a chapter which meets the requirements
of Ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code, and the National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP). These annexed lands are described on the Village of
Grafton's Official Zoning Map. County floodplain zoning provisions are
incorporated by reference for the purpose of administering this section
and are on file in the office of the municipal Zoning Administrator. All
plats or maps of annexation shall show the regional flood elevation and
the location of the floodway.
M. General development standards. The community shall review all permit
applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be
reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a floodprone
area, all new construction and substantial improvements shall be
designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads; be constructed with materials
resistant to flood damage; be constructed by methods and practices
that minimize flood damages; and be constructed with electrical,
heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and
other service facilities designed and/or located so as to prevent water
from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding. Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance
with the above standards. All subdivision proposals shall include
regional flood elevation and floodway data for any development that
meets the subdivision definition of this chapter.
§ 21.04.050 CODE ADOPTION § 21.04.060
1.01:475
§ 21.04.070. Watercourse alterations.
No land use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped floodplain
shall be issued until the local official has notified in writing all adjacent
municipalities, the Department and FEMA regional offices and required
the applicant to secure all necessary state and federal permits. The floodcarrying
capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse shall be
maintained. As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the
date of the watercourse alteration or relocation, the Zoning Administrator
shall notify FEMA of the changes by submitting appropriate technical or
scientific data in accordance with NFIP guidelines that shall be used to
revise the FIRM, risk premium rates and floodplain management
regulations as required.
§ 21.04.080. Chapters 30, 31, Wis. Stats., development.
Development which requires a permit from the Department, under Chs.
30 and 31, Wis. Stats., such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts,
dams and navigational aids, may be allowed if the necessary permits are
obtained and amendments to the floodway lines, water surface profiles,
BFEs established in the FIS, or other data from the officially adopted FIRM,
or other floodplain zoning maps or this chapter are made according to
§ 21.04.280.
§ 21.04.090. Floodway District (FW).
A. Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the conveyance of
floodwaters by itself or with other development, increasing regional
flood height; or
B. Increase regional flood height, due to floodplain storage area lost,
which equals or exceeds 0.01 foot.
C. The Zoning Administrator shall deny permits if it is determined the
proposed development will obstruct flow or increase regional flood
heights 0.01 foot or more, based on the officially adopted FIRM or other
adopted map, unless the provisions of § 21.04.090 are met.
D. Obstructions or increases equal to or greater than 0.01 foot may only be
permitted if amendments are made to this chapter, the Official
Floodplain Zoning Maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in
accordance with § 21.04.280.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all floodway areas on the floodplain
zoning maps and those identified pursuant to § 21.04.150.
B. Permitted uses. The following open space uses are allowed in the
floodway district and the floodway areas of the general floodplain
district, if they are not prohibited by any other chapter and they meet
the standards in §§ 21.04.100 and 21.04.110, and all permits or
certificates have been issued according to § 21.04.220:
§ 21.04.060 GRAFTON CODE § 21.04.090
1.01:476
§ 21.04.100. Standards for developments in floodway areas.
1. Agricultural uses, such as farming, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, viticulture and wild crop harvesting.
2. Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading
areas, parking areas and airport landing strips.
3. Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis
courts, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat ramps, swimming
areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish
hatcheries, shooting, trap and skeet activities, hunting and fishing
areas and hiking and horseback riding trails, subject to the fill
limitations of § 21.04.100D.
4. Uses or structures accessory to open space uses, or classified as
historic structures, that comply with §§ 21.04.100 and 21.04.110.
5. Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials that comply with
§ 21.04.100D.
6. Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or
wharves, dams, flowage areas, culverts, navigational aids and river
crossings of transmission lines, and pipelines, that comply with
Chs. 30, 31, Wis. Stats.
7. Public utilities, streets and bridges that comply with § 21.04.100C.
A. General.
1. Any development in floodway areas shall comply with § 21.04.060
and have low flood damage potential.
2. Applicants shall provide the following data to determine the effects
of the proposal according to § 21.04.060:
a. A cross-section elevation view of the proposal, perpendicular
to the watercourse, showing if the proposed development will
obstruct flow; or
b. An analysis calculating the effects of this proposal on regional
flood height.
3. The Zoning Administrator shall deny the permit application if the
project will increase flood elevations upstream or downstream 0.01
foot or more, based on the data submitted for Subsection A(2)(b)
above.
B. Structures. Structures accessory to permanent open space uses or
functionally dependent on a waterfront location may be allowed by
permit if the structures comply with the following criteria:
1. The structure is not designed for human habitation and does not
have a high flood damage potential;
§ 21.04.090 CODE ADOPTION § 21.04.100
1.01:477
§ 21.04.110. Prohibited uses.
All uses not listed as permitted uses in § 21.04.090B are prohibited,
including the following uses:
2. It must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral
movement;
3. Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed
to or above the flood protection elevation; and
4. It must not obstruct the flow of floodwaters or cause any increase
in flood levels during the occurrence of the regional flood.
C. Public utilities, streets and bridges. Public utilities, streets and bridges
may be allowed by permit, if:
1. Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood
protection elevation; and
2. Construction meets the development standards of § 21.04.060.
D. Fills or deposition of materials. Fills or deposition of materials may be
allowed by permit, if:
1. The requirements of § 21.04.060 are met;
2. No material is deposited in the navigable channel unless a permit is
issued by the Department pursuant to Ch. 30, Wis. Stats., and a
permit pursuant to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344, has been
issued, if applicable, and the other requirements of this section are
met;
3. The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by
riprap, vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulk-heading; and
4. The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material.
A. Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential, or
those not associated with permanent open-space uses;
B. Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, injurious to
property, water quality, or human, animal, plant, fish or other aquatic
life;
C. Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the
adjoining districts;
D. Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that are
removed prior to flooding and systems associated with recreational
areas;
§ 21.04.100 GRAFTON CODE § 21.04.110
1.01:478
§ 21.04.120. Flood-Fringe District (FF).
§ 21.04.130. Standards for development in flood-fringe areas.
E. Any public or private wells which are used to obtain potable water,
except those for recreational areas that meet the requirements of local
chapters and Chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code;
F. Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites;
G. Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those permitted
under § NR 110.15(3)(b), Wis. Adm. Code;
H. Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service
existing or proposed development located outside the floodway which
complies with the regulations for the floodplain area occupied.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all flood-fringe areas shown on the
floodplain zoning maps and those identified pursuant to § 21.04.150.
B. Permitted uses. Any structure, land use, or development is allowed in
the flood-fringe district if the standards in § 21.04.130 are met, the use
is not prohibited by this or any other chapter or regulation, and all
permits or certificates specified in § 21.04.220 have been issued.
A. Section 21.04.060 shall apply in addition to the following requirements
according to the use requested.
B. Residential uses. Any habitable structure, including a manufactured
home, which is to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered or
moved into the flood-fringe area, shall meet or exceed the following
standards:
1. The elevation of the lowest floor, excluding the basement or
crawlway, shall be at or above the flood protection elevation on fill.
The fill shall be one foot or more above the regional flood elevation
extending at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the structure. The
Department may authorize other floodproofing measures if the
elevations of existing streets or sewer lines make compliance
impractical;
2. The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional flood
elevation if it is floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. No
basement or crawlway floor is allowed below the regional flood
elevation;
3. Contiguous dry land access shall be provided from a structure to
land outside of the floodplain, except as provided in Subsection
B(4).
4. In developments where existing street or sewer line elevations
make compliance with Subsection B(3) impractical, the Village of
Grafton may permit new development and substantial
§ 21.04.110 CODE ADOPTION § 21.04.130
1.01:479
improvements where access roads are at or below the regional
flood elevation, if:
a. The Village of Grafton has written assurance from police, fire
and emergency services that rescue and relief will be provided
to the structure(s) by wheeled vehicles during a regional flood
event; or
b. The Village of Grafton has a natural disaster plan approved by
Wisconsin Emergency Management and the Department.
C. Accessory structures or uses. Any accessory structure or use which is
erected, altered or moved into the flood-fringe area shall meet the
requirements of Subsection A.
D. Commercial uses. Any commercial structure which is erected, altered
or moved into the flood-fringe area shall meet the requirements of
Subsection A. Subject to the requirements of Subsection F, storage
yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower
elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and
property.
E. Manufacturing and industrial uses. Any manufacturing or industrial
structure which is erected, altered or moved into the flood-fringe area
shall be protected to the flood protection elevation using fill, levees,
floodwalls or other floodproofing measures in § 21.04.260. Subject to
the requirements of Subsection F, storage yards, surface parking lots
and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate
warning system exists to protect life and property.
F. Storage of materials. Materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive
or injurious to property, water quality or human, animal, plant, fish or
aquatic life shall be stored at or above the flood protection elevation or
floodproofed in compliance with § 21.04.260. Adequate measures shall
be taken to ensure that such materials will not enter the water body
during flooding.
G. Public utilities, streets and bridges. All utilities, streets and bridges
shall be designed to be compatible with comprehensive floodplain
development plans; and
1. When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges would endanger
public health or safety, or where such facilities are deemed
essential, construction of and substantial improvements to such
facilities may only be permitted if they are floodproofed in
compliance with § 21.04.260 to the flood protection elevation;
2. Minor roads or nonessential utilities may be constructed at lower
elevations if they are designed to withstand flood forces to the
regional flood elevation.
§ 21.04.130 GRAFTON CODE § 21.04.130
1.01:480
§ 21.04.140. General Floodplain District (GFP); applicability.
§ 21.04.150. Determining floodway and flood-fringe limits.
Upon receiving an application for development within the general floodplain
district, the Zoning Administrator shall:
H. Solid waste disposal sites. Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is
prohibited in flood-fringe areas.
I. Deposition of materials. Any deposited material must meet all the
provisions of this chapter.
A. The provisions for this district shall apply to all floodplains for which
flood profiles are not available or where flood profiles are available but
floodways have not been delineated. Floodway and flood-fringe districts
shall be delineated when adequate data is available.
B. Permitted uses. Pursuant to § 21.04.150, it shall be determined whether
the proposed use is located within a floodway or flood-fringe area.
Those uses permitted in floodway (§ 21.04.090B) and flood-fringe areas
(§ 21.04.120B) are allowed within the general floodplain district,
according to the standards of § 21.04.140, provided that all permits or
certificates required under § 21.04.220 have been issued.
C. Standards for development in the general floodplain district. Section
21.04.090 applies to floodway areas, § 21.04.120 applies to flood-fringe
areas. The rest of this chapter applies to either district.
A. Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph or a
plan which shows the proposed development with respect to the
general floodplain district limits, stream channel, and existing
floodplain developments, along with a legal description of the property,
fill limits and elevations, building floor elevations and floodproofing
measures;
B. Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information
deemed necessary by the Department to evaluate the effects of the
proposal upon flood height and flood flows, regional flood elevation and
to determine floodway boundaries:
1. A typical valley cross section showing the stream channel, the
floodplain adjoining each side of the channel, the cross-sectional
area to be occupied by the proposed development, and all historic
high-water information;
2. Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground;
pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and
layout of all proposed and existing structures on the site; location
and elevations of streets, water supply, and sanitary facilities; soil
types and other pertinent information;
§ 21.04.130 CODE ADOPTION § 21.04.150
1.01:481
§ 21.04.160. Flood Storage District (FSD).
3. Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line
of the stream;
4. Specifications for building construction and materials,
floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement, storage,
water supply and sanitary facilities.
C. Transmit one copy of the information described in Subsections A and B
to the Department regional office along with a written request for
technical assistance to establish regional flood elevations and, where
applicable, floodway data. Where the provisions of § 21.04.220B(3)
apply, the applicant shall provide all required information and
computations to delineate floodway boundaries and the effects of the
project on flood elevations.
A. Statement of purpose. The flood storage district delineates that portion
of the floodplain where storage of floodwaters has been taken into
account and is relied upon to reduce the regional flood discharge. The
district protects the flood storage areas and assures that any
development in the storage areas will not decrease the effective flood
storage capacity which would cause higher flood elevations.
B. Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to all areas within the
flood storage district (FSD), as shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning
Maps.
C. Permitted uses. Any use or development which occurs in a flood storage
district must meet the applicable requirements in § 21.04.130.
D. Standards for development in flood storage districts.
1. Development in a flood storage district shall not cause an increase
equal or greater than 0.01 of a foot in the height of the regional
flood.
2. No development shall be allowed which removes flood storage
volume unless an equal volume of storage as defined by the
predevelopment ground surface and the regional flood elevation
shall be provided in the immediate area of the proposed
development to compensate for the volume of storage which is lost
(compensatory storage). Excavation below the groundwater table
is not considered to provide an equal volume of storage.
3. If compensatory storage cannot be provided, the area may not be
developed unless the entire area zoned as flood storage district on
this waterway is rezoned to the flood-fringe district. This must
include a revision to the floodplain study and map done for the
waterway to revert to the higher regional flood discharge
calculated without floodplain storage, as per § 21.04.280 of this
chapter.
§ 21.04.150 GRAFTON CODE § 21.04.160
1.01:482
§ 21.04.170. Nonconforming uses; general.
4. No area may be removed from the flood storage district unless it
can be shown that the area has been filled to the flood protection
elevation and is contiguous to other lands lying outside of the
floodplain.
A. Applicability. If these standards conform with § 62.23(7)(h), Wis. Stats.,
they shall apply to all modifications or additions to any nonconforming
use or structure and to the use of any structure or premises which was
lawful before the passage of this chapter or any amendment thereto.
B. The existing lawful use of a structure or its accessory use which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter may continue, subject to
the following conditions:
1. No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or structure
shall be permitted unless they comply with this chapter. The words
"modification" and "addition" include, but are not limited to, any
alteration, addition, modification, structural repair, rebuilding or
replacement of any such existing use, structure or accessory
structure or use. Ordinary maintenance repairs are not considered
an extension, modification or addition; these include painting,
decorating, paneling and the replacement of doors, windows and
other nonstructural components and the maintenance, repair or
replacement of existing private sewage or water supply systems or
connections to public utilities. Ordinary maintenance repairs do not
include any costs associated with the repair of a damaged
structure.
2. If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is
discontinued for 12 consecutive months, it is no longer permitted
and any future use of the property, and any structure or building
thereon, shall conform to the applicable requirements of this
chapter;
3. The Village of Grafton shall keep a record which lists all
nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures, their present
equalized assessed value, the cost of all modifications or additions
which have been permitted, and the percentage of the structure's
total current value those modifications represent;
4. No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or any
structure with a nonconforming use, which over the life of the
structure would exceed 50% of its present equalized assessed
value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently
changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in
compliance with the applicable requirements of this chapter.
Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and
commercial uses in compliance with § 21.04.130B. The costs of
elevating a nonconforming building or a building with a
§ 21.04.160 CODE ADOPTION § 21.04.170
1.01:483
§ 21.04.180. Floodway areas.
No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure
or any structure with a nonconforming use in a floodway area, unless such
modification or addition:
nonconforming use to the flood protection elevation are excluded
from the 50% provisions of this paragraph;
5. Except as provided in Subsection B(6), if any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use is destroyed
or is substantially damaged, it cannot be replaced, reconstructed or
rebuilt unless the use and the structure meet the current chapter
requirements. A structure is considered substantially damaged if
the total cost to restore the structure to its predamaged condition
exceeds 50% of the structure's present equalized assessed value.
[Amended by Ord. No. 002, Series 2008]
6. For nonconforming buildings that are damaged or destroyed by a
nonflood disaster, the repair or reconstruction of any such
nonconforming building may be permitted in order to restore it
after the nonflood disaster, provided that the nonconforming
building will meet all of the minimum requirements under
applicable FEMA regulations (44 CFR Part 60), or the regulations
promulgated thereunder.
7. A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure, the alteration will comply with § 21.04.100A, floodresistant
materials are used, and construction practices and
floodproofing methods that comply with § 21.04.260 are used.
A. Has been granted a permit or variance which meets all chapter
requirements;
B. Meets the requirements of § 21.04.170;
C. Will not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional flood height;
D. Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed, pursuant to
§ 21.04.260, by means other than the use of fill, to the flood protection
elevation;
E. If any part of the foundation below the flood protection elevation is
enclosed, the following standards shall apply:
1. The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered architect or
engineer to allow for the efficient entry and exit of floodwaters
without human intervention. A minimum of two openings must be
provided with a minimum net area of at least one square inch for
every one square foot of the enclosed area. The lowest part of the
opening can be no more than 12 inches above the adjacent grade;
§ 21.04.170 GRAFTON CODE § 21.04.180
1.01:484
§ 21.04.190. Flood-fringe areas.
2. The parts of the foundation located below the flood protection
elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant materials;
3. Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed
to or above the flood protection elevation; and
4. The use must be limited to parking or limited storage.
A. No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use unless such
modification or addition has been granted a permit or variance by the
Village of Grafton, and the modification or addition shall be placed on
fill or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation in compliance with
the standards for that particular use in §§ 21.04.130 and 21.04.260,
except where Subsection B of this section is applicable.
B. Where compliance with the provisions of Subsection A would result in
unnecessary hardship and only where the structure will not be used for
human habitation or be associated with a high flood damage potential,
the Board of Appeals, using the procedures established in § 21.04.240B,
may grant a variance from those provisions of Subsection A for
modifications or additions using the criteria listed below. Modifications
or additions which are protected to elevations lower than the flood
protection elevation may be permitted, if:
1. No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for residential
or commercial structures;
2. Human lives are not endangered;
3. Public facilities, such as water or sewer, will not be installed;
4. Flood depths will not exceed two feet;
5. Flood velocities will not exceed two feet per second; and
6. The structure will not be used for storage of materials as described
in § 21.04.130F.
C. If neither the provisions of Subsection A or B can be met, one addition
to an existing room in a nonconforming building or a building with a
nonconforming use may be allowed in the flood-fringe, if the addition:
1. Meets all other regulations and will be granted by permit or
variance;
2. Does not exceed 60 square feet in area; and
3. In combination with other previous modifications or additions to
the building, does not exceed 50% of the present equalized
assessed value of the building.
§ 21.04.180 CODE ADOPTION § 21.04.200
1.01:485
§ 21.04.200. Flood storage areas.
No modifications or additions shall be allowed to any nonconforming
structure in a flood storage area unless the standards outlined in
§ 21.04.160 are met.
§ 21.04.210. Administration.
The Zoning Administrator is appointed to administer this chapter.
§ 21.04.220. Zoning Administrator.
A. The Zoning Administrator shall have the following duties and powers:
1. Advise applicants of the chapter provisions, assist in preparing
permit applications and appeals, and assure that the regional flood
elevation for the proposed development is shown on all permit
applications.
2. Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with
provisions of this chapter, and issue certificates of compliance
where appropriate.
3. Inspect all damaged floodplain structures and perform a
substantial damage assessment to determine if substantial damage
to the structures has occurred.
4. Keep records of all official actions, such as:
a. All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved;
b. Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood
elevations for floodplain development;
c. Records of water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and
chapters, nonconforming uses and structures, including
changes, appeals, variances and amendments.
d. All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain
structures.
5. Submit copies of the following items to the Department regional
office:
a. Within 10 days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on
variances, appeals for map or text interpretations, and map or
text amendments.
b. Copies of any case-by-case analyses, and any other information
required by the Department, including an annual summary of
the number and types of floodplain zoning actions taken.
c. Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and all
related correspondence concerning the assessments.
§ 21.04.200 GRAFTON CODE § 21.04.220
1.01:486
6. Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this chapter
to the municipal Plan Commission and attorney for prosecution.
Copies of the reports shall also be sent to the Department regional
office.
7. Submit copies of text and map amendments and biennial reports to
the FEMA regional office.
8. Issue citations for violations of this chapter.
9. Issue stop-work orders for violations of this chapter. Removal of
said orders shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter.
B. Land use permit. A land use permit shall be obtained before any new
development or any repair or change in the use of a building or
structure, including sewer and water facilities, may be initiated.
Application to the Zoning Administrator shall include:
1. General information.
a. Name and address of the applicant, property owner and
contractor;
b. Legal description, proposed use, and whether it is new
construction or a modification.
2. Site development plan. A site plan drawn to scale shall be
submitted with the permit application form and shall contain:
a. Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot;
b. Location of the ordinary high-water mark of any abutting
navigable waterways;
c. Location of any structures with distances measured from the
lot lines and street center lines;
d. Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or
private water supply systems;
e. Location and elevation of existing or future access roads;
f. Location of floodplain and floodway limits as determined from
the Official Floodplain Zoning Maps;
g. The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and any
fill using vertical datum from the adopted study – either
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD);
h. Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in
NGVD or NAVD at the location of the development and to
determine whether or not the requirements of § 21.04.090 or
21.04.120 are met; and
§ 21.04.220 CODE ADOPTION § 21.04.220
1.01:487
i. Data to determine if the proposed development will cause an
obstruction to flow or an increase in regional flood height or
discharge according to § 21.04.060. This may include any of
the information noted in § 21.04.100A.
3. Data requirements to analyze developments. The applicant shall
provide all survey data and computations required to show the
effects of the project on flood heights, velocities and floodplain
storage, for all subdivision proposals, as "subdivision" is defined in
§ 236, Wis. Stats., and other proposed developments exceeding five
acres in area or where the estimated cost exceeds $125,000. The
estimated cost of the proposal shall include all structural
development, landscaping, access and road development, utilities
and other pertinent items, but need not include land costs. The
applicant shall provide:
a. An analysis of the effect of the development on the regional
flood profile, velocity of flow and floodplain storage capacity;
b. A map showing location and details of vehicular access to lands
outside the floodplain; and
c. A surface drainage plan showing how flood damage will be
minimized.
4. Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this chapter
shall expire 180 days after issuance.
C. Certificate of compliance. No land shall be occupied or used, and no
building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified,
repaired, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied until a certificate of
compliance is issued by the Zoning Administrator, except where no
permit is required, subject to the following provisions:
1. The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or
premises or part thereof, and the proposed use, conform to the
provisions of this chapter;
2. Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the
application for a permit;
3. If all chapter provisions are met, the certificate of compliance shall
be issued within 10 days after written notification that the
permitted work is completed;
4. The applicant shall submit a certification signed by a registered
professional engineer or registered land surveyor that the fill,
lowest floor and floodproofing elevations are in compliance with
the permit issued. Floodproofing measures also require
certification by a registered professional engineer or registered
architect that floodproofing measures meet the requirements of
§ 21.04.260.
§ 21.04.220 GRAFTON CODE § 21.04.220
1.01:488
§ 21.04.230. Plan Commission.
§ 21.04.240. Board of Appeals.
The Board of Appeals, created under § 62.23(7)(e), Wis. Stats., is hereby
authorized or shall be appointed to act for the purposes of this chapter. The
Board of Appeals shall exercise the powers conferred by Wisconsin Statutes
and adopt rules for the conduct of business. The Zoning Administrator may
not be the secretary of the Board of Appeals.
D. Other permits. The applicant must secure all necessary permits from
federal, state and local agencies, including those required by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344.
A. The Plan Commission shall:
1. Oversee the functions of the office of the Zoning Administrator; and
2. Review and advise the Village Board on all proposed amendments
to this chapter, maps and text.
B. The Plan Commission shall not:
1. Grant variances to the terms of the chapter in place of action by the
Board of Appeals; or
2. Amend the text or zoning maps in place of official action by the
Village Board.
A. Powers and duties. The Board of Appeals shall:
1. Appeals. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an
error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by
an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
2. Boundary disputes. Hear and decide disputes concerning the
district boundaries shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map.
3. Variances. Hear and decide, upon appeal, variances from the
chapter standards.
B. Appeals to the Board of Appeals.
1. Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by any officer or department of the Village of Grafton
affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator or other
administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days,
unless otherwise provided by the rules of the Board of Appeals, by
filing with the official whose decision is in question and with the
Board of Appeals a notice of appeal specifying the reasons for the
§ 21.04.220 CODE ADOPTION § 21.04.240
1.01:489
appeal. The official whose decision is in question shall transmit to
the Board of Appeals all records regarding the matter appealed.
2. Notice and hearing of appeals including variances.
a. Notice. The Board of Appeals shall:
1. Fix a reasonable time for the hearing;
2. Publish adequate notice pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes,
specifying the date, time, place and subject of the hearing;
3. Assure that notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest
and the Department regional office at least 10 days in
advance of the hearing.
b. Hearing. Any party may appear in person or by agent. The
Board of Appeals shall:
1. Resolve boundary disputes according to Subsection C.
2. Decide variance applications according to Subsection D.
3. Decide appeals of permit denials according to § 21.04.250.
3. Decision. The final decision regarding the appeal or variance
application shall:
a. Be made within a reasonable time;
b. Be sent to the Department regional office within 10 days of the
decision;
c. Be a written determination signed by the Chair or Secretary of
the Board of Appeals;
d. State the specific facts which are the basis for the Board of
Appeals decision;
e. Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part,
dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or grant or deny the
variance application; and
f. Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the
hardship demonstrated by the applicant in the case of a
variance, clearly stated in the recorded minutes of the Board of
Appeals proceedings.
C. Boundary disputes. The following procedure shall be used by the Board
of Appeals in hearing disputes concerning floodplain district
boundaries:
1. If a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate or
detailed floodplain studies, the flood elevations or profiles shall
§ 21.04.240 GRAFTON CODE § 21.04.240
1.01:490
prevail in locating the boundary. If none exist, other evidence may
be examined.
2. In all cases, the person contesting the boundary location shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to present arguments and technical
evidence to the Board of Appeals.
3. If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the Board of Appeals should
inform the Plan Commission or the person contesting the boundary
location to petition the Village Board for a map amendment
according to § 21.04.280.
D. Variance.
1. The Board of Appeals may, upon appeal, grant a variance from the
standards of this chapter if an applicant convincingly demonstrates
that:
a. Literal enforcement of the chapter provisions will cause
unnecessary hardship;
b. The hardship is due to adoption of the floodplain chapter and
unique property conditions not common to adjacent lots or
premises. In such case, the chapter or map must be amended;
c. The variance is not contrary to the public interest; and
d. The variance is consistent with the purpose of this chapter in
§ 21.04.030.
2. In addition to the criteria in Subsection D(1), to qualify for a
variance under FEMA regulations, the following criteria must be
met:
a. The variance may not cause any increase in the regional flood
elevation;
b. Variances can only be granted for lots that are less than 1/2
acre and are contiguous to existing structures constructed
below the RFE;
c. Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good and
sufficient cause, shall be the minimum relief necessary, shall
not cause increased risks to public safety or nuisances, shall
not increase costs for rescue and relief efforts and shall not be
contrary to the purpose of the chapter.
3. A variance shall not:
a. Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning
district.
b. Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or
loss.
§ 21.04.240 CODE ADOPTION § 21.04.240
1.01:491
§ 21.04.250. Review appeals of permit denials.
c. Be granted for a hardship which is self-created.
d. Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the
area.
e. Allow actions without the amendments to this chapter or
map(s) required in § 21.04.280.
f. Allow any alteration of a historic structure, including its use,
which would preclude its continued designation as a historic
structure.
4. When a floodplain variance is granted, the Board of Appeals shall
notify the applicant in writing that it may increase flood insurance
premiums and risks to life and property. A copy shall be maintained
with the variance record.
A. The Board of Appeals shall review all data related to the appeal. This
may include:
1. Permit application data listed in § 21.04.220B.
2. Floodway/flood-fringe determination data in § 21.04.150.
3. Data listed in § 21.04.100A(2), where the applicant has not
submitted this information to the Zoning Administrator.
4. Other data submitted with the application or submitted to the
Board of Appeals with the appeal.
B. For appeals of all denied permits, the Board of Appeals shall:
1. Follow the procedures of § 21.04.240B;
2. Consider Plan Commission recommendations; and
3. Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal.
C. For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation, the Board
of Appeals shall:
1. Uphold the denial where the Board of Appeals agrees with the data
showing an increase in flood elevation. Increases equal to or
greater than 0.01 foot may only be allowed after amending the
flood profile and map and all appropriate legal arrangements are
made with all adversely affected property owners.
2. Grant the appeal where the Board of Appeals agrees that the data
properly demonstrates that the project does not cause an increase
equal to or greater than 0.01 foot, provided no other reasons for
denial exist.
§ 21.04.240 GRAFTON CODE § 21.04.260
1.01:492
§ 21.04.260. Floodproofing.
§ 21.04.270. Public information.
§ 21.04.280. Amendments; general.
The Village Board may change or supplement the floodplain zoning district
boundaries and this chapter in the manner provided by law. Actions which
require an amendment include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. No permit or variance shall be issued until the applicant submits a plan
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing measures will protect the structure or development to the
flood protection elevation.
B. Floodproofing measures shall be designed to:
1. Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact
forces and other regional flood factors;
2. Protect structures to the flood protection elevation;
3. Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral
movement; and
4. Ensure that structural walls and floors are watertight to the flood
protection elevation and the interior remains completely dry during
flooding without human intervention.
C. Floodproofing measures could include:
1. Reinforcing walls and floors to resist rupture or collapse caused by
water pressure or floating debris.
2. Adding mass or weight to prevent flotation.
3. Placing essential utilities above the flood protection elevation.
4. Installing surface or subsurface drainage systems to relieve
foundation wall and basement floor pressures.
5. Putting cutoff valves on sewer lines or eliminating gravity-flow
basement drains.
A. Place marks on structures to show the depth of inundation during the
regional flood.
B. All maps, engineering data and regulations shall be available and
widely distributed.
C. All real estate transfers should show what floodplain zoning district any
real property is in.
§ 21.04.260 CODE ADOPTION § 21.04.280
1.01:493
§ 21.04.290. Procedures.
Chapter amendments may be made upon petition of any interested party
according to the provisions of s. 62.23, Wis. Stats. Such petitions shall
include all necessary data required by §§ 21.04.150 and 21.04.220B.
§ 21.04.300. Enforcement and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter by any person shall be
unlawful and shall be referred to the municipal attorney, who shall
expeditiously prosecute all such violators. A violator shall, upon conviction,
A. Any change to the Official Floodplain Zoning Map, including the
floodway line or boundary of any floodplain area.
B. Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles and
Floodplain Zoning Maps.
C. Any fill in the floodplain which raises the elevation of the filled area to a
height at or above the flood protection elevation and is contiguous to
land lying outside the floodplain.
D. Any fill or floodplain encroachment that obstructs flow, increasing
regional flood height 0.01 foot or more.
E. Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning chapter text required by § NR
116.05, Wis. Adm. Code, or otherwise required by law, or for changes by
the Village of Grafton.
F. All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway lines
or to remove an area from the floodway or the flood-fringe that is based
on a base flood elevation from a FIRM requires prior approval by FEMA.
A. The proposed amendment shall be referred to the Plan Commission for
a public hearing and recommendation to the Village Board. The
amendment and notice of public hearing shall be submitted to the
Department regional office for review prior to the hearing. The
amendment procedure shall comply with the provisions of § 62.23, Wis.
Stats.
B. No amendments shall become effective until reviewed and approved by
the Department.
C. All persons petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs flow,
increasing regional flood height 0.01 foot or more, shall obtain flooding
easements or other appropriate legal arrangements from all adversely
affected property owners and notify local units of government before
the amendment can be approved by the Village Board.
D. For amendments in areas with no water surface profiles, the Plan
Commission shall consider data submitted by the Department, the
Zoning Administrator's visual on-site inspections and other available
information. (See § 21.04.050D.)
§ 21.04.280 GRAFTON CODE § 21.04.300
1.01:494
forfeit to the Village of Grafton a penalty of not less than $200 and not
more than $1,000, together with a taxable cost of such action. Each day
of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of
this chapter is a public nuisance ,and the creation may be enjoined and the
maintenance may be abated by action at suit of the Village of Grafton, the
state, or any citizen thereof, pursuant to § 87.30, Wis. Stats.
§ 21.04.310. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined, words and phrases in this chapter shall have
their common law meaning and shall be applied in accordance with their
common usage. Words used in the present tense include the future; the
singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the
singular. The word "may" is permissive; "shall" is mandatory and is not
discretionary.
A ZONES — Those areas shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map
which would be inundated by the regional flood. These areas may be
numbered or unnumbered A Zones. The A Zones may or may not be
reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a given
area.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE — A facility, structure, building or use
which is accessory or incidental to the principal use of a property, structure
or building.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year, as published by FEMA as part of an FIS and
depicted on a FIRM.
BASEMENT — Any enclosed area of a building having its floor subgrade,
i.e., below ground level on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
BULKHEAD LINE — A geographic line along a reach of navigable water that
has been adopted by a municipal chapter and approved by the Department
pursuant to § 30.11, Wis. Stats., and which allows limited filling between
this bulkhead line and the original ordinary high-water mark, except where
such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A certification that the construction and
the use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a
structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks
to confine and conduct normal flow of water.
CRAWLWAYS or CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area below the first usable
floor of a building, generally less than five feet in height, used for access to
plumbing and electrical utilities.
DECK — An unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides, but has
a permeable floor which allows the infiltration of precipitation.
DEPARTMENT — The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
§ 21.04.300 CODE ADOPTION § 21.04.310
1.01:495
DEVELOPMENT — Any artificial change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings,
structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or
alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the repair of
any damaged structure or the improvement or renovation of any structure,
regardless of percentage of damage or improvement; the placement of
buildings or structures; subdivision layout and site preparation; mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; the
storage, deposition or extraction of materials or equipment; and the
installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems
or water supply facilities.
DRYLAND ACCESS — A vehicular access route which is above the regional
flood elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land
outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above regional flood
elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles.
ENCROACHMENT — Any fill, structure, equipment, building, use or
development in the floodway.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) — The federal
agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD FREQUENCY — The probability of a flood occurrence which is
determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a particular flood
event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average, once in a specified
number of years or as a percent chance of occurring in any given year.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP — A map designating approximate flood
hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered A Zones
and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations. This map
forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects of the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) until superseded by a Flood
Insurance Study and a Flood Insurance Rate Map.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — A map of a community on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both special
flood hazard areas (the floodplain) and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community. This map can only be amended by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — A technical engineering examination,
evaluation, and determination of the local flood hazard areas. It provides
maps designating those areas affected by the regional flood and provides
both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations and may provide
floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered and
unnumbered A Zones. Flood Insurance Rate Maps that accompany the
Flood Insurance Study form the basis for both the regulatory and the
insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by one of the
following conditions: the overflow or rise of inland waters, or the rapid
accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source, or the inundation
§ 21.04.310 GRAFTON CODE § 21.04.310
1.01:496
caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels
along the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake Superior, or the sudden increase
caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm or by an unanticipated force of nature, such
as a seiche, or by some similarly unusual event.
FLOOD PROFILE — A graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the
relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations of
land surface elevations along a stream or river.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION — An elevation of two feet of freeboard
above the water surface profile elevation designated for the regional flood.
(Also see: "freeboard.")
FLOOD STORAGE — Those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters
has been taken into account during analysis in reducing the regional flood
discharge.
FLOOD-FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway
which is covered by floodwaters during the regional flood and associated
with standing water rather than flowing water.
FLOODPLAIN — Land which has been or may be covered by floodwater
during the regional flood. It includes the floodway and the flood-fringe, and
may include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory purposes.
FLOODPLAIN ISLAND — A natural geologic land formation within the
floodplain that is surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the
regional flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — Policy and procedures to ensure wise use
of floodplains, including mapping and engineering, mitigation, education,
and administration and enforcement of floodplain regulations.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural provisions, changes or
adjustments to properties and structures, water and sanitary facilities and
contents of buildings subject to flooding, for the purpose of reducing or
eliminating flood damage.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood
discharge.
FREEBOARD — A safety factor expressed in terms of a specified number
of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for any
factors that cause flood heights greater than those calculated, including ice
jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and
floodways, the effects of watershed urbanization, loss of flood storage areas
due to development and aggregation of the river or stream bed.
HABITABLE STRUCTURE — Any structure or portion thereof used or
designed for human habitation.
HEARING NOTICE — Publication or posting meeting the requirements
of Ch. 985, Wis. Stats. For appeals, a Class 1 notice, published once at
least one week (seven days) before the hearing, is required. For all zoning
§ 21.04.310 CODE ADOPTION § 21.04.310
1.01:497
chapters and amendments, a Class 2 notice, published twice, once each
week consecutively, the last at least a week (seven days) before the hearing
is required. Local ordinances or bylaws may require additional notice
exceeding these minimums.
HIGH FLOOD DAMAGE POTENTIAL — Damage that could result from
flooding that includes any danger to life or health or any significant
economic loss to a structure or building and its contents.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is either listed individually
in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by
the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register, or certified or preliminarily determined by
the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance
of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district, or individually listed
on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior, or
individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an
approved state program, as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or
by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
INCREASE IN REGIONAL FLOOD HEIGHT — A calculated upward rise
in the regional flood elevation, equal to or greater than 0.01 foot, based
on a comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions, which is
directly attributable to development in the floodplain but not attributable
to manipulation of mathematical variables such as roughness factors,
expansion and contraction coefficients and discharge.
LAND USE — Any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real
estate. (Also see "development.")
NAVD or NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM — Elevations referenced
to mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For floodplain management purposes, "new
construction" means structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain zoning regulations
adopted by this community and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures. For the purpose of determining flood insurance rates, it
includes any structures for which the "start of construction" commenced
on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31,
1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.
NGVD or NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM — Elevations
referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — An existing lawful structure or
building which is not in conformity with the dimensional or structural
requirements of this chapter for the area of the floodplain which it occupies.
(For example, an existing residential structure in the flood-fringe district
§ 21.04.310 GRAFTON CODE § 21.04.310
1.01:498
is a conforming use. However, if the lowest floor is lower than the flood
protection elevation, the structure is nonconforming.)
NONCONFORMING USE — An existing lawful use or accessory use of a
structure or building which is not in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter for the area of the floodplain which it occupies. (Such as a residence
in the floodway.)
OBSTRUCTION TO FLOW — Any development which blocks the conveyance
of floodwaters such that this development alone or together with any future
development will cause an increase in regional flood height.
OFFICIAL FLOODPLAIN ZONING MAP — That map, adopted and made
part of this chapter, as described in § 21.04.050B, which has been approved
by the Department and FEMA.
OPEN SPACE USE — Those uses having a relatively low flood damage
potential and not involving structures.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — The point on the bank or shore up to
which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to
leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of
terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily
recognized characteristic.
PERSON — An individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership,
association, Village of Grafton or state agency.
PUBLIC UTILITIES — Those utilities using underground or overhead
transmission lines, such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and
distribution and collection systems, such as water, sanitary sewer and storm
sewer.
REASONABLY SAFE FROM FLOODING — Means base floodwaters will not
inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the special
flood hazard area and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood
will not damage existing or proposed buildings.
REGIONAL FLOOD — A flood determined to be representative of large
floods known to have occurred in Wisconsin. A regional flood is a flood with
a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and if
depicted on the FIRM, the RFE is equivalent to the BFE.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement
of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such
as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
§ 21.04.310 CODE ADOPTION § 21.04.310
1.01:499
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For
an alteration, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object with form, shape and utility, either
permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground,
streambed or lake bed, including, but not limited to, roofed and walled
buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts.
SUBDIVISION — Has the meaning given in § 236.02(12), Wis. Stats.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure,
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its predamaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the equalized assessed value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP — Where special conditions affecting a
particular property, which were not self-created, have made strict
conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height or
density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes
of the chapter.
VARIANCE — An authorization by the Board of Appeals for the construction
or maintenance of a building or structure in a manner which is inconsistent
with dimensional standards (not uses) contained in this Floodplain Zoning
Chapter.
VILLAGE OF GRAFTON or MUNICIPALITY — The Village governmental unit
enacting, administering and enforcing this chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without
required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, floodproofing
certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to
be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
WATERSHED — The entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a
watercourse or body of water.
WATER SURFACE PROFILE — A graphical representation showing the
elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along a
reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile of
the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain zoning.
Title 22: Shoreland-Wetland Zoning
Chapter 22.04
SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING
§ 21.04.310 GRAFTON CODE § 22.04.010
1.01:500
§ 22.04.010. Statutory authorization.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authorization in §§ 61.35 and
61.351, Wis. Stats.
§ 22.04.015. Incorporation of county ordinance. [Amended by Ord.
No. 020, Series 2001]
The provisions of Title 7, Shoreland and Wetland Zoning, of the Ozaukee
County Code of Ordinances, pertaining to shoreland-wetland regulations
on shoreland areas adjacent to navigable waters is incorporated herein
by reference. The shoreland-wetland provisions adopted shall apply to all
properties annexed to the Village of Grafton after May 7, 1982.
§ 22.04.020. Finding of fact and purpose.
Uncontrolled use of the shoreland-wetlands and pollution of the navigable
waters of the Village would adversely affect the public health, safety,
convenience and general welfare and impair the tax base. The Legislature
of Wisconsin has delegated responsibility to all municipalities to:
§ 22.04.030. General provisions. [Amended 2-1-2016 by Ord. No.
002-2016]
A. Promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare;
B. Maintain the stormwater and floodwater storage capacity of wetlands;
C. Prevent and control water pollution by preserving wetlands which filter
or store sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that
would otherwise drain into navigable waters;
D. Protect fish, their spawning grounds, other aquatic life and wildlife by
preserving wetlands and other aquatic habitat;
E. Prohibit certain uses detrimental to the shoreland-wetland area; and
F. Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by restricting the removal of
natural shoreland cover and controlling shoreland-wetland excavation,
filling and other earthmoving activities.
A. Compliance. The use of wetlands and the alteration of wetlands within
the shoreland area of the Village shall be in full compliance with the
terms of this chapter and other applicable local, state or federal
regulations. All permitted development shall require the issuance of a
zoning permit unless otherwise expressly excluded by a provision of
this chapter.
B. Municipalities and state agencies regulated. Unless specifically
exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns and counties are required to
comply with this chapter and obtain all necessary permits. State
agencies are required to comply if § 13.48(13), Wis. Stats., applies. The
construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways
§ 22.04.010 CODE ADOPTION § 22.04.030
1.01:501
§ 22.04.040. Abrogation and greater restrictions. [Amended
2-1-2016 by Ord. No. 002-2016]
§ 22.04.050. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in
favor of the Village and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any
other powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. Where a provision of this
chapter is required by a standard in Ch. NR 117, Wis. Adm. Code, and where
the ordinance provision is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light
of the Ch. NR 117 standards in effect on the date of the adoption of the
ordinance codified in this chapter or in effect on the date of the most recent
text amendment to this chapter.
§ 22.04.060. Severability.
Should any portion of this chapter be declared invalid or unconstitutional
by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not
be affected.
§ 22.04.070. Annexed areas. [Amended 2-1-2016 by Ord. No.
002-2016]
and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation are exempt
when § 30.12(4)(a), Wis. Stats., applies.
A. This chapter supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning
ordinance enacted under § 61.35, 62.23 or 87.30, Wis. Stats., which
relate to floodplains and shoreland-wetlands; except that, where
another municipal zoning ordinance is more restrictive than this
chapter, that ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the
extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise.
B. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
deed restrictions, covenants or easements. However, where this
chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter
shall prevail.
C. The lands within the Shoreland Zoning District are subject to all
applicable provisions of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code. Where
the provisions of this chapter are more restrictive than other
regulations in the Code, the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
A. The Ozaukee County shoreland zoning provisions in effect on the date
of annexation remain in effect and administered by the Village for all
areas annexed by the Village after May 7, 1982. These annexed lands
are described on the Village Official Zoning Map. The Ozaukee County
shoreland zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for the
purpose of administering this section and are on file in the office of the
Village Zoning Administrator.
§ 22.04.030 GRAFTON CODE § 22.04.070
1.01:502
§ 22.04.080. Shoreland-wetland zoning maps.
The following maps are adopted and made part of this chapter and are on
file in the office of the Village Clerk:
§ 22.04.090. District boundaries.
The shoreland-wetland zoning district includes all wetlands in the Village
which are five acres or more and are shown on the final Wetland Inventory
Map that has been adopted and made a part of this chapter and which are:
B. A shoreland that, before incorporation by the Village of Grafton, was
part of a town that was subject to a county shoreland zoning ordinance
under § 59.692, Wis. Stats., if the date of incorporation was after April
30, 1994.
A. Wisconsin Wetland Inventory Maps stamped "FINAL" on July 7, 1989;
B. Floodplain Zoning Maps issued by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency for the Village, dated December 4, 2007, and Department of
Natural Resources floodplain maps dated September 1987; [Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
C. "Cedarburg Quadrangle," United States Geological Survey Map dated
1959 and photo-revised 1971 and 1976;
D. Zoning Maps titled "Village of Grafton Zoning Map" and dated
December 1989.
A. Within 1,000 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable lakes,
ponds or flowages. Lakes, ponds or flowages in the Village shall be
presumed to be navigable if they are listed in the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources surface water data viewer available
on the DNR website, United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps
or other zoning base maps which have been incorporated by reference
and made a part of this chapter. [Amended 2-1-2016 by Ord. No.
002-2016]
B. Within 300 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable rivers or
streams, or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is
greater. Rivers and streams shall be presumed to be navigable if they
are designated as either continuous or intermittent waterways on the
United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning base
maps which have been incorporated by reference and made a part of
this chapter. Floodplain Zoning Maps adopted in § 22.04.080 shall be
used to determine the extent of floodplain areas.
C. Determinations of navigability and ordinary high-water-mark location
shall initially be made by the Zoning Administrator. When questions
arise, the Zoning Administrator shall contact the appropriate district
office of the Department for a final determination of navigability or
ordinary high-water mark.
§ 22.04.070 CODE ADOPTION § 22.04.090
1.01:503
§ 22.04.100. Filled wetlands.
Wetlands which are filled prior to July 7, 1989, the date on which the Village
received final wetland inventory maps, in a manner which affects their
wetland characteristics to the extent that the area can no longer be defined
as wetland, are not subject to this chapter.
§ 22.04.110. Wetlands landward of bulkhead line.
Wetlands located between the original ordinary high-water mark and a
bulkhead line established prior to May 7, 1982, under § 30.11, Wis. Stats.,
are not subject to this chapter.
§ 22.04.115. Setbacks from water. [Added 2-1-2016 by Ord. No.
002-2016]
D. When an apparent discrepancy exists between the shoreland-wetland
district boundary shown on the Official Zoning Maps and actual field
conditions at the time the maps were adopted, the Zoning
Administrator shall contact the appropriate district office of the
Department to determine if the shoreland-wetland district boundary as
mapped is in error. If Department staff concur with the Zoning
Administrator that a particular area was incorrectly mapped as
wetland, the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to
immediately grant or deny a zoning permit in accordance with the
regulations applicable to the correct zoning district. In order to correct
wetland mapping errors or acknowledge exempted wetlands
designated in §§ 22.04.100 and 22.110, the Zoning Administrator shall
be responsible for initiating a map amendment within a reasonable
period.
E. Pursuant to § 61.353(7) or 62.233, Wis. Stats., the shoreland zoning
district does not include lands adjacent to an artificially constructed
drainage ditch, pond or retention basin if the drainage ditch, pond or
retention basin is not hydrologically connected to a natural navigable
water body. [Added 2-1-2016 by Ord. No. 002-2016]
A. Principal building setbacks.
1. All principal buildings shall be set back at least 50 feet from the
ordinary high-water mark.
2. Adjustment of shore yards. A setback less than that required by
Subsection A.1 may be allowed if all of the following apply:
a. The principal building is constructed or placed on a lot or
parcel of land that is immediately adjacent on each side to a lot
or parcel of land containing a principal building; and
b. The principal building is constructed or placed within a
distance equal to the average setback of the principal building
§ 22.04.090 GRAFTON CODE § 22.04.115
1.01:504
§ 22.04.120. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted, subject to the provisions of Chs. 30 and
31, Wis. Stats., and the provisions of other local, state and federal laws, if
applicable.
on the adjacent lots or 35 feet from the ordinary high-water
mark, whichever distance is greater.
A. Activities and uses which do not require the issuance of a conditional
use permit, provided that no wetland alteration occurs:
1. Hiking, fishing, trapping, swimming, snowmobiling and boating;
2. The harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild
rice, berries, tree fruits and tree seeds, in a manner that is not
injurious to the natural reproduction of such crops;
3. The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning and
harvesting of timber;
4. The cultivation of agricultural crops.
B. Uses which do not require the issuance of a conditional use permit and
which may involve wetland alterations only to the extent specifically
provided below:
1. The maintenance and repair of existing drainage systems to restore
preexisting levels of drainage, including the minimum amount of
filling necessary to dispose of dredged spoil, provided that the
filling is otherwise permissible and that dredged spoil is placed on
existing spoil banks where possible;
2. The construction and maintenance of piers, docks, walkways,
observation decks and trail bridges built on pilings, including
limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or
maintenance;
3. The installation and maintenance of sealed tiles for the purpose of
draining lands outside the shoreland-wetland zoning district,
provided that such installation or maintenance is done in a manner
designed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural functions of
the shoreland-wetland district listed in § 22.04.090 of this chapter;
and
4. The maintenance, repair, replacement and reconstruction of
existing highways and bridges, including limited excavating and
filling necessary for such maintenance, repair, replacement or
reconstruction.
C. Uses which are allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use permit
and which may include wetland alterations only to the extent
specifically provided below:
§ 22.04.115 CODE ADOPTION § 22.04.120
1.01:505
1. The construction and maintenance of roads which are necessary for
the continuity of the municipal street system, the provision of
essential utility and emergency services or to provide access to
uses permitted under Subsection A of this section, provided that:
a. The road cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the
wetland;
b. The road is designed and constructed to minimize adverse
impacts upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in
§ 22.04.200 of this chapter;
c. The road is designed and constructed with the minimum crosssectional
area practical to serve the intended use;
d. Road construction activities are carried out in the immediate
area of the roadbed only; and
e. Any wetland alteration must be necessary for the construction
or maintenance of the road,
2. The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings,
provided that:
a. The building is used solely in conjunction with a use permitted
in the shoreland-wetland district;
b. The building cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside
wetlands;
c. The building does not exceed 500 square feet in floor area; and
d. Only limited filling and excavating necessary to provide
structural support for the building is allowed.
3. The establishment and development of public and private parks
and recreation areas, outdoor education areas, historic, natural
and scientific areas, game refuges and closed areas, fish and
wildlife habitat improvement projects, public boat-launching
ramps, provided that:
a. Any private development allowed under this subsection shall
be used exclusively for the permitted purpose;
b. Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the
development of public boat-launching ramps, swimming
beaches or the construction of park shelters or similar
structures is allowed;
c. The construction and maintenance of roads necessary for the
uses permitted under this subsection are allowed only where
such construction and maintenance meets the criteria in
§ 22.04.200 of this chapter; and
§ 22.04.120 GRAFTON CODE § 22.04.120
1.01:506
§ 22.04.130. Prohibited uses.
§ 22.04.135. Vegetative buffer zone. [Added 2-1-2016 by Ord. No.
002-2016]
Pursuant to § 61.353(3) or 62.233, Wis. Stats., a landowner must maintain a
vegetative buffer zone, as follows:
d. Wetland alterations in game refuges and closed areas, fish and
wildlife habitat improvement projects shall be for the purpose
of improving wildlife habitat or to otherwise enhance wetland
values.
4. The construction and maintenance of electric and telephone
transmission lines, water and gas distribution lines and sewage
collection lines and related facilities and the construction and
maintenance of railroad lines; provided that:
a. The utility transmission and distribution facilities and railroad
lines cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the
wetlands;
b. Only limited filling or excavating necessary for such
construction or maintenance is allowed; and
c. Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner
designed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural
functions of the wetland listed in § 22.04.200 of this chapter.
A. Any use not listed in § 22.04.120 of this chapter is prohibited, unless the
wetland or a portion of the wetland has been rezoned by amendment of
this chapter in accordance with § 22.04.200 of this chapter.
B. The use of a boathouse for human habitation and the construction or
placement of a boathouse or fixed houseboat below the ordinary highwater
mark of any navigable waters are prohibited.
A. A person who owns shoreland property that contains vegetation must
maintain that vegetation in a vegetative buffer zone along the entire
shoreline of the property and extending 35 feet inland from the
ordinary high-water mark of the navigable water, except as provided in
Subsection B.
B. If the vegetation in a vegetative buffer zone contains invasive species or
dead or diseased vegetation, the owner of the shoreland property may
remove the vegetation, except that if the owner removes all of the
vegetation in the vegetative buffer zone, the owner shall establish a
vegetative buffer zone with new vegetation.
C. A person who is required to maintain or establish a vegetative buffer
zone under Subsection A may remove all of the vegetation in a part of
that zone in order to establish a viewing or access corridor that is no
§ 22.04.120 CODE ADOPTION § 22.04.135
1.01:507
§ 22.04.140. (Reserved)30
§ 22.04.150. Administrative provisions.
Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall have the following
duties and powers:
§ 22.04.160. Zoning permits.
greater than 30 feet wide for every 100 feet of shoreline frontage and
extends no more than 35 feet inland from the ordinary high-water mark.
A. Advise applicants as to the provisions of this chapter and assist them in
preparing permit applications and appeal forms;
B. Issue permits and certificates of compliance and inspect properties for
compliance with this chapter;
C. Keep records of all permits issued, inspections made, work approved
and other official actions;
D. Have access to any structure or premises at any reasonable time for the
purpose of performing these duties;
E. Submit copies of decisions on variances, conditional use permits,
appeals for a map or text interpretation, and map or text amendments,
within 10 days after they are granted or denied, to the appropriate
district office of the Department.
F. Investigate and report violations of this chapter to the Plan Commission
and Village Attorney;
G. Issue citations for violations of this chapter;
H. Issue stop-work orders for violations of this chapter. Removal of said
orders shall be unlawful.
A. When required. Unless another section of this chapter specifically
exempts certain types of development from this requirement, a
conditional use permit shall be obtained from the Zoning Administrator
before any new development, as defined in § 22.04.220 of this chapter,
or any change in the use of an existing building or structure is initiated.
B. Application. An application for a conditional use permit shall be made to
the Zoning Administrator upon forms furnished by the Village and shall
include, for the purpose of proper enforcement of these regulations, the
following information:
1. General information.
30.Editor's Note: Original § 22.04.140, Nonconforming structures and uses, was repealed
2-1-2016 by Ord. No. 002-2016.
§ 22.04.135 GRAFTON CODE § 22.04.160
1.01:508
§ 22.04.170. Certificates of compliance.
a. Name, address and telephone number of applicant, property
owner and contractor, where applicable;
b. Legal description of the property and a general description of
the proposed use or development;
c. Any other information required by the Zoning Administrator or
the Plan Commission.
2. Site development plan. The site development plan shall be
submitted as a part of the permit application and shall contain the
following information drawn to scale:
a. Dimensions and area of the lot;
b. Location of any structures with distances measured from the
lot lines and center line of all abutting streets or highways;
c. Location of the ordinary high-water mark of any abutting
navigable waterways;
d. Boundaries of all wetlands;
e. Existing and proposed topographic and drainage features and
vegetative cover;
f. Location of floodplain and floodway limits on the property as
determined from floodplain zoning maps;
g. Location of existing or future access roads;
h. Specifications and dimensions for areas of proposed wetland
alteration; and
i. Any other information required by the Zoning Administrator or
the Plan Commission.
C. Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this chapter shall
expire six months from the date of issuance if work has not commenced.
A. Except where no conditional use permit is required, no land shall be
occupied or used and no building which is hereafter constructed,
altered, added to, modified, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied until a
certificate of compliance is issued by the Zoning Administrator, subject
to the following provisions:
1. The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or
premises or part thereof, and the proposed use thereof, conform to
the provisions of this chapter;
2. Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the
application for a conditional use permit;
§ 22.04.160 CODE ADOPTION § 22.04.170
1.01:509
§ 22.04.180. Conditional use permits.
3. The certificate of compliance shall be issued within 10 working
days after notification of the completion of the work specified in the
conditional use permit, providing the building or premises and
proposed use thereof conform with all the provisions of this
chapter.
B. The Zoning Administrator may issue a temporary certificate of
compliance for a building, premises or part thereof pursuant to rules
and regulations established by the municipal governing body.
C. Upon written request from the owner, the Zoning Administrator shall
issue a certificate of compliance for any building or premises existing at
the time of ordinance adoption, certifying after inspection the extent
and type of use made of the building or premises and whether or not
such conforms to the provisions of this chapter.
A. Application. Any use listed as a conditional use in this chapter shall be
permitted only after an application has been submitted to the Zoning
Administrator and a conditional use permit has been granted by the
Plan Commission following the procedures in § 22.04.190 of this
chapter.
B. Conditions. Upon consideration of the permit application and the
standards applicable to the conditional uses designated in § 22.04.120
of this chapter, the Plan Commission shall attach such conditions to a
conditional use permit, in addition to those required elsewhere in this
chapter, as are necessary to further the purposes of this chapter as
listed in § 22.04.020. Such conditions may include specifications for, but
not be limited to: type of shore cover; erosion controls; increased
setbacks; specific sewage disposal and water supply facilities;
landscaping and planting screens; period of operation; operational
control; sureties; deed restrictions; location of piers, docks, parking
areas and signs; and type of construction. To secure information upon
which to base its determination, the Plan Commission may require the
applicant to furnish, in addition to the information required for a
conditional use permit, other pertinent information which is necessary
to determine if the proposed use is consistent with the purpose of this
chapter.
C. Fees. The Village Board, by resolution, shall adopt fees for the
following:
1. Certificates of compliance: $50.
2. Public hearings, appeals: $125.
3. Legal notice publications: $50.
4. Conditional use permits: $125.
§ 22.04.170 GRAFTON CODE § 22.04.180
1.01:510
§ 22.04.190. Board of Appeals.
The Village President shall appoint a Board of Appeals under § 62.23(7)(e),
Wis. Stats., consisting of five members subject to confirmation by the Village
Board. The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules for the conduct of its business
as required by § 63.23(7)(e)3, Wis. Stats.
5. Rezoning petitions: $125.
D. Recording. Where a conditional use permit is approved, an appropriate
record shall be made by the Zoning Administrator of the land use and
structures permitted.
E. Revocation. Where the conditions of a conditional use permit are
violated, the permit shall be revoked by the Plan Commission.
A. Powers and duties. The Board of Appeals:
1. Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in
any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this
chapter;
2. May authorize, upon appeal, a variance from the dimensional
standards of this chapter where an applicant convincingly
demonstrates:
a. That literal enforcement of the terms of the chapter will result
in unnecessary hardship for the applicant;
b. That the hardship is due to special conditions unique to the
property and is not self-created or based solely on economic
gain or loss;
c. That such variance is not contrary to the public interest as
expressed by the purpose of this chapter; and
d. That such variance will not grant or increase any use of
property which is prohibited in the zoning district.
B. Appeals to the Board. Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by
any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau of
the community affected by any order, requirement, decision or
determination of the Zoning Administrator or other administrative
official. Such appeals shall be taken within 30 days, as provided by the
rules of the Board, by filing with the official whose decision is in
question and with the Board of Appeals a notice of appeal specifying the
reasons for the appeal. The Zoning Administrator or other official
whose decision is in question shall transmit to the Board all the papers
constituting the record on the matter appealed.
C. Public hearings.
§ 22.04.180 CODE ADOPTION § 22.04.190
1.01:511
§ 22.04.200. Amending shoreland-wetland zoning regulations.
The Village Board may alter, supplement or change the district boundaries
and the regulations contained in this chapter in accordance with the
requirements of § 62.23(7)(d)2, Wis. Stats., Ch. NR 117, Wis. Adm. Code,
and the following:
1. Before making a decision on an appeal or application, the Board of
Appeals shall, within a reasonable period of time, hold a public
hearing. The Board shall give public notice of the hearing by
publishing a Class 2 notice under Ch. 985, Wis. Stats., specifying
the date, time and place of the hearing and the matters to come
before the Board. At the public hearing, any party may present
testimony in person, by agent or by attorney. [Amended by Ord.
No. 002-94, 1994]
2. A copy of such notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest and
the appropriate district office of the Department at least 10 days
prior to all public hearings on issues involving shoreland-wetland
zoning.
D. Decisions.
1. The final disposition of an appeal or application for a conditional
use permit before the Board of Appeals shall be in the form of a
written decision, made within a reasonable time after the public
hearing and signed by the Board Chair. Such decision shall state
the specific facts which are the basis of the Board's determination
and shall either affirm, reverse or modify the order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part, dismiss the
appeal for lack of jurisdiction or prosecution, or grant the
application for a conditional use.
2. A copy of such decision shall be mailed to the parties in interest and
the appropriate district office of the Department within 10 days
after the decision is issued.
A. A copy of each proposed text or map amendment shall be submitted to
the appropriate district office of the Department within five days of the
submission of the proposed amendment to the Plan Commission.
B. All proposed text and map amendments to the shoreland-wetland
zoning regulations shall be referred to the municipal Plan Commission,
and a public hearing shall be held after Class 2 notice as required by
§ 62.23(7)(d)2, Wis. Stats. The appropriate district office of the
Department shall be provided with written notice of the public hearing
at least 10 days prior to such hearing. In order to ensure that this
chapter will remain consistent with the shoreland protection objectives
of § 281.31, Wis. Stats., the municipal governing body may not rezone a
wetland in a shoreland-wetland zoning district, or any portion thereof,
§ 22.04.190 GRAFTON CODE § 22.04.200
1.01:512
where the proposed rezoning may result in a significant adverse impact
upon any of the following wetland functions:
1. Storm and floodwater storage capacity;
2. Maintenance of dry season stream flow or the discharge of
groundwater to a wetland, the recharge of groundwater from a
wetland to another area, or the flow of groundwater through a
wetland;
3. Filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or
organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable
waters;
4. Shoreline protection against erosion;
5. Fish spawning, breeding, nursery or feeding grounds;
6. Wildlife habitat; or
7. Areas of special recreational, scenic or scientific interest, including
scarce wetland types and habitat of endangered species.
C. Where the district office of the Department determines that a proposed
rezoning may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria
listed in Subsection B the Department shall so notify the Village of its
determination either prior to or during the public hearing held on the
proposed amendment.
D. The appropriate district office of the Department shall be provided
with:
1. A copy of the recommendation and report, if any, of the Plan
Commission on a proposed text or map amendment within 10 days
after the submission of those recommendations to the Village
Board;
2. Written notice of the action on the proposed text or map
amendment within 10 days after the action is taken.
E. If the Department notifies the Plan Commission in writing that a
proposed amendment may have a significant adverse impact upon any
of the criteria listed in Subsection B, that proposed amendment, if
approved by the Village Board, shall not become effective until more
than 30 days have elapsed since written notice of the municipal
approval was mailed to the Department, as required by this section. If
within the thirty-day period the Department notifies the Village that the
Department intends to adopt a superseding shoreland-wetland zoning
ordinance for the Village as provided by §§ 62.231(6) and 61.351(6),
Wis. Stats., the proposed amendment shall not become effective until
the ordinance adoption procedure under § 62.231(6) or 61.351(6), Wis.
Stats., is completed or otherwise terminated.
§ 22.04.200 CODE ADOPTION § 22.04.210
1.01:513
§ 22.04.210. Enforcement and penalties.31
Any development, building or structure or accessory building or structure
constructed, altered, added to, modified, rebuilt or replaced or any use or
accessory use established after the effective date of the ordinance codified
in this chapter in violation of the provisions of this chapter, by any person,
firm, association, corporation (including building contractors or their
agents), shall be deemed a violation. Any person, firm, association or
corporation who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $200 nor more
than $1,000 per offense, together with the taxable costs of such action.
Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every
violation of this chapter is a public nuisance and the creation thereof may
be enjoined and the maintenance thereof may be abated by action at suit
of the Village, the state, or any citizen thereof pursuant to § 87.30(2), Wis.
Stats.
§ 22.04.220. Definitions.
A. For the purpose of administering and enforcing this chapter, the terms
or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: Words used in the
present tense include the future; words in the singular number include
the plural number; words in the plural number include the singular
number. The word "shall" is mandatory, not permissive. All distances
unless otherwise specified shall be measured horizontally.
B. The following terms used in this chapter mean:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE — A detached subordinate
structure or a use which is clearly incidental to, and customarily found
in connection with, the principal structure or use to which it is related
and which is located on the same lot as that of the principal structure
or use.
BOATHOUSE — As defined in § 30.01(1d), Wis. Stats., means a
permanent structure used for the storage of watercraft and associated
materials and includes all structures which are totally enclosed, have
roofs or walls, or any combination of structural parts.
CLASS 2 PUBLIC NOTICE — Publication of a public hearing notice
under Ch. 985, Wis. Stats., in a newspaper of circulation in the affected
area. Publication is required on two consecutive weeks, the last at least
seven days prior to the hearing.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use which is permitted by this chapter,
provided that certain conditions specified in the chapter are met and
that a permit is granted by the Board of Appeals or, where appropriate,
the planning agency designated by the municipal governing body.
DEPARTMENT — The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
31.Editor's Note: For provisions on citation deposits, forms and enforcement officials for
violations of this section, see §§ 1.12.020 and 1.12.040 of this Code.
§ 22.04.210 GRAFTON CODE § 22.04.220
1.01:514
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings,
structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or
substantial alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures;
the placement of buildings or structures; ditching, lagooning, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; and the
deposition or extraction of earthen materials.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — One or more artificial ditches, tile drains or
similar devices which collect surface runoff or groundwater and convey
it to a point of discharge.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL FACILITY — Any facility, temporary or
permanent, which is reasonably expected to abate, reduce or aid in
the prevention, measurement, control or monitoring of noise, air or
water pollutants, solid waste and thermal pollution, radiation or other
pollutants, including facilities installed principally to supplement or
to replace existing property or equipment not meeting or allegedly
not meeting acceptable pollution control standards or which are to be
supplemented or replaced by other pollution control facilities.
FIXED HOUSEBOAT — As defined in § 30.01(1r), Wis. Stats., means a
structure not actually used for navigation, which extends beyond the
ordinary high-water mark of a navigable waterway and is retained in
place either by cables to the shoreline or by anchors or spudpoles
attached to the bed of the waterway.
NAVIGABLE WATERS — Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, all natural
inland lakes within Wisconsin, and all streams, ponds, sloughs,
flowages and other waters within the territorial limits of this state,
including the Wisconsin portion of boundary waters, which are
navigable under the laws of this state. Under § 281.31(2)(d), Wis. Stats.,
notwithstanding any other provision of law or administrative rule
promulgated thereunder, shoreland ordinances required under
§ 61.351 or 62.231, Wis. Stats., and Ch. NR 117, Wis. Adm. Code, do
not apply to lands adjacent to farm drainage ditches, if:
1. Such lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable stream or river;
Those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were
not navigable streams before ditching.
Wisconsin's Supreme Court has declared "navigable" bodies of
water that have a bed differentiated from adjacent uplands and
levels or flow sufficient to support navigation by a recreational
craft of the shallowest draft on an annually recurring basis
[Muench v. Public Service Commission, 261 Wis. 492 (1952) and
DeGaynor and Co., Inc., v. Department of Natural Resources, 70
Wis. 2d 936 (1975)]. For example, a stream which is navigable by
skiff or canoe during normal spring high water is navigable, in
fact, under the laws of this state though it may be dry during other
seasons.
2.
§ 22.04.220 CODE ADOPTION § 22.04.220
1.01:515
Title 23: Stormwater Management And Erosion Control
Chapter 23.01
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
§ 23.01.010. Authority.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — The point on the bank or shore up
to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to
leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention
of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other
easily recognized characteristic.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — The main building or structure on a single
lot or parcel of land and includes any attached garage or attached
porch.[Added 2-1-2016 by Ord. No. 002-2016]
SHORELAND SETBACK AREA — Has the meaning given in
§ 59.692(1)(bn) Wis. Stats.[Added 2-1-2016 by Ord. No. 002-2016]
SHORELANDS — Has the meaning given in § 59.692(1)(b), Wis.
Stats.[Added 2-1-2016 by Ord. No. 002-2016]
SHORELANDS — Lands within the following distances from the
ordinary high-water mark of navigable waters: 1,000 feet from a lake,
pond or flowage and 300 feet from a river or stream or to the landward
side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater.
SHORELAND-WETLAND DISTRICT — The zoning district, created in
this chapter, comprised of shorelands that are designated as wetlands
on the wetlands inventory maps which have been adopted and made a
part of this chapter.
UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP — That circumstance where special
conditions, which were not self-created, affect a particular property
and make strict conformity with restrictions governing area, setbacks,
frontage height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable
in light of the purposes of this chapter.
VARIANCE — An authorization granted by the Board of Appeals to
construct or alter a building or structure in a manner that deviates from
the dimensional standards of this chapter.
WETLANDS — Those areas where water is at, near or above the land
surface long enough to support aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and
which have soils indicative of wet conditions.
WETLAND ALTERATION — Any filling, flooding, draining, dredging,
ditching, tiling, excavating, temporary water level stabilization
measures or dike and dam construction in a wetland area.
A. This chapter is adopted by the Village Board under the authority
granted by § 61.354, Wis. Stats. This chapter supersedes all provisions
§ 22.04.220 GRAFTON CODE § 23.01.010
1.01:516
§ 23.01.020. Findings of fact.
of an ordinance previously enacted under § 61.35, Wis. Stats., that
relate to stormwater management regulations. Except as otherwise
specified in § 61.354, Wis. Stats., § 61.35, Wis. Stats., applies to this
chapter and to any amendments to this chapter.
B. The provisions of this chapter are deemed not to limit any other lawful
regulatory powers of the same governing body.
C. The Village Board hereby designates the Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer and the Building Inspector to administer and enforce
the provisions of this chapter.
D. The requirements of this chapter do not preempt more stringent
stormwater management requirements that may be imposed by any of
the following:
1. Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative rules,
permits or approvals, including those authorized under §§ 281.16
and 283.33, Wis. Stats.
2. Targeted nonagricultural performance standards promulgated in
rules by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under
§ NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code.
A. The Village Board finds that uncontrolled, post-construction runoff has
a significant impact upon water resources and the health, safety and
general welfare of the community and diminishes the public enjoyment
and use of natural resources. Specifically, uncontrolled postconstruction
runoff can:
1. Degrade physical stream habitat by increasing stream bank
erosion, increasing streambed scour, diminishing groundwater
recharge, diminishing stream base flows and increasing stream
temperature.
2. Diminish the capacity of lakes and streams to support fish, aquatic
life, recreational and water supply uses by increasing pollutant
loading of sediment, suspended solids, nutrients, heavy metals,
bacteria, pathogens and other urban pollutants.
3. Alter wetland communities by changing wetland hydrology and by
increasing pollutant loads.
4. Reduce the quality of groundwater by increasing pollutant loading.
5. Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by
overtaxing storm sewers, drainageways, and other minor drainage
facilities.
6. Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by
increasing major flood peaks and volumes.
§ 23.01.010 CODE ADOPTION § 23.01.020
1.01:517
§ 23.01.030. Purpose and intent.
§ 23.01.040. Applicability and jurisdiction.
7. Undermine floodplain management efforts by increasing the
incidence and levels of flooding.
A. Purpose. The general purpose of this chapter is to establish long-term,
post-construction runoff management requirements that will diminish
the threats to public health, safety, welfare and the aquatic
environment. Specific purposes are to:
1. Further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions.
2. Prevent and control the adverse effects of stormwater; prevent and
control soil erosion; prevent and control water pollution; protect
spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites,
placement of structures and land uses; preserve ground cover and
scenic beauty; and promote sound economic growth.
3. Control exceedance of the safe capacity of existing drainage
facilities and receiving water bodies; prevent undue channel
erosion; control increases in the scouring and transportation of
particulate matter; and prevent conditions that endanger
downstream property.
4. Minimize the amount of pollutants discharged from the separate
storm sewer to protect the waters of the state.
B. Intent. It is the intent of the Village Board that this chapter regulates
post-construction stormwater discharges to waters of the state. This
chapter may be applied on a site-by-site basis. The Village Board
recognizes, however, that the preferred method of achieving the
stormwater performance standards set forth in this chapter is through
the preparation and implementation of comprehensive, systems-level
stormwater management plans that cover hydrologic units, such as
watersheds, on a municipal and regional scale. Such plans may
prescribe regional stormwater devices, practices or systems, any of
which may be designed to treat runoff from more than one site prior to
discharge to waters of the state. Where such plans are in conformance
with the performance standards developed under § 281.16, Wis. Stats.,
for regional stormwater management measures and have been
approved by the Village Board, it is the intent of this chapter that the
approved plan be used to identify post-construction management
measures acceptable for the community.
A. Applicability.
1. Where not otherwise limited by law, this chapter applies after final
stabilization to a site of land-disturbing construction activity
meeting any of the criteria in this paragraph, unless the site is
otherwise exempt under Subsection A.2. A post-development
§ 23.01.020 GRAFTON CODE § 23.01.040
1.01:518
§ 23.01.050. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
ADEQUATE SOD or SELF-SUSTAINING VEGETATIVE COVER —
Maintenance of sufficient vegetation types and densities such that the
physical integrity of the stream bank or lakeshore is preserved. Selfconstruction
site that had one or more acres of land-disturbing
construction activity.
2. A site that meets any of the criteria in this subsection is exempt
from the requirements of this chapter:
a. A redevelopment post-construction site with no increase in
exposed parking lots or roads.
b. A post-construction site with less than 10% connected
imperviousness based on complete development of the postconstruction
site, provided the cumulative area of all parking
lots and rooftops is less than one acre.
c. Nonpoint discharges from agricultural facilities and practices.
d. Nonpoint discharges from silviculture activities.
e. Routine maintenance for project sites under five acres of land
disturbance if performed to maintain the original line and
grade, hydraulic capacity or original purpose of the facility.
f. Underground utility construction such as water, sewer and
fiber-optic lines. This exemption does not apply to the
construction of any aboveground structures associated with
utility construction.
3. Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in Subsection A,
this chapter applies to post-construction sites of any size that, in
the opinion of the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer, is
likely to result in runoff that exceeds the safe capacity of the
existing drainage facilities or receiving body of water; that causes
undue channel erosion; that increases water pollution by scouring
or the transportation of particulate matter; or that endangers
property or public safety.
B. Jurisdiction. This chapter applies to post construction sites within the
boundaries and jurisdiction of the Village of Grafton.
C. Exclusions. This chapter is not applicable to activities conducted by a
state agency, as defined under § 227.01(1), Wis. Stats., but also
including the office of district attorney, which is subject to the state plan
promulgated or a memorandum of understanding entered into under
§ 281.33(2), Wis. Stats
§ 23.01.040 CODE ADOPTION § 23.01.050
1.01:519
sustaining vegetative cover includes grasses, forbs, sedges and duff layers
of fallen leaves and woody debris.
ADMINISTERING AUTHORITY — A governmental employee, or a regional
planning commission empowered under § 61.354, Wis. Stats., that is
designated by the Village Board to administer this chapter.
AGRICULTURAL FACILITIES AND PRACTICES — Has the meaning given in
§ 281.16, Wis. Stats.
ATLAS 14 — The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
Atlas 14 Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, Volume 8
(Midwestern States), published in 2013.
AVERAGE ANNUAL RAINFALL — A calendar year of precipitation,
excluding snow, which is considered typical.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE or BMP — Structural or nonstructural
measures, practices, techniques or devices employed to avoid or minimize
sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state.
BUSINESS DAY — A day the office of the Village of Grafton is routinely and
customarily open for business.
CEASE AND DESIST ORDER — A court-issued order to halt land-disturbing
construction activity that is being conducted without the required permit.
COMBINED SEWER SYSTEM — A system for conveying both sanitary
sewage and stormwater runoff.
CONNECTED IMPERVIOUSNESS — An impervious surface that is directly
connected to a separate storm sewer or water of the state via an impervious
flow path.
DESIGN STORM — A hypothetical discrete rainstorm characterized by a
specific duration, temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return frequency,
and total depth of rainfall.
DEVELOPMENT — Residential, commercial, industrial or institutional land
uses and associated roads.
DIRECT CONDUITS TO GROUNDWATER — Wells, sinkholes, swallets,
fractured bedrock at the surface, mine shafts, nonmetallic mines, tile inlets
discharging to groundwater, quarries or depressional groundwater
recharge areas over shallow fractured bedrock.
DIVISION OF LAND — The creation from one parcel of five or more parcels
or building sites of 1 1/2 or fewer acres each in area, where such creation
occurs at one time or through successive partition within a five-year period.
EFFECTIVE INFILTRATION AREA — The area of the infiltration system that
is used to infiltrate runoff and does not include the area used for site access,
berms or pretreatment.
EROSION — The process by which the land's surface is worn away by the
action of wind, water, ice or gravity.
§ 23.01.050 GRAFTON CODE § 23.01.050
1.01:520
EXCEPTIONAL RESOURCE WATERS — Waters listed in § NR 102.11, Wis.
Adm. Code.
EXTRATERRITORIAL — The unincorporated area within three miles of the
corporate limits of the Village of Grafton.
FILTERING LAYER — Soil that has at least a three-foot-deep layer with at
least 20% fines; or at least a five-foot-deep layer with at least 10% fines; or
an engineered soil with an equivalent level of protection as determined by
the regulatory authority for the site.
FINAL STABILIZATION — That all land-disturbing construction activities at
the construction site have been completed and that a uniform, perennial,
vegetative cover has been established, with a density of at least 70% of
the cover, for the unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent
structures, or employment of equivalent permanent stabilization measures.
FINANCIAL GUARANTEE — A performance bond, maintenance bond,
surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or similar guarantees submitted
to the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer by the responsible party
to assure that requirements of the ordinance are carried out in compliance
with the stormwater management plan.
GOVERNING BODY — Village Board of Trustees.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — An area that releases as runoff all or a large
portion of the precipitation that falls on it, except for frozen soil. Rooftops,
sidewalks, driveways, parking lots and streets are examples of areas that
typically are impervious.
IN-FILL AREA — An undeveloped area of land located within existing
development.
INFILTRATION — The entry of precipitation or runoff into or through the
soil.
INFILTRATION SYSTEM — A device or practice, such as a basin, trench,
rain garden or swale, designed specifically to encourage infiltration, but
does not include natural infiltration in pervious surfaces such as lawns,
redirecting of rooftop downspouts onto lawns or minimal infiltration from
practices, such as swales or roadside channels, designed for conveyance
and pollutant removal only.
KARST FEATURE — An area or surficial geologic feature subject to bedrock
dissolution so that it is likely to provide a conduit to groundwater and may
include caves, enlarged fractures, mine features, exposed bedrock surfaces,
sinkholes, springs, seeps or swallets.
LAND-DISTURBING CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Any man-made
alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the topography or
existing vegetative or nonvegetative soil cover, that may result in runoff and
lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters
of the state. Land-disturbing construction activity includes clearing and
grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading
activities.
§ 23.01.050 CODE ADOPTION § 23.01.050
1.01:521
LANDOWNER — Any person holding fee title, an easement or other interest
in property which allows the person to undertake cropping, livestock
management, land-disturbing construction activity or maintenance of
stormwater BMPs on the property.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legal document that provides for longterm
maintenance of stormwater management practices.
MEP or MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE — A level of implementing best
management practices in order to achieve a performance standard specified
in this chapter, which takes into account the best available technology, costeffectiveness
and other competing issues such as human safety and welfare,
endangered and threatened resources, historic properties and geographic
features. MEP allows flexibility in the way to meet the performance
standards and may vary based on the performance standard and site
conditions.
NEW DEVELOPMENT — Development resulting from the conversion of
previously undeveloped land or agricultural land uses.
NRCS MSE3 OR MSE4 DISTRIBUTION — A specific precipitation
distribution developed by the United States Department of Agriculture,
Natural Resources Conservation Service, using precipitation data from
Atlas 14.
OFF-SITE — Located outside the property boundary described in the permit
application.
ON-SITE — Located within the property boundary described in the permit
application.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — Has the meaning given in § NR
115.03(6), Wis. Adm. Code.
OUTSTANDING RESOURCE WATERS — Waters listed in § NR 102.10, Wis.
Adm. Code.
PERCENT FINES — The percentage of a given sample of soil which passes
through a No. 200 sieve.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A narrative or measurable number
specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or practice.
PERMIT — A written authorization made by the Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer to the applicant to conduct land-disturbing construction
activity or to discharge post-construction runoff to waters of the state.
PERMIT ADMINISTRATION FEE — A sum of money paid to the Director
of Public Works/Village Engineer by the permit applicant for the purpose
of recouping the expenses incurred by the authority in administering the
permit.
PERVIOUS SURFACE — An area that releases as runoff a small portion of
the precipitation that falls on it. Lawns, gardens, parks, forests or other
similar vegetated areas are examples of surfaces that typically are pervious.
POLLUTANT — Has the meaning given in § 283.01(13), Wis. Stats.
§ 23.01.050 GRAFTON CODE § 23.01.050
1.01:522
POLLUTION — Has the meaning given in § 281.01(10), Wis. Stats.
POST-CONSTRUCTION SITE — A construction site following the completion
of land-disturbing construction activity and final site stabilization.
PREDEVELOPMENT CONDITION — The extent and distribution of land
cover types present before the initiation of land-disturbing construction
activity, assuming that all land uses prior to development activity are
managed in an environmentally sound manner.
PREVENTIVE ACTION LIMIT — Has the meaning given in § NR 140.05(17),
Wis. Adm. Code.
PROTECTIVE AREA — An area of land that commences at the top of the
channel of lakes, streams and rivers, or at the delineated boundary of
wetlands, and that is the greatest of the following widths, as measured
horizontally from the top of the channel or delineated wetland boundary to
the closest impervious surface.
REDEVELOPMENT — Areas where development is replacing older
development.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Any entity holding fee title to the property or
other person contracted or obligated by other agreement to implement and
maintain post-construction stormwater BMPs.
RUNOFF — Stormwater or precipitation, including rain, snow or ice melt or
similar water, that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized flow.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER — A conveyance or system of conveyances,
including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters,
ditches, constructed channels or storm drains, which meets all of the
following criteria:
SILVICULTURE ACTIVITY — Activities including tree nursery operations,
tree harvesting operations, reforestation, tree thinning, prescribed burning,
and pest and fire control. Clearing and grubbing of an area of a construction
site is not a silviculture activity.
SITE — The entire area included in the legal description of the land on
which the land-disturbing construction activity occurred.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued by the Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer which requires that all construction activity on the site be
stopped.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A comprehensive plan designed
to reduce the discharge of pollutants from stormwater after the site has
A. Is designed or used for collecting water or conveying runoff.
B. Is not part of a combined sewer system.
C. Is not draining to a stormwater treatment device or system.
D. Discharges directly or indirectly to waters of the state.
§ 23.01.050 CODE ADOPTION § 23.01.050
1.01:523
undergone final stabilization following completion of the construction
activity.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM PLAN — Is a comprehensive plan
designed to reduce the discharge of runoff and pollutants from hydrologic
units on a regional or municipal scale.
TECHNICAL STANDARD — A document that specifies design, predicted
performance and operation and maintenance specifications for a material,
device or method.
TOP OF THE CHANNEL — An edge, or point on the landscape, landward
from the ordinary high-water mark of a surface water of the state, where
the slope of the land begins to be less than 12% continually for at least 50
feet. If the slope of the land is 12% or less continually for the initial 50 feet
landward from the ordinary high-water mark, the top of the channel is the
ordinary high-water mark.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD or TMDL — The amount of pollutants
specified as a function of one or more water quality parameters that can
be discharged per day into a water quality limited segment and still ensure
attainment of the applicable water quality standard.
TP-40 — Technical Paper No. 40, Rainfall Frequency Atlas of the United
States, published in 1961.
TR-55 — The United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service (previously Soil Conservation Service), Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Second Edition, Technical Release 55,
June 1986.
TRANSPORTATION FACILITY — A highway, a railroad, a public mass transit
facility, a public-use airport, a public trail or any other public work for
transportation purposes such as harbor improvements under § 85.095
(1)(b), Wis. Stats. "Transportation facility" does not include building sites
for the construction of public buildings and buildings that are places of
employment that are regulated by the Department pursuant to § 281.33,
Wis. Stats.
TSS — Total suspended solids.
TYPE II DISTRIBUTION — A rainfall type curve as established in the
"United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service,
Technical Paper 149, published 1973." The Type II curve is applicable to all
of Wisconsin and represents the most intense storm pattern.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Has the meaning given in § 281.01(18), Wis.
Stats.
§ 23.01.055. Applicability of maximum extent practicable.
Maximum extent practicable applies when a person who is subject to a
performance standard of this chapter demonstrates to the Department of
Public Work/Village Engineer's satisfaction that a performance standard is
not achievable and that a lower level of performance is appropriate. In
§ 23.01.050 GRAFTON CODE § 23.01.055
1.01:524
making the assertion that a performance standard is not achievable and
that a level of performance different from the performance standard is the
maximum extent practicable, the responsible party shall take into account
the best available technology, cost-effectiveness, geographic features, and
other competing interests such as protection of public safety and welfare,
protection of endangered and threatened resources, and preservation of
historic properties.
§ 23.01.060. Technical standards.
§ 23.01.070. Performance standards.
A. The following methods shall be used in designing the water quality,
peak flow shaving and infiltration components of stormwater practices
needed to meet the water quality standards of this chapter:
1. Technical standards identified, developed or disseminated by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under subchapter V of
Ch. NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code.
2. Where technical standards have not been identified or developed
by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, other technical
standards may be used, provided that the methods have been
approved by the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer.
3. In this chapter, the following year and location has been selected as
average annual rainfall: Milwaukee, 1969 (Mar. 28-Dec. 6).
A. Responsible party. The responsible party shall implement a postconstruction
stormwater management plan that incorporates the
requirements of this section.
B. Plan. A written stormwater management plan in accordance with
§ 23.01.090 shall be developed and implemented for each postconstruction
site.
C. Maintenance of effort. For redevelopment sites where the
redevelopment will be replacing older development that was subject to
post-construction performance standards of Ch. NR 151, Wis. Adm.
Code, in effect on or after October 1, 2004, the responsible party shall
meet the total suspended solids reduction, peak flow control,
infiltration, and protective areas standards applicable to the older
development or meet the redevelopment standards of this chapter,
whichever is more stringent.
D. Requirements. The plan required under Subsection B in this section
shall include the following:
1. Total suspended solids. BMPs shall be designed, installed and
maintained to control total suspended solids carried in runoff from
the post-construction site as follows:
§ 23.01.055 CODE ADOPTION § 23.01.070
1.01:525
a. For new development, by design, reduce to the maximum
extent practicable the total suspended solids load by 80%,
based on the average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff
management controls. No person shall be required to exceed
an eighty-percent total suspended solids reduction to meet the
requirements of this subsection.
b. For redevelopment, by design, reduce to the maximum extent
practicable the total suspended solids load by 40%, based on
the average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff
management controls. No person shall be required to exceed a
forty-percent total suspended solids reduction to meet the
requirements of this subsection.
c. For in-fill development under five acres that occurs within 10
years after the effective date of this rule (January 1, 2004), by
design, reduce to the maximum extent practicable the total
suspended solids load by 40%, based on an average annual
rainfall, as compared to no runoff management controls. No
person shall be required to exceed a forty-percent total
suspended solids reduction to meet the requirements of this
subsection.
d. For in-fill development that occurs 10 or more years after the
effective date of this rule (January 1, 2004), by design, reduce
to the maximum extent practicable the total suspended solids
load by 80%, based on an average annual rainfall, as compared
to no runoff management controls. No person shall be required
to exceed an eighty-percent total suspended solids reduction to
meet the requirements of this subsection.
e. Notwithstanding Subsection D.1.a to d, if the design cannot
achieve the applicable total suspended solids reduction
specified, the stormwater management plan shall include a
written and site-specific explanation why that level of
reduction is not attained, and the total suspended solids load
shall be reduced to the maximum extent practicable.
f. Off-site drainage. When designing BMPs, runoff draining to the
BMP from off site shall be taken into account in determining
the treatment efficiency of the practice. Any impact on the
efficiency shall be compensated for by increasing the size of
the BMP accordingly.
2. Peak discharge.
a. By design, BMPs shall be employed to maintain or reduce the
peak runoff discharge rates, to the maximum extent
practicable, as compared to predevelopment conditions for the
design storm referenced in Subsection D.2.c of this section
applicable to the post-construction site. Predevelopment
conditions shall assume "good hydrologic conditions" for
§ 23.01.070 GRAFTON CODE § 23.01.070
1.01:526
appropriate land covers as identified in TR-55 or an equivalent
methodology. Peak discharges shall be calculated using TR-55
runoff curve number methodology, Atlas 14 precipitation
depths, and the NRCS Wisconsin MSE3 precipitation
distribution. On a case-by-case basis, the Director of Public
Works/Village Engineer may allow the use of TP-40
precipitation depths and the Type II distribution. The meaning
of "hydrologic soil group" and "runoff curve number" are as
determined in TR-55. However, when predevelopment land
cover is cropland, rather than using TR-55 values for cropland,
the runoff curve numbers in Table 1 shall be used.
Table 1. Maximum Predevelopment Runoff Curve
Numbers
Hydrologic Soil Group
Runoff
Curve
Number A B C D
Woodland 30 55 70 77
Grassland 39 61 71 78
Cropland 55 69 78 83
b. This subsection of the ordinance does not apply to any of the
following:
1. A post-construction site where the change in hydrology
due to development does not increase the existing surface
water elevation at any point within the downstream
receiving water by more than 0.01 of a foot for the twoyear,
twenty-four-hour storm event.
2. A post-construction site where the discharge is directly
into a lake over 5,000 acres or a stream or river segment
draining more than 500 square miles.
3. A redevelopment post-construction site.
4. An in-fill development area less than five acres.
c. The post-construction peak discharge between a fifty-year
event and a hundred-year event shall be the predeveloped
twenty-five-year discharge. The post-construction peak
discharge between a ten-year event and a twenty-five-year
event shall be the predeveloped five-year event. The postconstruction
peak discharge between a two-year event and a
ten-year event shall be the predeveloped two-year event.
3. Infiltration. BMPs shall be designed, installed and maintained to
infiltrate runoff to the maximum extent practicable in accordance
§ 23.01.070 CODE ADOPTION § 23.01.070
1.01:527
with the following, except as provided in Subsection D.3.f and h
through j.
a. Low imperviousness. For development up to 40% connected
imperviousness, such as parks, cemeteries, and low-density
residential development, infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so
that the post-development infiltration volume shall be at least
90% of the predevelopment infiltration volume, based on an
average annual rainfall. However, when designing appropriate
infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than 1%
of the post-construction site is required as an effective
infiltration area.
b. Moderate imperviousness. For development with more than
40% and up to 80% connected imperviousness, such as
medium- and high-density residential, multifamily
development, industrial and institutional development, and
office parks infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the postdevelopment
infiltration volume shall be at least 75% of the
predevelopment infiltration volume, based on an average
annual rainfall. However, when designing appropriate
infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than 2%
of the post-construction site is required as an effective
infiltration area.
c. High imperviousness. For development with more than 80%
connected imperviousness, such as commercial strip malls,
shopping centers, and commercial downtowns, infiltrate
sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development
infiltration volume shall be at least 60% of the predevelopment
infiltration volume, based on an average annual rainfall.
However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to
meet this requirement, no more than 2% of the postconstruction
site is required as an effective infiltration area.
d. Predevelopment condition shall be the same as in Subsection
D.2, Peak discharge.
Note to permittees: A model that calculates runoff volume,
such as SLAMM, P8, or an equivalent methodology, may be
used.
e. Before infiltrating runoff, pretreatment shall be required for
parking lot runoff and for runoff from new road construction in
commercial, industrial and institutional areas that will enter an
infiltration system. The pretreatment shall be designed to
protect the infiltration system from clogging prior to scheduled
maintenance and to protect groundwater quality in accordance
with Subsection D.3.h. Pretreatment options may include, but
are not limited to, oil/grease separation, sedimentation,
biofiltration, filtration, swales or filter strips.
§ 23.01.070 GRAFTON CODE § 23.01.070
1.01:528
Note to permittees: To achieve the infiltration requirement
for the parking lots or roads, "maximum extent practicable"
should not be interpreted to require significant topography
changes that create an excessive financial burden. To
minimize potential groundwater impacts, it is desirable to
infiltrate the cleanest runoff. To achieve this, a design may
propose greater infiltration of runoff from low-pollutant
sources such as roofs, and less from higher-pollutant source
areas such as parking lots.
f. Exclusions. The runoff from the following areas are prohibited
from meeting the requirements of this subsection:
1. Areas associated with Tier 1 industrial facilities identified
in § NR 216.21(2)(a), Wis. Adm. Code, including storage,
loading, rooftop and parking.
2. Storage and loading areas of Tier 2 industrial facilities
identified in § NR 216.21(2)(b), Wis. Adm. Code.
Note to permittees: Runoff from Tier 2 parking and
rooftop areas may be infiltrated but may require
pretreatment.
3. Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas.
4. Areas within 1,000 feet upgradient or within 100 feet
downgradient of karst features.
5. Areas with less than three-feet separation distance from
the bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of
seasonal high groundwater or the top of bedrock, except
this Subsection D.3.f.5 does not prohibit infiltration of roof
runoff.
6. Areas with runoff from industrial, commercial and
institutional parking lots and roads and residential arterial
roads with less than five-feet separation distance from the
bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of
seasonal high groundwater or the top of bedrock.
7. Areas within 400 feet of a community water system well as
specified in § NR 811.16(4), Wis. Adm. Code, or within 100
feet of a private well as specified in § NR 812.08(4), Wis.
Adm. Code, for runoff infiltrated from commercial,
industrial and institutional land uses or regional devices
for residential development.
8. Areas where contaminants of concern, as defined in § NR
720.03(2), Wis. Adm. Code, are present in the soil through
which infiltration will occur.
§ 23.01.070 CODE ADOPTION § 23.01.070
1.01:529
9. Any area where the soil does not exhibit one of the
following soil characteristics between the bottom of the
infiltration system and the seasonal high groundwater and
top of bedrock: at least a three-foot soil layer with twentypercent
fines or greater; or at least a five-foot soil layer
with ten-percent fines or greater. This does not apply
where the soil medium within the infiltration system
provides an equivalent level of protection. This Subsection
D.3.f.9 does not prohibit infiltration of roof runoff.
Note to permittees: The areas listed in Subsection D.3.f,
Exclusions, are prohibited from infiltrating runoff due to
the potential for groundwater contamination.
g. Separation distances.
1. Infiltration practices shall be located so that the
characteristics of the soil and the separation distance
between the bottom of the infiltration system and the
elevation of seasonal high groundwater or the top of
bedrock are in accordance with Table 3:
Table 3. Separation Distances and Soil
Characteristics
Source Area Separation
Distance
Soil
Characteristics
Industrial,
commercial,
institutional
parking lots
and roads
5 feet or more filtering layer
Residential
arterial roads
5 feet or more filtering layer
Roofs draining
to subsurface
infiltration
practices
1 foot or more native or engineered
soil with particles
finer than coarse
sand
Roofs draining
to surface
infiltration
practices
not applicable not applicable
All other
impervious
source areas
3 feet or more filtering layer
2. Notwithstanding Subsection D.3.g.1, applicable
requirements for injection wells classified under Ch. NR
815, Wis. Adm. Code, shall be followed.
§ 23.01.070 GRAFTON CODE § 23.01.070
1.01:530
h. Exemptions. The following are not required to meet the
requirements of this paragraph:
1. Areas where the infiltration rate of the soil is less than 0.6
inches/hour measured at the site.
2. Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet
for commercial and industrial development.
3. Redevelopment post-construction sites.
4. In-fill development areas less than five acres.
5. Infiltration areas during periods when the soil on the site is
frozen.
6. Roads in commercial, industrial and institutional land
uses, and arterial residential roads.
i. Where alternate uses of runoff are employed, such as for toilet
flushing, laundry or irrigation, such alternate use shall be
given equal credit toward the infiltration volume required by
this paragraph.
j. Infiltration systems designed in accordance with this
paragraph shall:
1. To the extent technically and economically feasible,
minimize the level of pollutants infiltrating to groundwater
and shall maintain compliance with the preventive action
limit at a point of standards application in accordance with
Ch. NR 140, Wis. Adm. Code. However, if site-specific
information indicates that compliance with a preventive
action limit is not achievable, the infiltration BMP may not
be installed or shall be modified to prevent infiltration to
the maximum extent practicable.
2. Notwithstanding Subsection D.3.j.1, the discharge from
BMPs shall remain below the enforcement standard at the
point of standards application.
4. Protective areas.
a. "Protective area" means an area of land that commences at the
top of the channel of lakes, streams and rivers, or at the
delineated boundary of wetlands, and that is the greatest of the
following widths, as measured horizontally from the top of the
channel or delineated wetland boundary to the closest
impervious surface. However, in this paragraph, "protective
area" does not include any area of land adjacent to any stream
enclosed within a pipe or culvert, such that runoff cannot enter
the enclosure at this location.
§ 23.01.070 CODE ADOPTION § 23.01.070
1.01:531
1. For outstanding resource waters and exceptional resource
waters, and for wetlands in areas of special natural
resource interest as specified in § NR 103.04, Wis. Adm.
Code: 75 feet.
2. For perennial and intermittent streams identified on a
United States Geological Survey 7.5-minute series
topographic map, or a county soil survey map, whichever
is more current: 50 feet.
3. For lakes: 50 feet.
4. For wetlands not subject to Subsection D.4.a.5 or 6: 50
feet.
5. For highly susceptible wetlands: 75 feet. Highly
susceptible wetlands include the following types: fens,
sedge meadows, bogs, low prairies, conifer swamps, shrub
swamps, other forested wetlands, fresh wet meadows,
shallow marshes, deep marshes and seasonally flooded
basins. Wetland boundary delineations shall be made in
accordance with § NR 103.08(lm), Wis. Adm. Code. This
paragraph does not apply to wetlands that have been
completely filled in accordance with all applicable state
and federal regulations. The protective area for wetlands
that have been partially filled in accordance with all
applicable state and federal regulations shall be measured
from the wetland boundary delineation after fill has been
placed.
6. For less susceptible wetlands: 10% of the average wetland
width, but no less than 10 feet nor more than 30 feet. Less
susceptible wetlands include degraded wetlands
dominated by invasive species such as reed canary grass;
cultivated hydric soils; and any gravel pits or dredged
material or fill material disposal sites that take on the
attributes of a wetland.
7. In Subsection D.4.a.1, 4, 5 and 6, determinations of the
extent of the protective area adjacent to wetlands shall be
made on the basis of the sensitivity and runoff
susceptibility of the wetland in accordance with the
standards and criteria in § NR 103.03, Wis. Adm. Code.
8. For concentrated flow channels with drainage areas
greater than 130 acres: 10 feet.
9. Notwithstanding Subsection D.4.a.1 to 8, the greatest
protective area width shall apply where rivers, streams,
lakes and wetlands are contiguous.
§ 23.01.070 GRAFTON CODE § 23.01.070
1.01:532
b. This paragraph applies to post-construction sites located
within a protective area, except those areas exempted
pursuant to Subsection D.4.d of this section.
c. The following requirements shall be met:
1. Impervious surfaces shall be kept out of the protective
area to the maximum extent practicable. The stormwater
management plan shall contain a written site-specific
explanation for any parts of the protective area that are
disturbed during construction.
2. Where land-disturbing construction activity occurs within
a protective area, and where no impervious surface is
present, adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover
of 70% or greater shall be established and maintained. The
adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover shall be
sufficient to provide for bank stability, maintenance of fish
habitat and filtering of pollutants from upslope overland
flow areas under sheet flow conditions. Nonvegetative
materials, such as rock riprap, may be employed on the
bank as necessary to prevent erosion, such as on steep
slopes or where high velocity flows occur.
Note to permittees: It is recommended that seeding of
nonaggressive vegetative cover be used in the protective
areas. Vegetation that is flood- and drought-tolerant and
can provide long-term bank stability because of an
extensive root system is preferable. Vegetative cover can
be measured using the line transect method described
in the University of Wisconsin Extension Publication
Number A3533, titled "Estimating Residue Using the Line
Transect Method."
3. Best management practices such as filter strips, swales or
wet detention basins, that are designed to control
pollutants from non-point sources may be located in the
protective area.
Note to Permittees: Other regulations, such as Ch. 30,
Wis. Stats., and Chs. NR 103, 115, 116 and 117, Wis. Adm.
Code, and their associated review and approval process,
may apply in the protective area.
d. This paragraph does not apply to:
1. Redevelopment post-construction sites.
2. In-fill development areas less than five acres.
3. Structures that cross or access surface waters such as
boat landings, bridges and culverts.
§ 23.01.070 CODE ADOPTION § 23.01.070
1.01:533
4. Structures constructed in accordance with § 59.692(lv),
Wis. Stats.
5. Post-construction sites from which runoff does not enter
the surface water, except to the extent that vegetative
ground cover is necessary to maintain bank stability.
Note to permittees: A vegetated protective area to filter
runoff pollutants from post-construction sites described in
Subsection D.4.d.5 above, is not necessary since runoff
is not entering the surface water at that location. Other
practices, necessary to meet the requirements of this
section, such as a swale or basin, will need to be designed
and implemented to reduce runoff pollutants before the
runoff enters a surface water of the state.
5. Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas. Fueling and vehicle
maintenance areas shall, to the maximum extent practicable, have
BMPs designed, installed and maintained to reduce petroleum
within runoff, such that the runoff that enters waters of the state
contains no visible petroleum sheen.
Note to permittees: A combination of the following BMPs may be
used: oil and grease separators, canopies, petroleum spill cleanup
materials, or any other structural or nonstructural method of
preventing or treating petroleum in runoff.
6. Swale treatment for transportation facilities.
a. Applicability. Except as provided in Subsection D.6.b,
transportation facilities that use swales for runoff conveyance
and pollutant removal meet all of the requirements of this
section, if the swales are designed to the maximum extent
practicable to do all of the following:
1. Be vegetated. However, where appropriate, nonvegetative
measures may be employed to prevent erosion or provide
for runoff treatment, such as rock riprap stabilization or
check dams.
Note to permittees: It is preferred that tall and dense
vegetation be maintained within the swale due to its
greater effectiveness at enhancing runoff pollutant
removal.
2. Swales shall comply with sections V.F. (Velocity and Depth)
and V.G. (Sale Geometry Criteria) with a swale treatment
length as long as that specified in section V.C.
(preTreatment) of the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources Technical Standard 1005 "Vegetated Infiltration
Swales," dated May 2007, or a superseding document.
§ 23.01.070 GRAFTON CODE § 23.01.070
1.01:534
Transportation facility swale treatment does not have to
comply with other sections of Technical Standard 1005.
Note to permittees: Check dams may be included in the
swale design to slow runoff flows and improve pollutant
removal. Transportation facilities with continuous
features such as curb and gutter, sidewalks or parking
lanes do not comply with the design requirements of this
paragraph. However, a limited amount of structural
measures such as curb and gutter may be allowed as
necessary to account for other concerns such as human
safety or resource protection.
b. Exemptions. The Director of Public Works/Village Engineer
may, consistent with water quality standards, require other
provisions of this section be met on a transportation facility
with an average daily travel of vehicles greater than 2,500 and
where the initial surface water of the state that the runoff
directly enters is any of the following:
1. An outstanding resource water.
2. An exceptional resource water.
3. Waters listed in § 303(d) of the Federal Clean Water Act
that are identified as impaired in whole or in part due to
nonpoint source impacts.
4. Waters where targeted performance standards are
developed under § NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code, to meet
water quality standards.
5. The transportation facility authority shall contact the
Director of Public Works/Village Engineer to determine if
additional BMPs beyond a water quality swale are needed
under this subsection.
Note to permittees: The Department of Natural
Resource's regional stormwater staff can determine if
additional BMPs, beyond a water quality swale, are
needed under this paragraph.
E. General considerations for on-site and off-site stormwater management
measures. The following considerations shall be observed in managing
runoff:
1. Natural topography and land cover features such as natural swales,
natural depressions, native soil-infiltrating capacity, and natural
groundwater recharge areas shall be preserved and used, to the
extent possible, to meet the requirements of this section.
2. Emergency overland flow for all stormwater facilities shall be
provided to prevent exceeding the safe capacity of downstream
§ 23.01.070 CODE ADOPTION § 23.01.070
1.01:535
drainage facilities and prevent endangerment of downstream
property or public safety.
F. Location and regional treatment option.
1. The BMPs may be located on site or off site as part of a regional
stormwater device, practice or system, but shall be installed in
accordance with§ NR 151.003, Wis. Adm. Code.
2. Post-construction runoff within a non-navigable surface water that
flows into a BMP, such as a wet detention pond, is not required to
meet the performance standards of this chapter. Post-construction
BMPs may be located in non-navigable surface waters.
3. Except as allowed under Subsection F.4, post-construction runoff
from new development shall meet the post-construction
performance standards prior to entering a navigable surface water.
4. Post-construction runoff from any development within a navigable
surface water that flows into a BMP is not required to meet the
performance standards of this chapter, if:
a. The BMP was constructed prior to the effective date of this
chapter and the BMP either received a permit issued under Ch.
30, Wis. Stats., or the BMP did not require a Ch. 30, Wis. Stats.,
permit; and
b. The BMP is designed to provide runoff treatment from future
upland development.
5. Runoff from existing development, redevelopment and in-fill areas
shall meet the post-construction performance standards in
accordance with this paragraph.
a. To the maximum extent practicable, BMPs shall be located to
treat runoff prior to discharge to navigable surface waters.
b. Post-construction BMPs for such runoff may be located in a
navigable surface water if allowable under all other applicable
federal, state and local regulations such as Ch. NR 103, Wis.
Adm. Code, and Ch. 30, Wis. Stats.
Note to permittees: This allows the location of BMPs in
navigable surface waters where necessary to augment
management practices upstream of the navigable surface
water to meet the performance standards.
6. The discharge of runoff from a BMP, such as a wet detention pond,
or after a series of such BMPs is subject to this chapter.
Note to permittees: This section does not supersede any other
applicable federal, state or local regulation such as Ch. NR 103,
Wis. Adm. Code, and Ch. 30, Wis. Stats.
§ 23.01.070 GRAFTON CODE § 23.01.070
1.01:536
§ 23.01.080. Permitting requirements, procedures and fees.
7. The Director of Public Works/Village Engineer may approve off-site
management measures, provided that all of the following
conditions are met:
a. The Director of Public Works/Village Engineer determines that
the post-construction runoff is covered by a stormwater
management system plan that is approved by the Village of
Grafton and that contains management requirements
consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter.
b. The off-site facility meets all of the following conditions:
1. The facility is in place.
2. The facility is designed and adequately sized to provide a
level of stormwater control equal to or greater than that
which would be afforded by on-site practices meeting the
performance standards of this chapter.
3. The facility has a legally obligated entity responsible for its
long-term operation and maintenance.
8. Where a regional treatment option exists such that the Director of
Public Works/Village Engineer exempts the applicant from all or
part of the minimum on-site stormwater management
requirements, the applicant shall be required to pay a fee in an
amount determined in negotiation with the Director of Public
Works/Village Engineer. In determining the fee for postconstruction
runoff, the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer
shall consider an equitable distribution of the cost for land,
engineering design, construction and maintenance of the regional
treatment option.
G. Alternate requirements. The Director of Public Works/Village Engineer
may establish stormwater management requirements more stringent
than those set forth in this section if the Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer determines that an added level of protection is needed
to protect sensitive resources.
A. Permit required. No responsible party may undertake a land-disturbing
construction activity without receiving a post-construction runoff
permit from the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer prior to
commencing the proposed activity.
B. Permit application and fees. Unless specifically excluded by this
chapter, any responsible party desiring a permit shall submit to the
Director of Public Works/Village Engineer a permit application made on
a form provided by the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer for
that purpose.
§ 23.01.070 CODE ADOPTION § 23.01.080
1.01:537
1. Unless otherwise excepted by this chapter, a permit application
must be accompanied by a stormwater management plan, a
maintenance agreement and a nonrefundable permit
administration fee.
2. The stormwater management plan shall be prepared to meet the
requirements of §§ 23.01.070 and 23.01.090; the maintenance
agreement shall be prepared to meet the requirements of
§ 23.01.100; the financial guarantee shall meet the requirements of
§ 23.01.110; and fees shall be those established by the Village
Board as set forth in § 23.01.120.
C. Review and approval of permit application. The Director of Public
Works/Village Engineer shall review any permit application that is
submitted with a stormwater management plan, maintenance
agreement, and the required fee. The following approval procedure
shall be used:
1. Within 10 business days of the receipt of a complete permit
application, including all items as required by § 23.01.080B, the
Director of Public Works/Village Engineer shall inform the
applicant whether the application, plan and maintenance
agreement are approved or disapproved based on the requirements
of this chapter.
2. If the stormwater permit application, plan and maintenance
agreement are approved, or if an agreed upon payment of fees in
lieu of stormwater management practices is made, the Director of
Public Works/Village Engineer shall issue the permit.
3. If the stormwater permit application, plan or maintenance
agreement is disapproved, the Director of Public Works/Village
Engineer shall detail in writing the reasons for disapproval.
4. The Director of Public Works/Village Engineer may request
additional information from the applicant. If additional information
is submitted, the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer shall
have 10 business days from the date the additional information is
received to inform the applicant that the plan and maintenance
agreement are either approved or disapproved.
5. Failure by the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer to inform
the permit applicant of a decision within 15 business days of a
required submittal shall be deemed to mean approval of the
submittal, and the applicant may proceed as if a permit had been
issued.
D. Permit requirements. All permits issued under this chapter shall be
subject to the following conditions, and holders of permits issued under
this chapter shall be deemed to have accepted these conditions. The
Director of Public Works/Village Engineer may suspend or revoke a
permit for violation of a permit condition following written notification
§ 23.01.080 GRAFTON CODE § 23.01.080
1.01:538
of the responsible party. An action by the Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer to suspend or revoke this permit may be appealed in
accordance with § 23.01.140.
1. Compliance with this permit does not relieve the responsible party
of the responsibility to comply with other applicable federal, state
and local laws and regulations.
2. The responsible party shall design and install all structural and
nonstructural stormwater management measures in accordance
with the approved stormwater management plan and this permit.
3. The responsible party shall notify the Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer at least 10 business days before commencing any
work in conjunction with the stormwater management plan and
within five business days upon completion of the stormwater
management practices. If required as a special condition under
§ 23.01.080E, the responsible party shall make additional
notification according to a schedule set forth by the Director of
Public Works/Village Engineer so that practice installations can be
inspected during construction.
4. Practice installations required as part of this chapter shall be
certified "as built" by a licensed professional engineer. Completed
stormwater management practices must pass a final inspection by
the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer or its designee to
determine if they are in accordance with the approved stormwater
management plan and ordinance. The Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer, or its designee, shall notify the responsible party
in writing of any changes required in such practices to bring them
into compliance with the conditions of this permit.
5. The responsible party shall notify the Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer of any significant modifications it intends to make
to an approved stormwater management plan. The Director of
Public Works/Village Engineer may require that the proposed
modifications be submitted to it for approval prior to incorporation
into the stormwater management plan and execution by the
responsible party.
6. The responsible party shall maintain all stormwater management
practices in accordance with the stormwater management plan
until the practices either become the responsibility of the Village
Board or are transferred to subsequent private owners as specified
in the approved maintenance agreement.
7. The responsible party authorizes the Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer to perform any work or operations necessary to
bring stormwater management measures into conformance with
the approved stormwater management plan and consents to a
special assessment or charge against the property as authorized
§ 23.01.080 CODE ADOPTION § 23.01.080
1.01:539
§ 23.01.090. Stormwater management plan.
under Subch. VII of Ch. 66, Wis. Stats., or to charging such costs
against the financial guarantee posted under § 23.01.110.
8. If so directed by the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer, the
responsible party shall repair at the responsible party's own
expense all damage to adjoining municipal facilities and
drainageways caused by runoff, where such damage is caused by
activities that are not in compliance with the approved stormwater
management plan.
9. The responsible party shall permit property access to the Director
of Public Works/Village Engineer or its designee for the purpose of
inspecting the property for compliance with the approved
stormwater management plan and this permit.
10. Where site development or redevelopment involves changes in
direction, increases in peak rate and/or total volume of runoff from
a site, the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer may require
the responsible party to make appropriate legal arrangements with
affected property owners concerning the prevention of
endangerment to property or public safety.
11. The responsible party is subject to the enforcement actions and
penalties detailed in § 23.01.130, if the responsible party fails to
comply with the terms of this permit.
E. Permit conditions. Permits issued under this section may include
conditions established by the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer
in addition to the requirements needed to meet the performance
standards in § 23.01.070 or a financial guarantee as provided for in
§ 23.01.110.
F. Permit duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid from
the date of issuance through the date the Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer notifies the responsible party that all stormwater
management practices have passed the final inspection required under
Subsection D.4 of this section.
A. Plan requirements. The stormwater management plan required under
§ 23.01.080B.2 shall contain at a minimum the following information:
1. Name, address and telephone number for the following or their
designees: landowner; developer; project engineer for practice
design and certification; person(s) responsible for installation of
stormwater management practices; and person(s) responsible for
maintenance of stormwater management practices prior to the
transfer, if any, of maintenance responsibility to another party.
§ 23.01.080 GRAFTON CODE § 23.01.090
1.01:540
2. A proper legal description of the property proposed to be
developed, referenced to the U.S. Public Land Survey system or to
block and lot numbers within a recorded land subdivision plat.
3. Predevelopment site conditions, including:
a. One or more site maps at a scale of not less than one inch
equals 40 feet. The site maps shall show the following: site
location and legal property description; predominant soil types
and hydrologic soil groups; existing cover type and condition;
topographic contours of the site at a scale not to exceed two
feet; topography and drainage network including enough of the
contiguous properties to show runoff patterns onto, through
and from the site; watercourses that may affect or be affected
by runoff from the site; flow path and direction for all
stormwater conveyance sections; watershed boundaries used
in hydrology determinations to show compliance with
performance standards; lakes, streams, wetlands, channels,
ditches, and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent
to the site; limits of the one-hundred-year floodplain; location
of wells and wellhead protection areas covering the project
area and delineated pursuant to § NR 811.16, Wis. Adm. Code.
b. Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed to
show compliance with performance standards. All major
assumptions used in developing input parameters shall be
clearly stated. The geographic areas used in making the
calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the required
map(s).
4. Post-development site conditions, including:
a. Explanation of the provisions to preserve and use natural
topography and land cover features to minimize changes in
peak flow runoff rates and volumes to surface waters and
wetlands.
b. Explanation of any restrictions on stormwater management
measures in the development area imposed by wellhead
protection plans and ordinances.
c. One or more site maps at a scale of not less than one inch
equals 40 feet showing the following: post-construction
pervious areas, including vegetative cover type and condition;
impervious surfaces, including all buildings, structures and
pavement; post-construction topographic contours of the site
at a scale not to exceed two feet; post-construction drainage
network, including enough of the contiguous properties to
show runoff patterns onto, through and from the site; locations
and dimensions of drainage easements; locations of
maintenance easements specified in the maintenance
agreement; flow path and direction for all stormwater
§ 23.01.090 CODE ADOPTION § 23.01.090
1.01:541
§ 23.01.100. Maintenance agreement.
conveyance sections; location and type of all stormwater
management conveyance and treatment practices, including
the on-site and off-site tributary drainage area; location and
type of conveyance system that will carry runoff from the
drainage and treatment practices to the nearest adequate
outlet such as a curbed street, storm drain or natural
drainageway; watershed boundaries used in hydrology and
pollutant loading calculations, and any changes to lakes,
streams, wetlands, channels, ditches and other watercourses
on and immediately adjacent to the site.
d. Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed to
show compliance with performance standards. The
computations shall be made for each discharge point in the
development, and the geographic areas used in making the
calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the required
map(s).
e. Results of investigations of soils and groundwater required for
the placement and design of stormwater management
measures. Detailed drawings including cross sections and
profiles of all permanent stormwater conveyance and
treatment practices.
5. A description and installation schedule for the stormwater
management practices needed to meet the performance standards
in § 23.01.070.
6. A maintenance plan developed for the life of each stormwater
management practice, including the required maintenance
activities and maintenance activity schedule.
7. Cost estimates for the construction, operation and maintenance of
each stormwater management practice.
8. Other information requested in writing by the Director of Public
Works/Village Engineer to determine compliance of the proposed
stormwater management measures with the provisions of this
chapter.
9. All site investigations, plans, designs, computations and drawings
shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer, to be
prepared in accordance with accepted engineering practice and
requirements of this chapter.
B. Alternate requirements. The Director of Public Works/Village Engineer
may prescribe alternative submittal requirements for applicants
seeking an exemption to on-site stormwater management performance
standards under § 23.01.070D.3.e.
§ 23.01.090 GRAFTON CODE § 23.01.100
1.01:542
A. Maintenance agreement required. The maintenance agreement
required under § 23.01.080B for stormwater management practices
shall be an agreement between the Director of Public Works/Village
Engineer and the responsible party to provide for maintenance of
stormwater practices beyond the duration period of this permit. The
maintenance agreement shall be filed with the County Register of
Deeds as a property deed restriction so that it is binding upon all
subsequent owners of the land served by the stormwater management
practices.
B. Agreement provisions. The maintenance agreement shall contain the
following information and provisions and be consistent with the
maintenance plan required by § 23.01.090A.6:
1. Identification of the stormwater facilities and designation of the
drainage area served by the facilities.
2. A schedule for regular maintenance of each aspect of the
stormwater management system consistent with the stormwater
management plan required under § 23.01.080B.
3. Identification of the responsible party(s), organization or city,
county, town or village responsible for long-term maintenance of
the stormwater management practices identified in the stormwater
management plan required under § 23.01.080B.
4. Requirement that the responsible party(s), organization or city,
county, town or village shall maintain stormwater management
practices in accordance with the schedule included in Subsection
B.2.
5. Authorization for the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer to
access the property to conduct inspections of stormwater
management practices as necessary to ascertain that the practices
are being maintained and operated in accordance with the
agreement.
6. A requirement on the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer to
maintain public records of the results of the site inspections, to
inform the responsible party responsible for maintenance of the
inspection results, and to specifically indicate any corrective
actions required to bring the stormwater management practice into
proper working condition.
7. Agreement that the party designated under Subsection B.3 as
responsible for long-term maintenance of the stormwater
management practices shall be notified by the Director of Public
Works/Village Engineer of maintenance problems which require
correction. The specified corrective actions shall be undertaken
within a reasonable time frame as set by the Director of Public
Works/Village Engineer.
§ 23.01.100 CODE ADOPTION § 23.01.100
1.01:543
§ 23.01.110. Financial guarantee.
§ 23.01.120. Fee schedule.
The fees referred to in other sections of this chapter shall be established by
the Village Board and may from time to time be modified by resolution. A
schedule of the fees established by the Village Board shall be available for
8. Authorization of the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer to
perform the corrected actions identified in the inspection report if
the responsible party designated under Subsection B.3 does not
make the required corrections in the specified time period. The
Director of Public Works/Village Engineer shall enter the amount
due on the tax rolls and collect the money as a special charge
against the property pursuant to Subch. VII of Ch. 66, Wis. Stats.
A. Establishment of the guarantee. The Director of Public Works/Village
Engineer may require the submittal of a financial guarantee, the form
and type of which shall be acceptable to the Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer. The financial guarantee shall be in an amount
determined by the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer to be the
estimated cost of construction and the estimated cost of maintenance of
the stormwater management practices during the period which the
designated party in the maintenance agreement has maintenance
responsibility. The financial guarantee shall give the Director of Public
Works/Village Engineer the authorization to use the funds to complete
the stormwater management practices if the responsible party defaults
or does not properly implement the approved stormwater management
plan, upon written notice to the responsible party by the Director of
Public Works/Village Engineer that the requirements of this chapter
have not been met.
B. Conditions for release. Conditions for the release of the financial
guarantee are as follows:
1. The Director of Public Works/Village Engineer shall release the
portion of the financial guarantee established under this section,
less any costs incurred by the Director of Public Works/Village
Engineer to complete installation of practices, upon submission of
as-built plans by a licensed professional engineer. The Director of
Public Works/Village Engineer may make provisions for a partial
pro-rata release of the financial guarantee based on the completion
of various development stages.
2. The Director of Public Works/Village Engineer shall release the
portion of the financial guarantee established under this section to
assure maintenance of stormwater practices, less any costs
incurred by the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer, at such
time that the responsibility for practice maintenance is passed on
to another entity via an approved maintenance agreement.
§ 23.01.100 GRAFTON CODE § 23.01.120
1.01:544
review at the Department of Public Works, 1300 Hickory Street, Grafton,
Wisconsin.
§ 23.01.130. Enforcement.
A. The Village Board hereby designates the Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer to administer and enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
B. Any land-disturbing construction activity or post-construction runoff
initiated after the effective date of this chapter by any person, firm,
association or corporation subject to the ordinance provisions shall be
deemed a violation unless conducted in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
C. The Director of Public Works/Village Engineer shall notify the
responsible party by certified mail of any noncomplying land-disturbing
construction activity or post-construction runoff. The notice shall
describe the nature of the violation, remedial actions needed, a
schedule for remedial action, and additional enforcement action which
may be taken.
D. Upon receipt of written notification from the Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer under Subsection C, the responsible party shall
correct work that does not comply with the stormwater management
plan or other provisions of this permit. The responsible party shall make
corrections as necessary to meet the specifications and schedule set
forth by the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer in the notice.
E. If the violations to a permit issued pursuant to this chapter are likely to
result in damage to properties, public facilities, or waters of the state,
the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer may enter the land and
take emergency actions necessary to prevent such damage. The costs
incurred by the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer plus interest
and legal costs shall be billed to the responsible party.
F. The Director of Public Works/Village Engineer is authorized to post a
stop-work order on all land-disturbing construction activity that is in
violation of this chapter, or to request the Village Attorney to obtain a
cease and desist order in any court with jurisdiction.
G. The Director of Public Works/Village Engineer may revoke a permit
issued under this chapter for noncompliance with ordinance provisions.
H. Any permit revocation, stop-work order, or cease and desist order shall
remain in effect unless retracted by the Director of Public Works/Village
Engineer or by a court with jurisdiction.
I. The Director of Public Works/Village Engineer is authorized to refer any
violation of this chapter, or of a stop-work order or cease and desist
order issued pursuant to this chapter, to the Village Attorney for the
§ 23.01.120 CODE ADOPTION § 23.01.130
1.01:545
§ 23.01.140. Appeals.
commencement of further legal proceedings in any court with
jurisdiction.
J. Any person, firm, association or corporation who or which does not
comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a
forfeiture of not less than $50 or more than $500 per offense, together
with the costs of prosecution. Each day that the violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense.
K. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter may also be enforced by
injunction in any court with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary to
prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and desist order before resorting to
injunctional proceedings.
Note to permittees: Injunctional orders are authorized pursuant to
§ 59.69(11), 61.35 or 62.23(8), Wis. Stats., for counties, villages and
towns with Village powers, and cities, respectively.
L. When the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer determines that
the holder of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter has failed to
follow practices set forth in the stormwater management plan, or has
failed to comply with schedules set forth in said stormwater
management plan, the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer or a
party designated by the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer may
enter upon the land and perform the work or other operations
necessary to bring the condition of said lands into conformance with
requirements of the approved plan. The Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer shall keep a detailed accounting of the costs and
expenses of performing this work. These costs and expenses shall be
deducted from any financial security posted pursuant to § 23.01.110 of
this chapter. Where such a security has not been established, or where
such a security is insufficient to cover these costs, the costs and
expenses shall be entered on the tax roll as a special charge against the
property and collected with any other taxes levied thereon for the year
in which the work is completed.
A. Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals, created pursuant to Ch. 2.34 of
the Village of Grafton Code pursuant to § 61.354(4)(b), Wis. Stats, shall
hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any
order, decision or determination made by the Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer in administering this chapter. The Board shall also use
the rules, procedures, duties and powers authorized by statute in
hearing and deciding appeals. Upon appeal, the Board may authorize
variances from the provisions of this chapter that are not contrary to
the public interest and where owing to special conditions a literal
enforcement of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship.
B. Who may appeal. Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any
aggrieved person or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the
§ 23.01.130 GRAFTON CODE § 23.01.140
1.01:546
§ 23.01.150. Severability.
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is judged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of the chapter shall remain in force and not be affected by such
judgment.
§ 23.01.160. Effective date.
This chapter shall be in force and effect from and after its adoption and
publication. The above and foregoing ordinance was duly adopted by the
Village Board of the Village of Grafton on the 19th day of February, 2016.
Chapter 23.04
CONTROL OF CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION
§ 23.04.010. Authority.
Village of Grafton affected by any decision of the Director of Public
Works/Village Engineer.
A. This chapter is adopted under the authority granted by § 61.354, Wis.
Stats. This chapter supersedes all provisions of an ordinance previously
enacted under § 61.35, Wis. Stats., that relate to construction site
erosion control. Except as otherwise specified in § 61.354, Wis. Stats.,
§ 61.35, Wis. Stats., applies to this chapter and to any amendments to
this chapter.
B. The provisions of this chapter are deemed not to limit any other lawful
regulatory powers of the same governing body.
C. The Village Board hereby designates the Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer to administer and enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
D. The requirements of this chapter do not preempt more stringent
erosion and sediment control requirements that may be imposed by any
of the following:
1. Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative rules,
permits or approvals, including those authorized under §§ 281.16
and 283.33, Wis. Stats.
2. Targeted nonagricultural performance standards promulgated in
rules by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under
§ NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 23.01.140 CODE ADOPTION § 23.04.020
1.01:547
§ 23.04.020. Findings of fact.
The Village Board finds that runoff from land-disturbing construction
activity carries a significant amount of sediment and other pollutants to the
waters of the state in the Village of Grafton.
§ 23.04.030. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to further the maintenance of safe and
healthful conditions; prevent and control water pollution; prevent and
control soil erosion; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control
building sites, placement of structures and land uses; preserve ground
cover and scenic beauty; and promote sound economic growth, by
minimizing the amount of sediment and other pollutants carried by runoff or
discharged from land-disturbing construction activity to waters of the state
in the Village of Grafton.
§ 23.04.040. Applicability and jurisdiction.
A. Applicability. This chapter applies to construction of sanitary sewer and
water mains and erosion control for planned unit developments,
subdivisions, and other land-disturbing construction activities except as
provided under Subsection A.1.
1. This chapter does not apply to the following:
a. Land-disturbing construction activity that includes the
construction of a building and is otherwise regulated by the
Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services in
Chs. SPS 321 to 325 or 361 to 366, Wis. Adm. Code.
b. Transportation facilities, except transportation facility
construction projects that are part of a larger common plan of
development, such as local roads within a residential or
industrial development.
Note to permittees: Transportation facility projects directed
and supervised by Wisconsin Department of Transportation
are not subject to this chapter. Notwithstanding this chapter,
a municipality is required to comply with the construction
site transportation facility performance standards in subch. IV
of Ch. NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code, for its own transportationrelated
projects.
c. A construction project that is exempted by federal statutes or
regulations from the requirement to have a national pollutant
discharge elimination system permit issued under Chapter 40,
Code of Federal Regulations, Part 122, for land-disturbing
construction activity.
d. Nonpoint discharges from agricultural facilities and practices.
§ 23.04.020 GRAFTON CODE § 23.04.040
1.01:548
§ 23.04.050. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTERING AUTHORITY — A governmental employee or a regional
planning commission empowered under § 61.354, Wis. Stats., that is
designated by the Village Board to administer this chapter.
AGRICULTURAL FACILITIES AND PRACTICES — Has the meaning in
§ 281.16(1), Wis. Stats.
AVERAGE ANNUAL RAINFALL — A calendar year of precipitation,
excluding snow, which is considered typical.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE or BMP — Structural or nonstructural
measures, practices, techniques or devices employed to avoid or minimize
soil, sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state.
BUSINESS DAY — A day that the office of the Village of Grafton is routinely
and customarily open for business.
CEASE AND DESIST ORDER — A court-issued order to halt land-disturbing
construction activity that is being conducted without the required permit.
CONSTRUCTION SITE — An area upon which one or more land-disturbing
construction activities occur, including areas that are part of a larger
common plan of development or sale where multiple separate and distinct
land-disturbing construction activities may be taking place at different
times on different schedules but under one plan.
e. Nonpoint discharges from silviculture activities.
f. Routine maintenance for project sites under five acres of land
disturbance, if performed to maintain the original line and
grade, hydraulic capacity or original purpose of the facility.
2. Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in Subsection A.1,
this chapter applies to construction sites of any size that, in the
opinion of the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer, are likely
to result in runoff that exceeds the safe capacity of the existing
drainage facilities or receiving body of water, that causes undue
channel erosion, that increases water pollution by scouring or the
transportation of particulate matter, or that endangers property or
public safety.
B. Jurisdiction. This chapter applies to land-disturbing construction
activity on construction sites located within the boundaries and
jurisdiction of the Village of Grafton.
C. Exclusions. This chapter is not applicable to activities conducted by a
state agency, as defined under § 227.01 (1), Wis. Stats., but also
including the office of district attorney, which is subject to the state plan
promulgated or a memorandum of understanding entered into under
§ 281.33(2), Wis. Stats.
§ 23.04.040 CODE ADOPTION § 23.04.050
1.01:549
DESIGN STORM — A hypothetical discrete rainstorm characterized by a
specific duration, temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return frequency
and total depth of rainfall.
DIVISION OF LAND — The creation from one parcel of five or more parcels
or building sites of 1 1/2 or fewer acres each in area where such creation
occurs at one time or through the successive partition within a five-year
period.
EROSION — The process by which the land's surface is worn away by the
action of wind, water, ice or gravity.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A comprehensive plan
developed to address pollution caused by erosion and sedimentation of soil
particles or rock fragments during construction.
EXTRATERRITORIAL — The unincorporated area within 1 1/2 miles of the
corporate limits of the Village of Grafton.[Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption)]
FINAL STABILIZATION — That all land-disturbing construction activities
at the construction site have been completed and that a uniform perennial
vegetative cover has been established, with a density of at least 70% of
the cover, for the unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent
structures, or that employ equivalent permanent stabilization measures.
GOVERNING BODY — Village Board of Trustees.
LAND-DISTURBING CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Any man-made
alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the topography or
existing vegetative or nonvegetative soil cover, that may result in runoff and
lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters
of the state. Land-disturbing construction activity includes clearing and
grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading
activities.
LANDOWNER — Any person holding fee title, an easement or other interest
in property, which allows the person to undertake cropping, livestock
management, land-disturbing construction activity or maintenance of
stormwater BMPs on the property.
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE or MEP — A level of implementing best
management practices in order to achieve a performance standard specified
in this chapter, which takes into account the best available technology, costeffectiveness
and other competing issues such as human safety and welfare,
endangered and threatened resources, historic properties and geographic
features. MEP allows flexibility in the way to meet the performance
standards and may vary based on the performance standard and site
conditions.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A narrative or measurable number
specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or practice.
§ 23.04.050 GRAFTON CODE § 23.04.050
1.01:550
PERMIT — A written authorization made by the Village Board to the
applicant to conduct land-disturbing construction activity or to discharge
post-construction runoff to waters of the state.
POLLUTANT — Has the meaning given in § 283.01(13), Wis. Stats.
POLLUTION — Has the meaning given in § 281.01(10), Wis. Stats.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Any entity holding fee title to the property or
performing services to meet the performance standards of this chapter
through a contract or other agreement.
RUNOFF — Stormwater or precipitation, including rain, snow or ice melt,
or similar water that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized
flow.
SEDIMENT — Settleable solid material that is transported by runoff,
suspended within runoff or deposited by runoff away from its original
location.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER — A conveyance or system of conveyances,
including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters,
ditches, constructed channels or storm drains, which meets all of the
following criteria:
SILVICULTURE ACTIVITY — Activities including tree nursery operations,
tree harvesting operations, reforestation, tree thinning, prescribed burning,
and pest and fire control. Clearing and grubbing of an area of a construction
site is not a silviculture activity.
SITE — The entire area included in the legal description of the land on
which the land-disturbing construction activity is proposed in the permit
application.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued by the Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer, which requires that all construction activity on the site be
stopped.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code
Adoption)]
TECHNICAL STANDARD — A document that specifies design, predicted
performance and operation and maintenance specifications for a material,
device or method.
TRANSPORTATION FACILITY — A highway, a railroad, a public mass transit
facility, a public-use airport, a public trail or any other public work for
transportation purposes, such as harbor improvements under § 85.095
(1)(b), Wis. Stats. "Transportation facility" does not include building sites
for the construction of public buildings and buildings that are places of
A. Is designed or used for collecting water or conveying runoff.
B. Is not part of a combined sewer system.
C. Is not draining to a stormwater treatment device or system.
D. Discharges directly or indirectly to waters of the state.
§ 23.04.050 CODE ADOPTION § 23.04.050
1.01:551
employment that are regulated by the Department pursuant to § 281.33,
Wis. Stats.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Has the meaning given in § 281.01(18), Wis.
Stats.
§ 23.04.055. Applicability of maximum extent practicable.
"Maximum extent practicable" applies when a person who is subject to
a performance standard of this chapter demonstrates to the Village of
Grafton's satisfaction that a performance standard is not achievable and
that a lower level of performance is appropriate. In making the assertion
that a performance standard is not achievable and that a level of
performance different from the performance standard is the maximum
extent practicable, the responsible party shall take into account the best
available technology, cost-effectiveness, geographic features, and other
competing interests such as protection of public safety and welfare,
protection of endangered and threatened resources, and preservation of
historic properties.
§ 23.04.060. Technical standards.
A. Design criteria, standards and specifications. All BMPs required to
comply with this chapter shall meet the design criteria, standards and
specifications based on any of the following:
1. Applicable design criteria, standards and specifications identified
in the Wisconsin Construction Site Best Management Practice
Handbook, WDNR Publication WR-222, November 1993 Revision.
2. Other design guidance and technical standards identified or
developed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
under subch. V of Ch. NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code.
3. For this chapter, average annual basis is calculated using the
appropriate annual rainfall or runoff factor, also referred to as the
R factor, or an equivalent design storm using a Type II distribution,
with consideration given to the geographic location of the site and
the period of disturbance.
4. Soil loss prediction tools [such as the Universal Soil Loss Equation
(USLE)] when using an appropriate rainfall or runoff factor (also
referred to as the R factor) or an appropriate design storm and
precipitation distribution, and when considering the geographic
location of the site and the period of disturbance.
Note to permittees: The USLE and its successors RUSLE and
RUSLE2 utilize an R factor which has been developed to estimate
annual soil erosion, averaged over extended time periods. The
R factor can be modified to estimate monthly and single-storm
erosion.
§ 23.04.050 GRAFTON CODE § 23.04.060
1.01:552
§ 23.04.070. Performance standards for construction sites of one
acre or more.
B. Other standards. Other technical standards not identified or developed
in Subsection A may be used, provided that the methods have been
approved by the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer.
A. Responsible party. The responsible party shall implement an erosion
and sediment control plan, developed in accordance with § 23.04.090,
that incorporates the requirements of this section.
B. Plan. A written plan shall be developed in accordance with § 23.04.090
and implemented for each construction site.
C. Erosion and other pollutant control requirements. The plan required
under Subsection B shall include the following:
1. BMPs that, by design, achieve to the maximum extent practicable
discharge of no more than five tons per acre per year of the
sediment load carried in runoff, on an average annual basis, as
compared with no sediment or erosion controls until the
construction site has undergone final stabilization. No person shall
be required to exceed the requirements of this subsection. Erosion
and sediment control BMPs may be used alone or in combination to
meet the requirements of this subsection. Credit toward meeting
the sediment reduction shall be given for limiting the duration or
area, or both, of land-disturbing construction activity, or other
appropriate mechanism.
2. Notwithstanding Subsection C.1, if BMPs cannot be designed and
implemented to meet the sediment performance standard, on an
average annual basis, the plan shall include a written and sitespecific
explanation as to why the sediment performance standard
is not attainable, and the sediment load shall be reduced to the
maximum extent practicable.
3. Where appropriate, the plan shall include sediment controls to do
all of the following to the maximum extent practicable:
a. Prevent tracking of sediment from the construction site onto
roads and other paved surfaces.
b. Prevent the discharge of sediment as part of site dewatering.
c. Protect the separate storm drain inlet structure from receiving
sediment.
d. The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into adjacent
waters of the state.
e. The discharge of sediment from drainageways that flow off the
site.
§ 23.04.060 CODE ADOPTION § 23.04.070
1.01:553
f. The discharge of sediment eroding from soil stockpiles existing
for more than seven days.
g. The discharge of sediment from erosive flows at outlets and in
downstream channels.
h. The transport by runoff into waters of the state of chemicals,
cement and other building compounds and materials on the
construction site during the construction period. However,
projects that require the placement of these materials in
waters of the state, such as constructing bridge footings or
BMP installations, are not prohibited by this subdivision.
i. The transport by runoff into waters of the state of untreated
wash water from vehicle and wheel washing.
4. The use, storage and disposal of chemicals, cement and other
compounds and materials used on the construction site shall be
managed during the construction period to prevent their entrance
into waters of the state. However, projects that require the
placement of these materials in waters of the state, such as
constructing bridge footings or BMP installations, are not
prohibited by this paragraph.
D. Preventive measures. The erosion and sediment control plan shall
incorporate all of the following:
1. Maintenance of existing vegetation, especially adjacent to surface
waters whenever possible.
2. Minimization of soil compaction and preservation of topsoil.
3. Minimization of land-disturbing construction activity on slopes of
20% or more.
4. Development of spill prevention and response procedures.
E. Location. The BMPs used to comply with this section shall be located
prior to runoff entering waters of the state.
F. Implementation. The BMPs used to comply with this section shall be
implemented as follows:
1. Erosion and sediment control practices shall be constructed or
installed before land-disturbing construction activities begin in
accordance with the erosion and sediment control plan developed
in § 23.04.090.
2. Erosion and sediment control practices shall be maintained until
final stabilization.
3. Final stabilization activity shall commence when land-disturbing
activities cease and final grade has been reached on any portion of
the site.
§ 23.04.070 GRAFTON CODE § 23.04.070
1.01:554
§ 23.04.080. Permitting requirements, procedures and fees.
4. Temporary stabilization activity shall commence when landdisturbing
activities have temporarily ceased and will not resume
for a period exceeding 14 calendar days.
5. BMPs that are no longer necessary for erosion and sediment
control shall be removed by the responsible party.
G. Alternate requirements. The Director of Public Works/Village Engineer
may establish stormwater management requirements more stringent
than those set forth in this section if the Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer determines that an added level of protection is needed
for sensitive resources.
A. Permit required. No responsible party may commence a land-disturbing
construction activity subject to this chapter without receiving prior
approval of a developer's agreement, erosion and sediment control plan
for the site and a permit from the Director of Public Works/Village
Engineer.
B. Permit application and fees. At least one responsible party desiring to
undertake a land-disturbing construction activity subject to this chapter
shall submit an application for a permit and an erosion and sediment
control plan that meets the requirements of § 23.04.090, an approved
developer's agreement and shall pay an application fee to the Village of
Grafton. By submitting an application, the applicant is authorizing the
Director of Public Works/Village Engineer to enter the site to obtain
information required for the review of the erosion and sediment control
plan.
1. Subdivision development: $300 plus $5/lot.
2. Planned unit development: $300 plus $5/acre.
3. Other: $30.
C. Review and approval of permit application. The Director of Public
Works/Village Engineer shall review any permit application that is
submitted with an erosion and sediment control plan, the required fee,
and after the developer's agreement is approved by the Village Board.
The following approval procedure shall be used:
1. Within 10 business days of the receipt of a complete permit
application, as required by Subsection B, the Director of Public
Works/Village Engineer shall inform the applicant whether the
application and plan are approved or disapproved based on the
requirements of this chapter.
2. If the permit application and plan are approved, the Director of
Public Works/Village Engineer shall issue the permit.
§ 23.04.070 CODE ADOPTION § 23.04.080
1.01:555
3. If the permit application or plan is disapproved, the Director of
Public Works/Village Engineer shall state in writing the reasons for
disapproval.
4. The Director of Public Works/Village Engineer may request
additional information from the applicant. If additional information
is submitted, the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer shall
have 10 business days from the date the additional information is
received to inform the applicant that the plan is either approved or
disapproved.
5. Failure by the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer to inform
the permit applicant of a decision within 15 business days of a
required submittal shall be deemed to mean approval of the
submittal, and the applicant may proceed as if a permit had been
issued.
D. Surety bond. As a condition of approval and issuance of the permit, the
Director of Public Works/Village Engineer may require the applicant to
deposit a surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit to guarantee a good
faith execution of the approved erosion control plan and any permit
conditions.
E. Permit requirements. All permits shall require the responsible party to:
1. Notify the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer within 48
hours of commencing any land-disturbing construction activity.
2. Notify the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer of completion
of any BMPs within 14 days after their installation.
3. Obtain permission in writing from the Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer prior to any modification, pursuant to
§ 23.01.080D.5, of the erosion and sediment control plan.
4. Install all BMPs as identified in the approved erosion and sediment
control plan.
5. Maintain all road drainage systems, stormwater drainage systems,
BMPs and other facilities identified in the erosion and sediment
control plan.
6. Repair any siltation or erosion damage to adjoining surfaces and
drainageways resulting from land-disturbing construction
activities, and document repairs in a site erosion control log.
7. Inspect the BMPs within 24 hours after each rain of 0.5 inches or
more which results in runoff during active construction periods and
at least once each week; make needed repairs and document the
findings of the inspections in a site erosion control log with the date
of inspection, the name of the person conducting the inspection,
and a description of the present phase of the construction at the
site.
§ 23.04.080 GRAFTON CODE § 23.04.080
1.01:556
§ 23.04.090. Erosion and sediment control plan, statement and
amendments.
8. Allow the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer to enter the
site for the purpose of inspecting compliance with the erosion and
sediment control plan or for performing any work necessary to
bring the site into compliance with the control plan. Keep a copy of
the erosion and sediment control plan at the construction site.
F. Permit conditions. Permits issued under this section may include
conditions established by the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer
in addition to the requirements set forth in Subsection E, where needed
to assure compliance with the performance standards in § 23.04.070.
G. Permit duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid for a
period of 180 days or the length of the building permit or other
construction authorizations, whichever is longer, from the date of
issuance. The Director of Public Works/Village Engineer may extend the
period one or more times for up to an additional 180 days. The Director
of Public Works/Village Engineer may require additional BMPs as a
condition of the extension if they are necessary to meet the
requirements of this chapter.
H. Maintenance. The responsible party throughout the duration of the
construction activities shall maintain all BMPs necessary to meet the
requirements of this chapter until the site has undergone final
stabilization.
A. Erosion and sediment control plan.
1. An erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared and
submitted to the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer.
2. The erosion and sediment control plan shall be designed to meet
the performance standards in § 23.04.070 and other requirements
of this chapter.
3. The erosion and sediment control plan shall address pollution
caused by soil erosion and sedimentation during construction and
up to final stabilization of the site. The erosion and sediment
control plan shall include, at a minimum, the following items:
a. The name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the
site and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant,
together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at
such firm. The application shall also include start and end
dates for construction.
b. Description of the site and the nature of the construction
activity, including representation of the limits of land
disturbance on a United States Geological Service 7.5-series
topographic map.
§ 23.04.080 CODE ADOPTION § 23.04.090
1.01:557
c. A sequence of construction of the development site, including
stripping and clearing; rough grading; construction of utilities,
infrastructure and buildings; and final grading and
landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the expected date on
which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure
of cleared areas, areas of clearing, installation of temporary
erosion and sediment control measures, and establishment of
permanent vegetation.
d. Estimates of the total area of the site and the total area of the
site that is expected to be disturbed by construction activities.
e. Estimates, including calculations, if any, of the runoff
coefficient of the site before and after construction activities
are completed.
f. Calculations to show the expected sediment load in the
average annual sediment load carried in runoff as compared to
no sediment or erosion controls.
g. Existing data describing the surface soil as well as subsoils.
h. Depth to groundwater, as indicated by Natural Resources
Conservation Service soil information where available.
i. Name of the immediate named receiving water from the United
States Geological Service 7.5-minute series topographic maps.
4. The erosion and sediment control plan shall include a site map. The
site map shall include the following items and shall be at a scale not
greater than 100 feet per inch and at a contour interval not to
exceed five feet.
a. Existing topography, vegetative cover, natural and engineered
drainage systems, roads and surface waters. Lakes, streams,
wetlands, channels, ditches and other watercourses on and
immediately adjacent to the site shall be shown. Any identified
one-hundred-year floodplains, flood fringes and floodways shall
also be shown.
b. Boundaries of the construction site.
c. Drainage patterns and approximate slopes anticipated after
major grading activities.
d. Areas of soil disturbance.
e. Location of major structural and nonstructural controls
identified in the plan.
f. Location of areas where stabilization practices will be
employed.
g. Areas which will be vegetated following construction.
§ 23.04.090 GRAFTON CODE § 23.04.090
1.01:558
h. Area extent of wetland acreage on the site and locations where
stormwater is discharged to a surface water or wetland.
i. Locations of all surface waters and wetlands within one mile of
the construction site.
j. An alphanumeric or equivalent grid overlying the entire
construction site map.
k. Areas(s) used for infiltration of post-construction stormwater
runoff.
5. Each erosion and sediment control plan shall include a description
of appropriate controls and measures that will be performed at the
site to prevent pollutants from reaching waters of the state. The
plan shall clearly describe the appropriate control measures for
each major activity and the timing during the construction process
that the measures will be implemented. The description of erosion
controls shall include, when appropriate, the following minimum
requirements:
a. Description of interim and permanent stabilization practices,
including a practice implementation schedule. Site plans shall
ensure that existing vegetation is preserved where attainable
and that disturbed portions of the site are stabilized.
b. Description of structural practices to divert flow away from
exposed soils, store flows or otherwise limit runoff and the
discharge of pollutants from the site. Unless otherwise
specifically approved in writing by the Director of Public
Works/Village Engineer, structural measures shall be installed
on upland soils.
c. Management of overland flow at all sites, unless otherwise
controlled by outfall controls.
d. Trapping of sediment in channelized flow.
e. Staging construction to limit bare areas subject to erosion.
f. Protection of downslope drainage inlets where they occur.
g. Minimization of tracking at all sites.
h. Cleanup of off-site sediment deposits.
i. Proper disposal of building and waste materials at all sites.
j. Stabilization of drainageways.
k. Control of soil erosion from dirt stockpiles.
l. Installation of permanent stabilization practices as soon as
possible after final grading.
§ 23.04.090 CODE ADOPTION § 23.04.090
1.01:559
§ 23.04.100. Building construction activities.
m. Minimization of dust to the maximum extent practicable.
6. The erosion and sediment control plan shall require that velocity
dissipation devices be placed at discharge locations and along the
length of any outfall channel, as necessary, to provide a nonerosive
flow from the structure to a watercourse so that the natural
physical and biological characteristics and functions are
maintained and protected.
B. Erosion and sediment control plan statement. For each construction
site identified under § 23.04.040A.2, an erosion and sediment control
plan statement shall be prepared. This statement shall be submitted to
the Director of Public Works/Village Engineer. The control plan
statement shall briefly describe the site, including a site map. Further,
it shall also include the best management practices that will be used to
meet the requirements of the ordinance, including the site development
schedule.
C. Amendments. The applicant shall amend the plan if any of the following
occur:
1. There is a change in design, construction, operation or
maintenance at the site which has the reasonable potential for the
discharge of pollutants to waters of the state and which has not
otherwise been addressed in the plan.
2. The actions required by the plan fail to reduce the impacts of
pollutants carried by construction site runoff.
3. The Director of Public Works/Village Engineer notifies the
applicant of changes needed in the plan.
A. Erosion control. Construction sites involving building construction
where a building permit has been issued under Title 16, Buildings and
Construction, shall comply with the following:
1. One- and two-family construction. On a site where a building
permit has been issued under Title 16, Buildings and Construction,
for the construction of a one- or two-family residence, compliance
shall be as required in § SPS 321.125, Wis. Adm. Code, Erosion
Control and Sediment Control, as adopted by reference; or
2. Building construction under Chs. SPS 361 and 362, Wis. Adm.
Code. On a site where a building permit has been issued under Title
16 for the construction of a building or other structure, other than
indicated in Subsection A.1, and which is governed by and
constructed under Chs. SPS 361 and 362, compliance shall be as
required in Chs. SPS 361 and 362, as adopted by reference.
§ 23.04.090 GRAFTON CODE § 23.04.100
1.01:560
§ 23.04.110. Fee schedule.
The fees referred to in other sections of this chapter shall be established by
the Village Board and may from time to time be modified by resolution. A
schedule of the fees established by the Village Board shall be available for
review in the Department of Public Works.
§ 23.04.120. Inspection.
If land-disturbing construction activities are being carried out without a
permit required by this chapter, the Director of Public Works/Village
Engineer may enter the land pursuant to the provisions of s§ 66.0119(1),
(2), and (3), Wis. Stats.
Note to permit holder: The Director of Public Works/Village Engineer will
inspect any construction site that holds a permit under this chapter at least
once a month during the period starting March 1 and ending October 31
and at least two times during the period starting November 1 and ending
February 28 to ensure compliance with the approved sediment and erosion
control plan.
§ 23.04.130. Enforcement.
Note to permit holder: Any building construction greater than one
acre is not eligible to be regulated by § SPS 321.125 or Chs. SPS
361 and 362, Wis. Adm. Code. Construction sites greater than one
acre are subject to the requirements of § 23.04.070.
A. The Director of Public Works/Village Engineer may post a stop-work
order if any of the following occurs:
1. Any land-disturbing construction activity regulated under this
chapter is being undertaken without a permit.
2. The erosion and sediment control plan is not being implemented in
a good faith manner.
3. The conditions of the permit are not being met.
B. If the responsible party does not cease activity as required in a stopwork
order posted under this section or fails to comply with the erosion
and sediment control plan or permit conditions, the Director of Public
Works/Village Engineer may revoke the permit.
C. If the responsible party, where no permit has been issued, does not
cease the activity after being notified by the Director of Public Works/
Village Engineer or if a responsible party violates a stop-work order
posted under Subsection A, the Director of Public Works/Village
Engineer may request the Village Attorney to obtain a cease and desist
order in any court with jurisdiction.
§ 23.04.100 CODE ADOPTION § 23.04.130
1.01:561
§ 23.04.140. Appeals.
D. The Director of Public Works/Village Engineer may retract the stopwork
order issued under Subsection A or the permit revocation under
Subsection B.
E. After posting a stop-work order under Subsection A, the Director of
Public Works/Village Engineer may issue a notice of intent to the
responsible party of its intent to perform work necessary to comply with
this chapter. The Director of Public Works/Village Engineer may go on
the land and commence the work after issuing the notice of intent. The
costs of the work performed under this subsection by the Director of
Public Works/Village Engineer, plus interest at the rate authorized by
Village Board shall be billed to the responsible party. In the event a
responsible party fails to pay the amount due, the Village Clerk shall
enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect as a special
assessment against the property pursuant to subch. VII of Ch. 66, Wis.
Stats.
F. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to a forfeiture of not less than $50 nor more than $500 and the
costs of prosecution for each violation. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense.
G. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter may also be enforced by
injunction in any court with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary to
prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and desist order before resorting to
injunctional proceedings.
A. Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals created pursuant to
§ 19.08.0201 of the Village's Zoning Ordinance pursuant to
§ 61.354(4)(b), Wis. Stats.:
1. Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error
in any order, decision or determination made by the Director of
Public Works/Village Engineer in administering this chapter except
for cease and desist orders obtained under § 23.04.130C.
2. Upon appeal, may authorize variances from the provisions of this
chapter which are not contrary to the public interest and where
owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions
of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship; and
3. Shall use the rules, procedures, duties and powers authorized by
statute in hearing and deciding appeals and authorizing variances.
B. Who may appeal. Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any
aggrieved person or by any office, department, board or bureau of the
Village of Grafton affected by any decision of the Director of Public
Works/Village Engineer.
§ 23.04.130 GRAFTON CODE § 23.04.150
1.01:562
§ 23.04.150. Severability.
If a court of competent jurisdiction judges any section, clause, provision
or portion of this chapter unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of the
ordinance shall remain in force and not be affected by such judgment.
§ 23.04.160. Effective date.
This chapter shall be in force and effect from and after its adoption and
publication. The above and foregoing ordinance was duly adopted by the
Village Board of the Village of Grafton on the 19th day of February, 2016.
Title 24: Community Development Authority
Chapter 24.04
CREATION OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
§ 24.04.010. Creation of Community Development Authority.
Pursuant to § 66.1335, Wis. Stats, (entitled "Housing and Community
Development Authorities") there is hereby created a housing and
community development authority, which shall be known as the Community
Development Authority of the Village of Grafton.
Chapter 24.08
STATUS OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY AS
PUBLIC BODY
§ 24.08.010. Status of Community Development Authority as a
public body.
The Community Development Authority (CDA) is deemed to be a public body
having all the powers, duties and functions granted to housing authorities,
redevelopment authorities, and housing and community development
authorities by applicable laws of the State of Wisconsin.
Chapter 24.12
APPOINTMENT, CONFIRMATION AND TERM OF
COMMISSIONERS; VACANCIES
§ 24.12.010. Appointment, confirmation and term; vacancies.
The seven Commissioners of the CDA shall be appointed by the Village
President and confirmed by the Village Board, as follows:
A. Two of the Commissioners shall be members of the Village Board and
shall serve during their term of office as members of the Village Board.
§ 23.04.150 CODE ADOPTION § 24.12.010
1.01:563
Chapter 24.16
BYLAWS
§ 24.16.010. Bylaws.
The CDA may adopt and from time to time amend or repeal such bylaws and
other rules and regulations consistent with applicable law and as it deems
necessary in the performance of its functions.
Chapter 24.20
OFFICERS, AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 24.20.010. Officers, agents, and employees.
Chapter 24.24
POWERS AND DUTIES OF CDA
§ 24.24.010. Powers and duties.
B. Five of the Commissioners shall be Village residents and shall be
initially appointed as follows: two for terms ending on the first Monday
in August of 1999; one each for terms ending on the first Monday in
May of 2000, 2001, and 2002, respectively. Thereafter, the terms of the
five Commissioners who are not members of the Village Board shall be
four years. These terms shall expire on the first Monday in May of the
designated year. Commissioners who are not members of the Village
Board shall serve until a successor has been appointed and qualified,
unless such Commissioner's term is vacated earlier because of change
of residence, removal, resignation or death. [Amended by Ord. No.
025, Series 1999]
C. Vacancies shall be filled by the Village President and confirmed by
majority vote of the Village Board.
A. The CDA shall annually elect a Chair and Vice Chair from among the
Commissioners. Vacancies occurring in the office of Chair or Vice Chair
shall be filled from among the Commissioners for the unexpired portion
of the term.
B. The CDA may contract with the Village or any other agency or entity,
public or private, for the provision of any necessary services associated
with or required by the CDA in the performance of its duties and
functions. Any services provided to the CDA by the Village pursuant to
such contract shall be coordinated through the Village Administrator.
A. Housing authority. The CDA shall have all the powers, duties and
functions of a housing authority, as set forth in §§ 66.1201 to 66.1211,
§ 24.12.010 GRAFTON CODE § 24.24.010
1.01:564
Chapter 24.28
CONSTRUCTION
§ 24.28.010. Construction.
All powers, duties and functions of a housing and community development
authority, as set forth in § 66.1335, Wis. Stats., are deemed to have been
granted to the CDA as though set forth in this chapter, and the powers
granted hereunder shall be construed liberally to effectuate its purpose.
Title 25: Weights and Measures
Chapter 25.04
inclusive, Wis. Stats., and all housing projects initiated by the CDA and
approved by the Village Board shall be undertaken and carried out
pursuant to such sections.
B. Redevelopment plan(s). The CDA shall implement the retention and
development activities as identified in any redevelopment plan(s) or
other economic development plans created and approved by the Village
Board. The CDA shall be responsible for regularly reviewing any
redevelopment or economic development plans, and shall implement
any changes or additions to the plans approved by the Village Board.
C. Redevelopment authority. The CDA shall have all the powers, duties and
functions of a redevelopment authority, as set forth in § 66.1335, Wis.
Stats. All redevelopment projects initiated by the CDA and approved by
the Village Board shall be undertaken and carried out in accordance
with § 66.1105, 66.1301 to 66.1329, 66.1331, 66.1333 or 66.1337, Wis.
Stats., or as determined appropriate to each project by the Village
Board. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1.01, Code
Adoption)]
D. The CDA shall submit an annual budget to the Village Administrator;
such budget shall be subject to review by the Village Administrator
prior to submission to the Village Board. The approval of the CDA
budget by the Village Board permits the CDA to spend budgeted funds
for the purposes designated.
E. The CDA shall advise the Village Board of funds or assets received by
the CDA from all sources and provide a monthly accounting of
expenditures to the Village Board for information purposes. The CDA
shall be subject to the Village accounting and auditing procedures.
F. In addition to the foregoing powers, duties and functions, the CDA shall
have such other powers, duties and functions related to housing,
community and economic development as are granted to it by the
Village Board.
§ 24.24.010 CODE ADOPTION § 24.28.010
1.01:565
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
§ 25.04.010. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL WEIGHING OR MEASURING DEVICES — Those used or
employed in establishing the size, quantity, extent, area or measurement
of quantities, things, produce or articles for sale, hire or award, or in
computing any basic charge or payment for services rendered on the basis
of weight or measure within the Village of Grafton.
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES PROGRAM — Includes administration and
enforcement of this chapter and Ch. 98, Wis. Stats., and any related actions.
§ 25.04.020. License required.
§ 25.04.030. Application.
The application for a weighing or measuring device license shall be made
in writing on a form provided for such purpose by the Village of Grafton
Inspection Department and signed by an individual authorized to sign for
the applicant. Such application shall state the type and number of weighing
and measuring devices to be licensed, the location of the devices, the
applicant's full name and post office address and whether such person
is an individual, partnership, limited liability company or corporation. If
a partnership, the application shall state the names of partners together
with their addresses. If a company or limited liability corporation, the
application shall state the names and addresses of all officers and agents of
the applicant.
§ 25.04.040. Issuance of license.
The Village of Grafton Inspection Department shall issue a license to the
applicant if the requirements of this Code have been complied with upon
payment to the Village of Grafton Inspection Department of the license fees.
§ 25.04.050. Term.
Licenses issued under this section shall expire on June 30 of each year.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B, no person shall operate or maintain
weights and measures, weighing or measuring devices and systems and
accessories relating thereto, which are used commercially within the
Village of Grafton in determining the weight, measure or count of
commodities or things sold or offered or exposed for sale on the basis of
weights and measures a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
B. Occasional sales temporarily permitted by a Village of Grafton special
event permit are exempt from licensing under this chapter.
§ 24.28.010 GRAFTON CODE § 25.04.060
1.01:566
§ 25.04.060. Enforcement for nonrenewal.
It shall be the duty of the Village of Grafton Inspection Department to
notify the Village Attorney and other appropriate Village officials and to
order the immediate enforcement of the provisions of this chapter in cases
involving failure to renew a weighing or measuring device license. Said
licensee shall be prohibited from operating or maintaining a weighing or
measuring device until such time as a valid license has been obtained under
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 25.04.070. Fees.
§ 25.04.080. Doubled fees for late renewal. [Amended by Ord. No.
005, Series 2011]
Any person who fails to renew a license prior to the date of expiration
may be subject to doubled fees for each day that constitutes a separate
violation. The assessment or payment of penalties does not preclude the
Village from seeking an injunction to cease and desist from allowing an
unlicensed device, as defined in this chapter, to be used to determine a
weight, measure or cost of goods for public sale or consumption.
§ 25.04.090. Violations and penalties. [Amended by Ord. No. 005,
Series 2011]
In addition to any other penalty imposed or restitution required, any person
who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, forfeit not less than $500 nor more than $2,000 together with the
costs of prosecution and, in default in payment of such forfeiture and costs
of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the county jail until the forfeiture and
costs are paid, but not exceeding 60 days. Each day is considered a separate
violation.
A. The Village Board shall establish a fee schedule for each type of
weighing and measuring devices licensed as of July 1.
B. The Inspection Department shall prepare a notice of fees and mail to
each licensee a copy of the fee schedule at the licensee's last known
address as shown on the application form prior to the licensing period.
The schedule shall be known as Weights and Measures Fees, Table II.
[Amended by Ord. No. 009, Series 2000; Ord. No. 012, Series
2003; Ord. No. 021, Series 2003]
Table II
Weights and Measures Fees
Type of Device Cost
Liquid measure device (LMD) $28
Counter scales $28
Point-of-sale system $36
§ 25.04.060 CODE ADOPTION § 25.04.090
1.01:567
Disposition List
Chapter DL

19- 1-1
PART 1: INTRODUCTION
DIVISION 19.01.0100 INTRODUCTION
SECTION 19.01.0101 AUTHORITY
This Title of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code is adopted pursuant to the authority granted Villages under Sections
61.65 and 62.23(7) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
SECTION 19.01.0102 SHORT TITLE
This Title may be cited as the "ZONING ORDINANCE, VILLAGE OF GRAFTON, WISCONSIN."
SECTION 19.01.0103 PURPOSE AND INTENT
This Ordinance is intended to promote the health, safety, morals, prosperity, and general welfare of the citizens of the Village
of Grafton, Wisconsin through the regulation of the use of land, water, and other natural resources, and the review of
construction and development within the Village so as to promote the wise and compatible uses of limited resources, protect
property values, preserve the historic heritage and aesthetic character of the Village, and balance public needs and concerns
with the interests of private property owners
SECTION 19.01.0104 OTHER LAWS AND REGULATIONS
Where appropriate, this Ordinance is intended to supplement, and not supplant, all federal, state, and agency laws,
regulations, rules, and orders relating to or regulating the subject hereof. All uses, projects, developments, structures, and
buildings subject to this Ordinance shall also comply with all applicable federal, state, agency laws, regulations, rules and
orders. Where the provisions of this Ordinance are more restrictive than other applicable rules or regulations, the provisions
of this Ordinance shall control.
SECTION 19.01.0105 INTERPRETATION
A. General. This Ordinance shall be interpreted consistent with the broadest possible exercise of the authority
delegated to the Village under Wisconsin statutes and the Constitutions of the United States of America and the
State of Wisconsin.
B. Provision or Portion of this Ordinance. If any part, division, section, provision, or portion of this Ordinance is
adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this Ordinance shall not
be affected thereby.
C. Application of this Ordinance to a Particular Structure, Land, or Water. If an application of this Ordinance to
a particular structure, land, or water is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such judgement shall not be applicable to any other structure, land, or water not specifically subject to such
judgement.
SECTION 19.01.0106 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY
The Village of Grafton does not guarantee, warrant, or represent that only those areas delineated as floodplain, floodway,
floodland, wetland, or drainageways from tests and/or mapping required by this Ordinance will be subject to periodic
19- 1-2
inundation, nor does the Village of Grafton guarantee, warrant, or represent that the soils shown to be unsuited for a given
land use from tests and/or mapping required by this Ordinance are the only unsuited soils within the jurisdiction of this
Ordinance; and thereby asserts that there is no liability on the part of the Village of Grafton, Village Board, Plan
Commission, its agencies and contractors, or employees for flooding problems, sanitation problems, or structural damages
that may occur as a result of reliance upon, and conformance with, this Ordinance.
SECTION 19.01.0107 PERMITS ISSUED AND APPROVED PRIOR TO THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THE
ZONING ORDINANCE
A. When New Zoning Ordinance Shall Apply. All work, structures, and uses authorized by permits issued before the
effective date of this Ordinance or any amendment thereto shall not be affected by this Ordinance. Except as
provided in Paragraphs B., C., D., and E. below of this Section, no Zoning Permit or Conditional Use Permit shall be
issued following the effective date of this Ordinance or any amendment thereto unless the work, structure, or use for
which the Zoning Permit or Conditional Use Permit is sought is made to fully comply with the applicable provisions
of this Ordinance or any such amendment thereto.
B. Right to Complete Construction Pursuant to Approved Plans and Permits. Nothing in this Ordinance, or any
amendment thereto, shall be deemed to require any change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any
structure if a Building Permit (also see Paragraph C. of this Section) and/or Certificate of Occupancy for such
structure was lawfully and properly issued before the effective date of this Ordinance, or any such amendment
thereto, and such Building Permit and/or Certificate of Occupancy had not by its own terms expired before such
effective date of this Ordinance, and construction pursuant to such permits is commenced before the expiration date
of such permits.
C. Building Permits. Where a Building Permit for a building or structure has been issued according to law before the
effective date of this Ordinance, and if construction is begun within six (6) months of such effective date and the
exterior of the building or structure is completed within twenty-four (24) months of such effective date, said
building or structure may be completed according to the approved plans for which the Building Permit has been
issued; and further, may, upon completion, be occupied under a Certificate of Occupancy by the use for which
originally designated, subject thereafter to the provisions of Division 19.03.1000 of this Ordinance.
D. Right to Occupy as Nonconformity. Upon completion pursuant to Paragraph B. and C. of this Section, such
building or structure may be occupied by, and a Zoning Permit and/or Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for,
the use designated on such Zoning Permit and/or Certificate of Occupancy, subject thereafter, to the extent
applicable, to the provisions of Division 19.03.1000 of this Ordinance relating to nonconforming buildings,
structures, and uses.
SECTION 19.01.0108 PENDING APPLICATIONS
A. When Zoning Ordinance Shall Apply. This Ordinance, and any amendment thereto, shall apply to all applications
pending and not finally decided on the effective date thereof to which it would apply if such applications were filed
on or after such effective date; provided, however, that nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to require any
change in any Preliminary Subdivision Plat, Final Subdivision Plat, Certified Survey Map, or Condominium Plat
submitted before such effective date and which Preliminary Subdivision Plat, Final Subdivision Plat, Certified
Survey Map, or Condominium Plat application shall be processed according to the standards and requirements that
were in effect on the date such application was filed; and provided further, that this Ordinance shall not be deemed
to require any change to a Final Subdivision Plat which is in substantial compliance with a Preliminary Subdivision
Plat approved before such effective date; and provided further, that this Ordinance shall not apply to any zoning
variance application that was on file with the Village of Grafton and complete in all material respects before such
effective date, and which zoning variance application shall be processed according to the standards and requirements
that were in effect on the date such application was filed. (Ord. 036, Series 2000, Part 1).
B. Zoning Administration Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this Ordinance, or any amendment
thereto, the Zoning Administrator shall inform each applicant to which this Ordinance applies that said application is
subject to the provisions of this Ordinance (except pending applications for Preliminary Subdivision Plats, Final
Subdivision Plats, Certified Survey Maps, or Condominium Plats), as amended, and will be processed in accordance
19- 1-3
therewith; that the applicant may within thirty (30) days after the mailing of such notice refile, without an additional
fee, its application based on this Ordinance, as amended; and that if the applicant does not refile, its application may
be denied for noncompliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, as amended.
C. Duty of Applicant. Notwithstanding the provisions of Paragraph B. of this Section, it shall be the responsibility of
each applicant having an application pending on the effective date of this Ordinance (except pending applications
for Preliminary Subdivision Plats, Final Subdivision Plats, Certified Survey Maps, or Condominium Plats), or any
amendment thereto, to modify such application according to the terms and provisions of this Ordinance, as amended,
and the failure to do so, whether or not the procedures of this Section have been followed, may result in the denial of
such application for failure to comply with this Ordinance, as amended. Any modification or refiling of an
application pending on such effective date to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance, as amended, shall be
permitted anytime before the final disposition of such application and shall be permitted without payment of any
additional fee.
D. Processing of Pending Applications. Upon the refiling of any pending application as herein provided, or upon
notification from the applicant that it will not refile or modify its application, or upon the expiration of sixty (60)
days after the effective date of this Ordinance or any amendment thereto, whichever occurs first, such pending
application shall be processed according to the terms of this Ordinance, as amended; provided, however, that such
applications will be processed according to the procedures in effect on the date that such application was filed.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to request
additional data, information, or documentation for pending applications when, in the Zoning Administrator's
judgement, such additional data, information, or documentation is necessary or appropriate to a full and proper
consideration and disposition of such pending application.
SECTION 19.01.0109 REPEAL
Title 19 "Zoning" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code as amended through April 2, 2000 relating to the zoning of land,
excepting "Official Map" Chapter 19.125, is hereby repealed and all other Ordinances or parts of Ordinances of the Village of
Grafton inconsistent or conflicting with this Ordinance, including Chapters 2.28 "Plan Commission" and Chapter 2.34
"Zoning Board of Appeals" of Title 2 of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code, to the extent of the inconsistency only, are
hereby repealed.
19- 2-0
2Chapter 19
19- 2-1
PART 2: GENERAL PROVISIONS
DIVISION 19.02.0100 GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 19.02.0101 JURISDICTION
The jurisdiction of this Ordinance shall apply to all structures, lands, water, and air within the corporate limits of the Village.
SECTION 19.02.0102 COMPLIANCE
A. General Compliance. No structure, development, land, water, or air shall hereafter be used and no structure or part
thereof shall hereafter be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, substantially improved, extended, enlarged,
converted, or structurally altered without a Building or Zoning Permit.
B. Zoning Compliance. The following specific zoning provisions shall be complied with:
1. Changes in Structures or Use. Except as may otherwise be provided in Division 19.03.1000,
nonconforming buildings, structures and uses, all buildings erected hereafter, all uses of land or buildings
established hereafter, all structural alterations or relocation of existing buildings occurring hereafter, and all
enlargements of or additions to existing uses occurring hereafter, shall be subject to all regulations that are
applicable to the zoning districts in which such buildings, uses, or land shall be located.
2. Nonconforming Buildings, Structures, and Uses. Any lawfully established building, structure, or use
existing at the time of enactment of this Ordinance, may be continued, though such building, structure, or
use does not conform to the provisions of the zoning district in which it is located. Whenever a zoning
district is changed thereafter, the then existing lawful use may be continued, subject to the provisions of
Division 19.03.1000 of this Ordinance.
3. Site Suitability. No land shall be used or structure erected where the land is held unsuitable for such use or
structure by the Plan Commission due to flooding, concentrated runoff, inadequate drainage, adverse soil or
rock formation, erosion susceptibility, or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety,
prosperity, aesthetics, and general welfare of this community. The Plan Commission, in applying the
provisions of this Ordinance, shall, in writing, recite the particular facts upon which it bases its conclusion
that the land is not suitable for certain uses. The applicant shall have an opportunity to present evidence
contesting such unsuitability if so desired. Thereafter, the Zoning Board of Appeals may affirm, modify, or
withdraw its determination of unsuitability.
a. Land or Lot Divisions. All land divisions shall conform to the provisions of this Ordinance.
b. Must Meet Private Water and On-Site Sewage Disposal System Requirements. In any zoning
district where a public water supply or public sewage service is not available and private water and
on-site sewage disposal systems are permitted on an interim basis as defined in the various
"Intent" statements of the zoning districts, each lot or dwelling unit shall be capable of meeting the
requirements of the Department of Commerce COMM 81 through 85 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code and the applicable requirements of the Sanitary Code of the Ozaukee County
Code, and any other applicable agency regarding the construction of an on-site sewage disposal
systems.
19- 2-2
DIVISION 19.02.0200 GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
SECTION 19.02.0201 USE AND BULK REGULATIONS
A. Use. No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or part thereof, or other
structure, shall be erected, raised, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, or altered except in conformity with the
regulations specified for the district in which it is located.
B. Bulk. All new buildings, building additions, and structures shall conform to the building regulations established for
the district in which each building is located, except that parapet walls of a maximum height determined by the
Building Code, chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, stacks, and necessary mechanical
appurtenances shall be permitted to exceed the maximum height provisions when erected according to all other
ordinances of the Village of Grafton. The extent to which such structures may exceed maximum height provisions
shall be determined by the Architectural Review Board and Plan Commission in their review of required
architectural plans. (Also see Division 19.03.0900 of this Ordinance for modifications.)
SECTION 19.02.0202 LOT COVERAGE
All new buildings, structures, and off-street parking and loading areas shall conform to the various lot coverage regulations
set forth in this Ordinance.
A. Maintenance of Minimum Dimensional Requirements of Yards, Courts, and Other Open Spaces. The
maintenance of yards, courts, and other open space and minimum lot area required under the provisions of this
Ordinance for a building shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of such building or of the property on which it
is located as long as the building is in existence. Furthermore, no legally required yards, courts, or other open space
or minimum lot area allocated to any building shall, by virtue of change of ownership or for any other reason, be
used to satisfy yard, court, other open space, or minimum lot area requirements or any other building.
B. Division of Zoning Lots. No improved zoning lot shall be divided into two (2) or more zoning lots unless all
improved zoning lots resulting from each division conform with all the applicable bulk regulations of the zoning
district in which the property is located. However, with respect to the resubdivision of improved zoning lots in R-4,
MFR-1, and MFR-2 Districts, side yard requirements shall not apply between attached dwelling units.
C. Location of Required Open Space. All yards, courts, and other open spaces allocated to a building or dwelling
group shall be located on the same zoning lot as such building or dwelling group.
D. Required Yards for Existing Buildings. No yards, now or hereafter provided for an existing building, shall
subsequently be reduced below, or further reduced below--if already less than--the minimum yard requirements of
the district in which it is located. (Also see Sections 19.07.0108 and 19.07.0109 of this Ordinance regarding
variances.)
E. Permitted Obstructions in Required Yards. The following are not considered obstructions when located in the
required yards specified:
1. In All Yards. Ramps for use by persons with disabilities; open terraces not more than four (4) feet above
the average level of the adjoining ground, but not including a permanently roofed-over terrace or porch;
awnings and canopies; uncovered stairs, steps, decks, or landings four (4) feet or less above grade--which
are necessary for access to a permitted building or for access to a zoning lot from a street or alley; and
which, if for access to a building, project six (6) feet or less into the yard and no closer than three (3) feet
from any lot line, architectural projections and chimneys projecting twenty-four (24) inches or less into the
yard; recreational equipment; non-mechanical laundry-drying equipment; arbors and trellises, landscaping,
essential services and utilities; and flag poles. Fences having a height of six (6) feet or less may be used to
locate property lines within the required side or rear yards in the residential districts. (Ord. 033, Series
2000, Part 1)
19- 2-3
2. In Front Yards. Cantilevered bay windows projecting two (2) feet or less into the front yard; overhanging
eaves and gutters projecting two (2) feet or less into the yard; within the R-1 District, on a lot which
was either recorded or included within a valid preliminary plat before April 17, 2000, any
building or building addition extending five (5) feet or less into the yard; within the R-4
District, on a lot which was either recorded or included within a valid preliminary plat before
April 17, 2000, any building or building addition extending ten (10) feet or less into the yard.
(Ord. 033, Series 2000, Part 1)
3. In Rear Yards. Accessory garages, sheds, tool rooms, and similar buildings or structures for domestic or
agricultural storage not less than five (5) feet from a rear yard lot line; balconies; breezeways and open
porches; cantilevered bay windows projecting two (2) feet or less into the yard; overhanging eaves and
gutters projecting two (2) feet or less into the yard; in the R-1 District, on a lot which was either recorded
or included within a valid preliminary plat before April 17, 2000, any building or building addition
extending five (5) feet or less into the yard. In any residential district, no accessory building shall be
constructed within ten (10) feet of a principal building on the same lot. (Also see Title 16 "Buildings and
Construction" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code for modifications.) (Ord. 033, Series 2000, Part 1)
4. In Side Yards. In the R-4 District, on a lot which was either recorded or included within a valid
preliminary plat before April 17, 2000, any building or building addition extending three (3) feet or less
into the yard. (Ord. 033, Series 2000, Part 1)
SECTION 19.02.0203 YARDS, GENERAL
Base setback lines are hereby established for all streets and highways in the Village of Grafton as follows, unless otherwise
specified by action of the Village Board:
A. Setbacks from Ultimate Street and Highway Right-of-Way Line. On all streets or highways for which the
ultimate width has been established by the Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan (or component thereof), the
Village Official Map, and/or subsequent amendments thereto to those documents, the base setback line shall be
located at such established ultimate street and/or highway right-of-way line as prescribed by this Ordinance.
Required setbacks shall be measured from the base setback line. (See Figure 19.02.0203(A).)
B. Corner Lot Setbacks. Corner lot setback requirements on a side street shall meet the requirements set forth in this
Ordinance. However, in no case shall a corner lot have a side set back on an abutting street of less than seventy-five
(75) percent of the required front yard setback on the frontage street
19- 2-4
Figure 19.02.0203(A)
SETBACKS FROM ULTIMATE STREET AND
HIGHWAY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE
SECTION 19.02.0204 ACCESS TO PUBLIC STREETS
Except as otherwise provided for herein, every building shall be constructed or erected upon a lot or parcel of land that abuts
no less than sixty (60) feet (forty (40) feet in the case of cul-de-sac bulbs only and not anywhere else on a cul-de-sac street)
upon a dedicated public street right-of-way.
SECTION 19.02.0205 LOT AREA AND DIMENSION
See Section 19.03.1003 for requirements affecting substandard lots of record existing at the time of the adoption of this
Ordinance. (Ord. 010, Series 2002, Part 1).
SECTION 19.02.0206 NUMBER OF BUILDINGS ON A ZONING LOT
All principal buildings shall be located on a zoning lot. Within the R-RE, R-1, R-S, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, and R-6 zoning
districts, only one (1) principal building shall be located, erected, or moved onto a lot. The Plan Commission may permit
more than one (1) principal building per lot in other Districts where more than one (1) principal building is needed for the
orderly development of the parcel. When additional structures are permitted, the Plan Commission may impose additional
yard requirements, floor area ratio limitations, residential density requirements, land use intensity requirements, landscaping
requirements, or parking requirements, or may require a minimum separation distance between principal buildings. (Ord.
015, Series 2015).
SECTION 19.02.0207 REDUCTION OR JOINT USE
No lot, yard, off-street parking area, building area, or other space shall be reduced in area or dimensions so as not to meet the
provisions of this Ordinance. No part of any lot, yard, parking area, or other space required for a structure or use shall be
used for any other structure or use not otherwise authorized by this Ordinance.
SECTION 19.02.0208 REZONING OF PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC AREAS
An area indicated on the Village of Grafton "Official Zoning Map" as a public park, public recreation area, public school site,
cemetery, or other similar public or semi-public open space, may not be used for any other purpose than that designated.
When the use of the specific area is ceased, it may be considered by the Village of Grafton Plan Commission and Village
Board for potential rezoning to a zoning district that is consistent with the land use district set forth for that area in the
Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan.
SECTION 19.02.0209 HAZARD PREVENTION PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
The hazard prevention performance standards set forth in Division 19.03.1100 of this Ordinance shall apply to all zoning
districts.
19- 2-5
SECTION 19.02.0210 EXISTING CONDITIONAL USES
When a use is classified as a "Conditional Use" under this Ordinance and exists as either a permitted use or conditional use at
the date of the adoption of this Ordinance, it shall be considered a legal "Conditional Use," without further action of the
Village Board, the Zoning Administrator, or the Zoning Board of Appeals. Any proposed changes in the existing operation
shall be subject to the "Conditional Use" procedures of this Ordinance as if such "Conditional Use" was being established
anew.
SECTION 19.02.0211 VIOLATIONS
It shall be unlawful to construct or use any structure, land, or water violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance. In case
of any violation, the Village Board, the Plan Commission, the Village Attorney, the Zoning Administrator, or any property
owner who would be specifically damaged by such violation may institute appropriate actions or proceedings to enjoin a
violation of this Ordinance.
SECTION 19.02.0212 MUNICIPALITIES AND STATE AGENCIES REGULATED
Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, counties, and other municipal corporations are required to
comply with this Ordinance and obtain all required permits. State agencies are required to comply if Section 13.48(13) of the
Wisconsin Statutes applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance, and repair of state highways and bridges by the
Wisconsin Department of Transportation are exempt from compliance when Section 30.12(4)(a) of the Wisconsin Statutes, as
amended, applies.
DIVISION 19.02.0300 OFFICIAL MAP
SECTION 19.02.0301 INTENT
It is the intent of the Village Board to establish an Official Map for the purpose of serving and promoting the public health,
safety, convenience, economy, orderliness and general welfare of the community: to further the orderly layout and use of
land; to stabilize the location of real property boundary lines; to insure proper legal descriptions and proper monumenting of
land; to facilitate adequate provision for transportation, parks, playgrounds and stormwater drainage; and to facilitate the
further subdivision of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land. (Ord. A-481-86 (part), 1986).
SECTION 19.02.0302 AUTHORITY
The ordinance codified in this Division is enacted under the authority granted by Section(s) 62.23(6) of the Wisconsin
Statutes. (Ord. A-481-86 (part), 1986).
SECTION 19.02.0303 OFFICIAL MAP
The Official Map shall show the location and extent of all platted and existing streets, high- ways, parkways and parks within
the corporate limits of the village of Grafton as heretofore laid out, adopted and established by law. There is established as
the Official Map of the village of Grafton, the map which accompanies and is made a part of the ordinance codified in this
Division. This map is designated as the "Official Map of the Village of Grafton," and all notations, references and other
information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this Division as though the matters and information thereon were fully
described herein. (Ord. A-481-86 (part), 1986).
SECTION 19.02.0304 CHANGES AND ADDITIONS
A. The Village Board may change or add to the Official Map so as to establish the exterior lines of, or widen, narrow,
extend or close any platted, existing, proposed or planned streets, highways, parkways, parks or playgrounds, and
waterways.
B. The Village Board shall refer any change or addition to the Official Map to the plan commission for review and
report thereon prior to adoption. The Plan Commission shall report its recommendation to the board within sixty
19- 2-6
days.
C. A public hearing of parties-in-interest and citizens before the Village Board shall be required before any changes or
additions to the Official Map are effective. A Class 2 notice of the hearing shall be required.
D. Changes and additions made by duly approved subdivision plats shall not require the public hearing if the changes
or additions do not affect any land outside the area being platted. (Ord. A-481-86 (part), 1986).
SECTION 19.02.0305 BUILDING PERMITS
A. For the purpose of preserving the integrity of the Official Map, a building permit shall be required for any structure
or part thereof that shall hereafter be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or
structurally altered. No permit shall hereafter be issued for any building in the bed of any existing or proposed
street, highway or parkway shown on the Official Map. No permit for the erection of any building shall be issued
unless a street, highway or parkway giving access to such proposed structure has been duly placed on the map.
B. The Building Inspector may require each applicant for a building permit to submit a plan, prepared and certified by a
registered land surveyor, showing accurately the location of any proposed building with reference to any street,
highway, or parkway shown on the Official Map. (Ord. A-481-86 (part), 1986).
SECTION 19.02.0306 MUNICIPAL IMPROVEMENTS
No public sewer or other municipal street utility or improvement shall be constructed in any street, highway or parkway
within the corporate limits of the Village of Grafton until such street, highway, or parkway is duly placed on the Official
Map. (Ord. A-481-86 (part), 1986).
SECTION 19.02.0307 APPEALS
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power to review any administrative decision of the building inspector to deny a
permit for the erection of a structure under this Division and to grant relief from the requirements of this Division under the
provisions of Sections 62.23(6)(d), (f), and (g) of the Wisconsin Statutes. (Ord. A-481-86 (part), 1986).
SECTION 19.02.0308 CERTIFIED COPY OF MAP
There shall be a certified copy of the Official Map kept in the office of the Village Clerk and it shall be available for
inspection by any interested person during regular office hours. The certified copy shall bear on its face a certification that it
is a true copy of the Official Map described in and accompanying the ordinance codified in this Division and shall show the
date of adoption of this Division and shall be signed by the village president and countersigned by the Village Clerk.
Thereafter no change or addition to the Official Map shall become effective until indicated on the certified copy of the
Official Map. (Ord. A-481-86 (part), 1986).
SECTION 19.02.0309 MAP TO BE FILED WITH REGISTER OF DEEDS
The Village Clerk shall be responsible immediately upon adoption of the Official Map or any amendment thereto for
recording a true copy of the amended Official Map with the register of deeds of the county of Ozaukee, Wisconsin. (Ord. A-
481-86 (part), 1986).
SECTION 19.02.0310 ENFORCEMENT
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector and the chief of police to enforce the provisions of this Division. (Ord. A-481-
86 (part), 1986).
19- 2-7
SECTION 19.02.0311 PENALTIES
A. Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of this Division shall upon conviction
thereof, forfeit not more than two hundred dollars and not less than fifty dollars and cost of prosecution for each
violation, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail until payment
thereof but not exceeding thirty days.
B. No damages shall be allowed for the taking by any governmental agency, for street, highway and parkway purposes,
any building erected in violation of this Division. (Ord. A-481-86 (part), 1986).
19- 0
PART 3:
ZONING DISTRICTS: DISTRICT ESTABLISHMENT,
DIMENSIONAL, AND USE REGULATIONS
DIVISION 19.03.0100 ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAPS
SECTION 19.03.0101 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
To carry out the purpose and provisions of this Ordinance, the Village of Grafton is hereby divided into the
following zoning districts:
Residential Districts:
R-RE Rural Estate Single-Family Residential District
R-E Estate Single-Family Residential District
R-1 Suburban Estate Single-Family Residential District
R-S Suburban Single-Family Residential District
R-2 Single-Family Residential District
R-3 Urban Single-Family Residential District
R-4 Duplex/Townhouse Residential District
R-5 Suburban Two-Family Residential District
R-6 Urban Two-Family Residential District
MFR-1 Medium Density Multiple-Family Residential District
MFR-2 Low Density Multiple-Family Residential District
Business Districts:
CBD Central Business District
C-1 Neighborhood Business District
C-2 Community Business District
C-3 Commercial Service Business District
C-4 Freeway Interchange Business District
O Office District
BP Business Park District
Industrial Districts:
M-1 Industrial District
PID Planned Industrial District
Public and Semi-Public Districts:
I Institutional District
PR Park and Recreation District
Agricultural Districts:
A-1 Prime Agriculture District
A-2 Agriculture District
A-3 Agricultural Holding District
Special Districts:
PUD Planned Unit Development Districts
HPO Historic Preservation Overlay District
19- 1
SECTION 19.03.0102 ZONING DISTRICT MAPS
The location and boundaries of the districts established by this Ordinance are set forth in the Official Zoning Map,
dated April 3, 2000 and as amended, which is incorporated herein and hereby made a part of this Ordinance. The
Official Zoning Map, with everything shown thereon, and all amendments thereto, shall be as much a part of this
Ordinance as though fully set forth and described herein.
SECTION 19.03.0103 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
When uncertainty exists with respect to boundaries of the various districts shown on the zoning maps, the following
rules shall apply:
A. General Location of Zoning District Boundaries.
1. Zoning Boundary Determination. The zoning district boundaries are corporate limits; U.S.
Public Land Survey lines; lot or property lines; centerlines of street, highways, alleys, easements,
and railroad rights-of-way or such lines extended; or stream unless otherwise shown. Distances
not specifically shown on the Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the Zoning Map.
2. Zoning Boundary Determination for Approximate Boundaries. Where the designation of the
Official Zoning Map shows that various zoning districts are approximately bounded by a street,
alley, railroad, lot line, or stream, such lot line or the centerline of such street, alley, or railroad
right-of-way, or centerline of the main channel of such stream, said approximate boundaries shall
be construed to be the zoning district boundary line.
3. Split Zoning of Newly Created Lots Not Allowed. The split zoning of any newly created lot or
parcel into more than one (1) zoning district shall not be allowed except as may be permitted when
the HPO District; the FW, FF, and GFP Districts (under the provisions of Title 21 "Floodplain
Zoning of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code); and, the shoreland-wetland district (under the
provisions of Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code).
B. Zoning District Boundary Lines on Unsubdivided Property. In un-subdivided property, the location of
the zoning district boundary lines shown on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by using the scale
on such map or in the case of flood land boundaries shall be determined by using flood profiles and
accompanying hydrologic and hydraulic engineering data, or shall be according to the dimensions shown
on the map measured at right angles from the centerline of the street or highway, and the length of frontage
shall be according to dimensions shown on the map from section, quarter-section, or division lines, or
centerlines of streets, highways, or railroad rights-of-way unless otherwise shown.
SECTION 19.03.0104 ZONING OF STREETS, ALLEYS, PUBLIC-WAYS, WATERWAYS, AND
RAILROAD RIGHTS-OF-WAY
All streets, alleys, public-ways, waterways, and railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall
be deemed to be in the same zoning district as the property immediately abutting upon such alleys, streets, publicways,
waterways, and railroad rights-of-way. Where the centerline of a street, alley, public-way, waterway, or
railroad right-of-way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such areas, unless otherwise specifically
designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such centerline.
SECTION 19.03.0105 ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND
Any additions to the incorporated area of the Village of Grafton, resulting from disconnections from incorporated
areas in Ozaukee County, annexations from unincorporated areas in Ozaukee County, or otherwise, shall be
automatically classified in the A-3 District on a temporary basis until otherwise classified by amendment. Upon
annexation, the existing use of the annexed property shall be considered a permitted use until permanent zoning is
established by the Village Board. All land annexed to the Village shall meet Village improvement standards as
determined by the Village Board.
19- 2
DIVISION 19.03.0200 RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
This Division sets forth detailed descriptions of the residential zoning districts and their respective dimensional and
bulk regulations, requirements, and design standards. The various "Open Space Subdivision" options indicated
within some residential zoning districts are "open space ratio," or OSR, driven. While the overall maximum gross
density stays essentially the same within each residential zoning district for each option within a specific residential
zoning district, as the minimum OSR increases the maximum permitted net density increases. Under the
"Conventional Subdivision" and other options presented for each residential zoning district, the site intensity and
capacity calculations, as well as the natural resource protection standards and guidelines set forth in Divisions
19.03.0500 and 19.04.0100 of this Ordinance, shall be followed. The residential zoning districts are generally
organized into a residential density hierarchy.
19- 3
SECTION 19.03.0201 R-RE RURAL ESTATE SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
A. District Intent. The R-RE District is intended to provide for rural estate type housing on very large lots as
set forth in the Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan and components thereof. It preserves and enhances
the rural estate character of the district and surrounding areas and the attractiveness associated with such
areas. The R-RE District may also be used as a transitional district located between districts of higher and
lower intensity levels such as the A-3 and R-E Districts. For existing lots of record with existing dwelling
units located thereon and which lots of record and dwelling units are existing at the time of the adoption of
this Ordinance, the R-RE District is intended to be served by on-site soil absorption sewage disposal
systems, holding tanks, and/or private wells on an interim basis until such time as public sanitary sewer
service and/or public water supply facilities are made available. Any lots created in the R-RE District after
the adoption of this Ordinance shall be served by public sanitary sewer service and public water supply
facilities if available.
B. District Standards. The R-RE District is further intended to have the development standards as set forth
in Table 19.03.0201. Those developments served by on-site sewage disposal systems must meet all
requirements set forth under Section 19.02.0103(B)(3)(b) of this Ordinance.
C. Permitted, Accessory, and Conditional Uses. See Section 19.03.0602, Division 19.03.0700, Section
19.03.0702, and Section 19.03.0802 of this Ordinance.
19- 4
Table 19.03.0201
R-RE RURAL ESTATE SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Use R1 R2 R3 R4
Open Space Ratio (OSR) 0 0.65 0.73 0.81
Gross Density (GD) 0.294 0.300 0.297 0.293
Net Density (ND) 0.294 0.897 1.179 1.718
Minimum Lot Area (s.f.) 130,680 40,000 30,000 20,000
Minimum Lot Width at
Setback Line (feet) 250 150 125
135-corner
100
110-corner
Minimum Front Yard (feet) 100 60 50 45
Minimum Side Yard (feet) 30 20 15 10
Minimum Side Yard
on Corner Lot (feet) 75 45 40 35
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 30 30 30 30
Minimum Shore Yard (feet) 75 (c) 75 (c) 75 (c) 75 (c)
Maximum Lot Coverage
(maximum percent of lot area) 0.075 0.1 0.12 0.15
Minimum Total Living Area per Dwelling Unit (D.U.)
1-Story D.U. ?3 Bedr ooms 1,600 s.f. 1,600 s.f. 1,600 s.f. 1,600 s.f.
1-Story D.U. >3 Bedrooms 250 s.f. (a) 250 s.f. (a) 250 s.f. (a) 250 s.f. (a)
1-Story D.U. if Basement is
< 600 Square Feet 250 s.f. (b) 250 s.f. (b) 250 s.f. (b) 250 s.f. (b)
Multi-Story D.U. ?3 Bedrooms 1,900 s.f.-total
1,100-1st floor
1,900 s.f.-total
1,100 s.f.-1st
floor
1,900 s.f.-total
1,100 s.f.-1st
floor
1,900 s.f.-total
1,100 s.f.-1st
floor
Multi-Story D.U. >3 Bedrooms 100 s.f. (a) 100 s.f. (a) 100 s.f. (a) 100 s.f. (a)
Multi-Story D.U. if Basement is
< 600 Square Feet 250 s.f. (b) 250 s.f. (b) 250 s.f. (b) 250 s.f. (b)
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structure (stories/ft.) 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5
Accessory Structure (stories/ft.) 1.0/15 1.0/15 1.0/15 1.0/15
(a) Add to minimum required building floor area for each bedroom greater than three (3)
(b) Add to minimum required floor area for each dwelling unit that has a basement less than 600 s.f.
(Ord. 008, Series 2001, Part 1)
(c) Subject to Section 22.04.070 of Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the Village of Grafton
Municipal Code.
19- 5
SECTION 19.03.0202 R-E ESTATE SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
A. District Intent. The R-E District is intended to provide for low density single-family estate type housing on
large lots as set forth in the Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan and components thereof. The R-E
District regulations are intended to preserve and enhance an estate character of surrounding areas and the
attractiveness associated with such areas. The options in the R-E District promote open space and natural
resource base protection. The R-E District is intended to be served by public sanitary sewer and water
supply facilities if available.
B. District Standards. The R-E District is further intended to have the development standards as set forth in
Table 19.03.0202.
C. Permitted, Accessory, and Conditional Uses. See Section 19.03.0602, Division 19.03.0700, Section
19.03.0702, and Section 19.03.0802 of this Ordinance.
19- 6
Table 19.03.0202
R-E ESTATE SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Type of Standard
Permitted Use
"Conventional
Subdivision"
Conditional Use "Open Space
Subdivision"
Option 1 Option 2 Option 3
Minimum Open Space Ratio and Maximum Density
Open Space Ratio (OSR) 0 0.24 0.47 0.57
Gross Density (GD) 0.897 0.891 0.892 0.902
Net Density (ND) 0.897 1.179 1.718 2.167
Lot Dimensional Requirements
Minimum Lot Area (s.f.) 40,000 30,000 20,000 15,000
Minimum Lot Width at Setback
Line (feet) 150 125
135-corner
100
110-corner
100
110-corner
Minimum Front Yard (feet) 60 50 45 40
Minimum Side Yard (feet) 20 15 10 10
Minimum Side Yard
on Corner Lot (feet) 45 40 35 35
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 30 30 30 30
Minimum Shore Yard (feet) 75 (c) 75 (c) 75 (c) 75 (c)
Maximum Lot Coverage
(maximum percent of lot area) 0.10 0.12 0.15 0.20
Minimum Total Living Area per Dwelling Unit (D.U.)
1-Story D.U. ?3 Bedr ooms 1,600 s.f. 1,600 s.f. 1,600 s.f. 1,600 s.f.
1-Story D.U. >3 Bedrooms 250 s.f. (a) 250 s.f. (a) 250 s.f. (a) 250 s.f. (a)
1-Story D.U. if Basement is
< 600 Square Feet 250 s.f. (b) 250 s.f. (b) 250 s.f. (b) 250 s.f. (b)
Multi-Story D.U. ?3 Bedr ooms 1,900 s.f.-total
1,100-1st floor
1,900 s.f.-total
1,100 s.f.-1st
floor
1,900 s.f.-total
1,100 s.f.-1st
floor
1,900 s.f.-total
1,100 s.f.-1st
floor
Multi-Story D.U. >3 Bedrooms 100 s.f. (a) 100 s.f. (a) 100 s.f. (a) 100 s.f. (a)
Multi-Story D.U. if Basement is
< 600 Square Feet 250 s.f. (b) 250 s.f. (b) 250 s.f. (b) 250 s.f. (b)
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structure (stories/ft.) 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5
Accessory Structure (stories/ft.) 1.0/15 1.0/15 1.0/15 1.0/15
(a) Add to minimum required building floor area for each bedroom greater than three (3).
(b) Add to minimum required floor area for each dwelling unit that has a basement less than 600 s.f.
(Ord. 008, Series 2001, Part 1)
(c) Subject to Section 22.04.070 of Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the Village of Grafton
Municipal Code.
19- 7
SECTION 19.03.0203 R-1 SUBURBAN ESTATE SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
A. District Intent. The R-1 District is intended to provide for the continuance of medium density single-family
suburban estate lots as set forth in the Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan and components thereof. It is
further intended to be used to protect the character of building bulk in established suburban estate residential
neighborhoods and subdivisions. The options in this district promote open space and natural resource base
protection. The R-1 District is intended to be served by public sanitary sewer and water supply facilities.
B. District Standards. The R-1 District is further intended to have the development standards as set forth in
Table 19.03.0203.
C. Permitted, Accessory, and Conditional Uses. See Section 19.03.0602, Division 19.03.0700, Section
19.03.0702, and Section 19.03.0802 of this Ordinance.
19- 8
Table 19.03.0203
R-1 SUBURBAN ESTATE SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Type of Standard
Permitted Use
"Conventional
Subdivision"
Conditional Use "Open Space
Subdivision"
Option 1 Option 2 Option 3
Minimum Open Space Ratio and Maximum Density
Open Space Ratio (OSR) 0 0.14 0.27 0.39
Gross Density (GD) 1.909 1.902 1.902 1.904
Net Density (ND) 1.909 2.215 2.623 3.165
Lot Dimensional Requirements
Minimum Lot Area (s.f.) 18,000 15,000 12,500 10,000
Minimum Lot Width at Setback
Line (feet)
100
110-corner
100
110-corner
90
100-corner
75
85-corner
Minimum Front Yard (feet) 40 35 35 30
Minimum Side Yard (feet) 8 / 10 one side 8 / 10 one side 8 / 10 one side 8 / 10 one side
Minimum Side Yard
on Corner Lot (feet) 35 35 35 30
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 30 30 30 25
Minimum Shore Yard (feet) 75 (c) 75 (c) 75 (c) 75 (c)
Maximum Lot Coverage
(maximum percent of lot area) 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.30
Minimum Total Living Area per Dwelling Unit (D.U.)
1-Story D.U. ?3 Bedr ooms 1,600 s.f. 1,600 s.f. 1,600 s.f. 1,600 s.f.
1-Story D.U. >3 Bedrooms 250 s.f. (a) 250 s.f. (a) 250 s.f. (a) 250 s.f. (a)
1-Story D.U. if Basement is
< 600 Square Feet 250 s.f. (b) 250 s.f. (b) 250 s.f. (b) 250 s.f. (b)
Multi-Story D.U. ?3 Bedr ooms 1,900 s.f.-total
1,100 s.f.-1st
floor
1,900 s.f.-total
1,100 s.f.-1st
floor
1,900 s.f.-total
1,100 s.f.-1st
floor
1,900 s.f.-total
1,100 s.f.-1st
floor
Multi-Story D.U. >3 Bedrooms 100 s.f. (a) 100 s.f. (a) 100 s.f. (a) 100 s.f. (a)
Multi-Story D.U. if Basement is
< 600 Square Feet 250 s.f. (b) 250 s.f. (b) 250 s.f. (b) 250 s.f. (b)
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structure (stories/ft.) 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5
Accessory Structure (stories/ft.) 1.0/15 1.0/15 1.0/15 1.0/15
(a) Add to minimum required building floor area for each bedroom greater than three (3)
(b) Add to minimum required floor area for each dwelling unit that has a basement less than 600 s.f
(Ord. 008, Series 2001, Part 1).
(c) Subject to Section 22.04.070 of Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the Village of Grafton
Municipal Code.
19- 9
SECTION 19.03.0204 R-S SUBURBAN SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
A. District Intent. The R-S District is established recognizing the importance of providing suburban size
single-family residential areas and lots with larger minimum building bulk requirements than the R-2
District as set forth in the Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan. The options in the R-S District promote
open space and natural resource base protection. The R-S District is intended to be served by public sanitary
sewer and water supply facilities.
B. District Standards. The R-S District is further intended to have the development standards as set forth in
Table 19.03.0204.
C. Permitted, Accessory, and Conditional Uses. See Section 19.03.0602, Division 19.03.0700, Section
19.03.0702, and Section 19.03.0802 of this Ordinance.
19- 10
Table 19.03.0204
R-S SUBURBAN SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Type of Standard
Permitted Use
"Conventional
Subdivision"
Conditional Use "Open
Space Subdivision"
Option 1 Option 2
Minimum Open Space Ratio and Maximum Density
Open Space Ratio (OSR) 0 0.14 0.30
Gross Density (GD) 2.190 2.195 2.197
Net Density (ND) 2.190 2.556 3.165
Lot Dimensional Requirements
Minimum Lot Area (s.f.) 15,000 12,500 10,000
Minimum Lot Width at Setback Line (feet) 95
110-corner
90
105-corner
75
100-corner
Minimum Front Yard (feet) 35 30 30
Minimum Side Yard (feet) 10 10 10
Minimum Side Yard
on Corner Lot (feet) 30 35 30
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 30 30 25
Minimum Shore Yard (feet) 75 (a) 75 (a) 75 (a)
Maximum Lot Coverage
(maximum percent of lot area) 0.20 0.25 0.30
Minimum Total Living Area per Dwelling Unit (D.U.)
1-Story D.U. ?3 Bedr ooms 1,600 s.f. 1,600 s.f. 1,600 s.f.
1-Story D.U. >3 Bedrooms 250 s.f. (b) 250 s.f. (b) 250 s.f. (b)
1-Story D.U. if Basement is
< 600 Square Feet 250 s.f. (c) 250 s.f. (c) 250 s.f. (c)
Multi-Story D.U. ?3 Bedr ooms 1,900 s.f.-total
1,050 s.f.-1st
floor
1,900 s.f.-total
1,050 s.f.-1st
floor
1,900 s.f.-total
1,050 s.f.-1st
floor
Multi-Story D.U. >3 Bedrooms 100 s.f. (b) 100 s.f. (b) 100 s.f. (b)
Multi-Story D.U. if Basement is < 600 Square Feet 250 s.f. (c) 250 s.f. (c) 250 s.f. (c)
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structure (stories/ft.) 2.5 2.5 2.5
Accessory Structure (stories/ft.) 1.0/15 1.0/15 1.0/15
(a) Subject to Section 22.04.070 of Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the
Village of Grafton Municipal Code.
(b) Add to minimum required floor area for each dwelling unit which has a
basement less than 600 s.f. (Ord. 008, Series 2001, Part 1)
(c) Add to minimum required building floor area for each bedroom in excess of
three (3).
19- 11
SECTION 19.03.0205 R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
A. District Intent. The R-2 District is intended to permit the continuation of the existing pattern of residential
development in a manner that is consistent with the Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan and components
thereof. The R-2 District is also intended to accommodate existing developed areas of the Village which
have been zoned under earlier R-2 District zoning requirements. The R-2 District is intended to be served
by public sanitary sewer and water supply facilities.
B. District Standards. The R-2 District is further intended to have the development standards as set forth in
Table 19.03.0205.
C. Permitted, Accessory, and Conditional Uses. See Section 19.03.0602, Division 19.03.0700, Section
19.03.0702, and Section 19.03.0802 of this Ordinance.
19- 12
Table 19.03.0205
R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Type of Standard
Permitted Use
"Conventional
Subdivision"
Minimum Open Space Ratio and Maximum Density
Open Space Ratio (OSR) 0.00
Gross Density (GD) 3.165
Net Density (ND) 3.165
Lot Dimensional Requirements
Minimum Lot Area (s.f.) 10,000
Minimum Lot Width at Setback Line (feet) 75
100-corner
Minimum Front Yard (feet) 30
Minimum Side Yard (feet) 6 / 10 one side
Minimum Side Yard
on Corner Lot (feet) 30
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 25
Minimum Shore Yard (feet) 75 (c)
Maximum Lot Coverage
(maximum percent of lot area) 0.30
Minimum Total Living Area per Dwelling Unit (D.U.) (d)
1-Story D.U. ?3 Bedr ooms 1,250 s.f.
1-Story D.U. >3 Bedrooms 250 s.f. (a)
1-Story D.U. if Basement is
< 600 Square Feet 250 s.f. (b)
Multi-Story D.U. ?3 Bedr ooms 1,550 s.f.-total
950 s.f.-1st floor
Multi-Story D.U. >3 Bedrooms 100 s.f. (a)
Multi-Story D.U. if Basement is < 600 Square Feet 250 s.f. (b)
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structure (stories/ft.) 2.5
Accessory Structure (stories/ft.) 1.0/15
(a) Add to minimum required building floor area for each bedroom in excess of
three (3)
(b) Add to minimum required floor area for each dwelling unit which has a
basement less than 600 s.f. (Ord. 008, Series 2001, Part 1)
(c) Subject to Section 22.04.070 of Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the
Village of Grafton Municipal Code.
(d) Lots which were developed with a residence as of the effective date of this
Ordinance shall not be subject to 'Minimum Total Living Area per Dwelling Unit'
requirements of this table.
19- 13
SECTION 19.03.0206 R-3 URBAN SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
A. District Intent. The R-3 District is intended to provide for single-family residential development on lots of
record existing at the time of the adoption of the Ordinance codified under this title and already zoned in the
R-3 District under the former zoning ordinance. The R-3 District is also intended for limited new
development areas where small-lot single-family residential development is compatible with the
recommendations of the Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan and with the character of the surrounding
area. The R-3 District is intended to be served by public sanitary sewer and water supply facilities.
B. District Standards. The R-3 District is further intended to have the development standards as set forth in
Table 19.03.0206.
C. Permitted, Accessory, and Conditional Uses. See Section 19.03.0602, Division 19.03.0700, Section
19.03.0702, and Section 19.03.0802 of this Ordinance.
19- 14
Table 19.03.0206
R-3 URBAN SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Type of Standard
Permitted Use--
Existing
Subdivision
Permitted Use--New
"Conventional
Subdivision"
Minimum Open Space Ratio and Maximum Density
Open Space Ratio (OSR) 0.00 0.00
Gross Density (GD) 4.471 3.806
Net Density (ND) 4.471 3.806
Lot Dimensional Requirements
Minimum Lot Area (s.f.) 7,000 8,000
Minimum Lot Width at Setback Line (feet) 55
75-corner
70
80-corner
Minimum Front Yard (feet) 30 30
Minimum Side Yard (feet) 5 / 10 on one side for
new lots
5 / 10 on one side for
new lots
Minimum Side Yard
on Corner Lot (feet) 15 30
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 25 25
Minimum Shore Yard (feet) 75 (c) 75 (c)
Maximum Lot Coverage
(maximum percent of lot area) 0.50 0.40
Minimum Total Living Area per Dwelling Unit (D.U.) (d)
1-Story D.U. ?3 Bedr ooms 1,250 s.f. 1,250 s.f.
1-Story D.U. >3 Bedrooms 250 s.f. (a) 250 s.f. (a)
1-Story D.U. if Basement is
< 600 Square Feet 250 s.f. (b) 250 s.f. (b)
Multi-Story D.U. ?3 Bedr ooms 1,550 s.f.-total
950 s.f.-1st
floor
1,550 s.f.-total
950 s.f.-1st
floor
Multi-Story D.U. >3 Bedrooms 100 s.f. (a) 100 s.f. (a)
Multi-Story D.U. if Basement is < 600 Square Feet 250 s.f. (b) 250 s.f. (b)
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structure (stories/ft.) 2.5 2.5
Accessory Structure (stories/ft.) 1.0/15 1.0/15
(a) Add to minimum required building floor area for each bedroom in excess of three (3).
(b) Add to minimum required floor area for each dwelling unit which has a basement less than 600
s.f. (Ord. 008, Series 2001, Part 1)
(c) Subject to Section 22.04.070 of Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the Village of Grafton
Municipal Code.
(d) Lots which were developed with a residence as of the effective date of this Ordinance shall not
be subject to 'Minimum Total Living Area per Dwelling Unit' requirements of this table.
19- 15
SECTION 19.03.0207 R-4 DUPLEX/TOWNHOUSE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
A. District Intent. The R-4 District is intended to establish and preserve two-family residential dwelling
districts and low density townhouse areas in the Village. The R-4 District permits two-family and attached
townhouse residential development in a manner that is consistent with the Village of Grafton
Comprehensive Plan and components thereof. The R-4 District is further intended to provide affordable
housing opportunities for moderate income residents, employees of local businesses, and residents on fixed
incomes, and other persons preferring two-family residential and attached townhouse dwelling living. The
development options in the R-4 District promote open space and natural resource base protection. The R-4
District may be used as a transitional district between the less dense single-family residential zoning districts
and the higher density MFR-1, MFR-2, and multiple-family PUD Districts. The R-4 District is intended to
be served by public sanitary sewer and water supply facilities.
B. District Standards. The R-4 District is further intended to have the development standards as set forth in
Table 19.03.0207. Attached dwelling units in the R-4 District shall not exceed six (6) dwelling units per
structure.
C. Permitted, Accessory, and Conditional Uses. See Section 19.03.0602, Division 19.03.0700, Section
19.03.0702, and Section 19.03.0802 of this Ordinance.
19- 16
Table 19.03.0207
R-4 DUPLEX/TOWNHOUSE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Type of Standard
Permitted Use
"Conventional
Subdivision"
Conditional Use
"Open Space
Subdivision"
Option 1
Minimum Open Space Ratio and Maximum Density
Open Space Ratio (OSR) 0 0.20
Gross Density (GD) 2.09 (a) 2.00 (a)
Net Density (ND) 2.09 (a) 2.569 (a)
Lot Dimensional Requirements
Minimum Lot Area (s.f.) 15,000 12,000
Minimum Lot Width at Setback Line (feet) 115 100
Minimum Front Yard (feet) 40 30
Minimum Side Yard (feet) 13 10
Minimum Side Yard on Corner Lot (feet) 30 30
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 25 25
Minimum Shore Yard (feet) 75 (d) 75 (d)
Maximum Lot Coverage
(maximum percent of lot area) 0.30 0.35
Minimum Total Living Area per Dwelling Unit (D.U.) (d)
1-Story D.U. ?3 Bedr ooms 1,150 s.f. 1,150 s.f.
1-Story D.U. >3 Bedrooms 150 s.f. (b) 150 s.f. (b)
1-Story D.U. if Basement is
< 600 Square Feet 150 s.f. (c) 150 s.f. (c)
Multi-Story D.U. ?3 Bedr ooms 1,150 s.f. 1,150 s.f.
Multi-Story D.U. >3 Bedrooms 150 s.f. (c) 150 s.f. (c)
Multi-Story D.U. if Basement is < 600 Square Feet 150 s.f. (c) 150 s.f. (c)
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structure (stories/ft.) 2.5 2.5
Accessory Structure (stories/ft.) 1.0/15 1.0/15
(a) In terms of number of lots only. To arrive at maximum dwelling unit density, multiply the
number indicated by two (2).
(b) Add to minimum required building floor area for each bedroom in excess of three (3).
(c) Add to minimum required floor area for each dwelling unit which has a basement less than 600
s.f. (ord. 008, Series 2001, Part 1)
(d) Subject to Section 22.04.070 of Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the Village of Grafton
Municipal Code.
(d) Lots which were developed with a residence as of the effective date of this Ordinance shall not
be subject to 'Minimum Total Living Area per Dwelling Unit' requirements of this table.
19- 17
SECTION 19.03.0208 R-5 SUBURBAN TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
A. District Intent. The R-5 District is intended to preserve small lot existing two-family residential dwelling
districts in the Village. The R-5 District permits two-family residential development in a manner that is
consistent with the Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan and components thereof. The R-5 District is
further intended to provide affordable housing opportunities for moderate income residents, employees of
local businesses, and residents on fixed incomes, and other persons preferring two-family residential
dwelling living. The R-5 District is not intended to be used in any new areas of the Village or areas of the
Village not designated within the R-5 District at the time of the adoption of the Ordinance codified under
this title. The R-5 District is intended to be served by public sanitary sewer and water supply facilities.
B. District Standards. The R-5 District is further intended to have the development standards as set forth in
Table 19.03.0208.
C. Permitted, Accessory, and Conditional Uses. See Section 19.03.0602, Division 19.03.0700, Section
19.03.0702, and Section 19.03.0802 of this Ordinance.
19- 18
Table 19.03.0208
R-5 SUBURBAN TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Type of Standard
Permitted Use
"Conventional
Subdivision"
Minimum Open Space Ratio and Maximum Density
Open Space Ratio (OSR) 0
Gross Density (GD) 3.068 (a)
Net Density (ND) 3.068 (a)
Lot Dimensional Requirements
Minimum Lot Area (s.f.) 10,000
Minimum Lot Width at Setback Line (feet) 85
Minimum Front Yard (feet)
30
Minimum Side Yard (feet) 8; however at least one (1)
side yard shall be 10
Minimum Side Yard
on Corner Lot (feet) 30
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 25
Minimum Shore Yard (feet) 75 (d)
Maximum Lot Coverage
(maximum percent of lot area) 0.30
Minimum Total Living Area per Dwelling Unit (D.U.) (e)
1-Story D.U. ?3 Bedr ooms 1,150 s.f.
1-Story D.U. >3 Bedrooms 150 s.f. (b)
1-Story D.U. if Basement is
< 600 Square Feet 150 s.f. (c)
Multi-Story D.U. ?3 Bedr ooms 1,150 s.f.
Multi-Story D.U. >3 Bedrooms 150 s.f. (b)
Multi-Story D.U. if Basement is < 600 Square Feet 150 s.f. (c)
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structure (stories/ft.) 2.5
Accessory Structure (stories/ft.) 1.0/15
(a) In terms of number of lots only. To arrive at maximum dwelling unit density, multiply the
number indicated by two (2).
(b) Add to minimum required building floor area for each bedroom in excess of three (3).
(c) Add to minimum required floor area for each dwelling unit which has a basement less than 600
s.f. (Ord. 008, Series 2001, Part 1)
(d) Subject to Section 22.04.070 of Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the Village of Grafton
Municipal Code.
(e) Lots which were developed with a residence as of the effective date of this Ordinance shall not
be subject to 'Minimum Total Living Area per Dwelling Unit' requirements of this table.
19- 19
SECTION 19.03.0209 R-6 URBAN TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
A. District Intent. The R-6 District is intended to preserve small lot, existing two-family residential dwelling
districts in the Village. The R-6 District permits two-family residential development in a manner that is
consistent with the Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan and components thereof. The R-6 District is
further intended to provide affordable housing opportunities for moderate income residents, employees of
local businesses, and residents on fixed incomes, and other persons preferring two-family residential
dwelling living. The R-6 District is not intended to be used in any undeveloped areas of the Village. This
District is intended to be applied only to existing areas that either abut or contain an intermix or
incompatible land uses and which may be in need of redevelopment and/or revitalization. The R-6 District
shall only be applied to areas of development existing as of the effective date of the Ordinance codified in
this title. The R-6 District is intended to be served by public sanitary sewer and water supply facilities.
B. District Standards. The R-6 District is further intended to have the development standards as set forth in
Table 19.03.0209.
C. Permitted, Accessory, and Conditional Uses. See Section 19.03.0602, Division 19.03.0700, Section
19.03.0702, and Section 19.03.0802 of this Ordinance.
19- 20
Table 19.03.0209
R-6 URBAN TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Type of Standard
Permitted Use
"Conventional
Subdivision"
Minimum Open Space Ratio and Maximum Density
Open Space Ratio (OSR) 0
Gross Density (GD) 3.86 (a)
Net Density (ND) 3.86 (a)
Lot Dimensional Requirements
Minimum Lot Area (s.f.) 8,000
Minimum Lot Width at Setback Line (feet) 66
Minimum Front Yard (feet) 25
Minimum Side Yard (feet) 8; however at least one (1)
side yard shall be 10
Minimum Side Yard
on Corner Lot (feet) 30
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 25
Minimum Shore Yard (feet) 75 (d)
Maximum Lot Coverage
(maximum percent of lot area) 0.50
Minimum Total Living Area per Dwelling Unit (D.U.) (e)
1-Story D.U. ?3 Bedr ooms 1,150 s.f.
1-Story D.U. >3 Bedrooms 150 s.f. (b)
1-Story D.U. if Basement is
< 600 Square Feet 150 s.f. (c)
Multi-Story D.U. ?3 Bedr ooms 1,150 s.f.
Multi-Story D.U. >3 Bedrooms 150 s.f. (b)
Multi-Story D.U. if Basement is < 600 Square Feet 150 s.f. (c)
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structure (stories/ft.) 2.5
Accessory Structure (stories/ft.) 1.0/15
(a) In terms of number of lots only. To arrive at maximum dwelling unit density, multiply the
number indicated by two (2).
(b) Add to minimum required building floor area for each bedroom in excess of three (3).
(c) Add to minimum required floor area and first floor area for each dwelling unit which has a
basement less than 600 s.f.
(d) Subject to Section 22.04.070 of Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the Village of Grafton
Municipal Code.
(e) Lots which were developed with a residence as of the effective date of this Ordinance shall not
be subject to 'Minimum Total Living Area per Dwelling Unit' requirements of this table.
19- 21
SECTION 19.03.0210 MFR-1 MEDIUM DENSITY MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
A. District Intent. The MFR-1 District is intended to establish and preserve medium density, multi-family
residential districts in the Village. The MFR-1 District permits medium density, urban type, multi-family
residential development in a way that is consistent with the Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan and
components thereof. Areas of open space are to be provided in the MFR-1 District. The MFR-1 District
may be used as a transitional district between the less dense R-4, R-5, and R-6 Districts and other higher
intensity commercial or institutional zoning districts with the provision of adequate landscape bufferyards.
The MFR-1 District is the most dense of the residential district types. The MFR-1 District is intended to be
served by public sanitary sewer and water supply facilities.
B. District Standards. The MFR-1 District is further intended to have the development standards as set forth
in Table 19.03.0210A.
C. Permitted, Accessory, and Conditional Uses. See Section 19.03.0602, Division 19.03.0700, Section
19.03.0702, and Section 19.03.0802 of this Ordinance.
D. Minimum Total Living Area Per Dwelling Unit in Multiple Family Dwellings. Within the MFR-1
District, the minimum total living area for a one (1) bedroom dwelling unit in a multiple-family dwelling
shall be six hundred fifty (650) square feet floor area, with one hundred fifty (150) additional square feet required for
each bedroom over one (1) bedroom. Dens, libraries, studies, or other similar rooms within a dwelling unit
that can potentially be used as a bedroom shall be considered and counted as a bedroom.
19- 22
Table 19.03.0210A
MFR-1 MEDIUM DENSITY MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Type of Standard Permitted Use:
Maximum Two
Attached D.U.s
(Two-Family
Structures)
Permitted Use: Multiple-
Family Attached
Dwelling Units with
More Than Two D.U.s
per Structure
Conditional Use:
Multiple-Family
Attached Dwelling
Units with More Than
Two D.U.s per
Structure
Minimum Open Space Ratio and Maximum Density
Open Space Ratio (OSR) 0.00 0.25 0.35
Gross Density (GD) 5.00 8.00 11.00
Net Density (ND) 5.00 8.00 14.50
Lot Dimensional Requirements
Minimum Lot Area (s.f.) 6,000 per D.U. 6,000 per D.U. 4,000 per D.U.
Minimum Lot Width at Setback
Line (feet) 60 & 75-corner 125 125
Minimum Front Yard (feet) 25 30 (c) 35 (c)
Minimum Side Yard (feet) 10 20 (d) 20 (d)
Minimum Side Yard
on Corner Lot (feet) 15 30 30
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 25-D.U. & 10-garage 50 50
Minimum Shore Yard (feet) 75 (e) 75 (e) 75 (e)
Maximum Lot Coverage
(maximum percent of lot area) 0.35 N/A N/A
Minimum Total Living Area per Dwelling Unit (D.U.) in Single-Family and Two-Family Structures
1-Story D.U. ?3 Bedr ooms 1,150 s.f. N/A N/A
1-Story D.U. >3 Bedrooms 150 s.f. (a) N/A N/A
1-Story D.U. if Basement is
< 600 Square Feet 150 s.f. (b) N/A N/A
Multi-Story D.U. ?3 Bedr ooms 1,150 s.f.-total N/A N/A
Multi-Story D.U. >3 Bedrooms 150 s.f. (a) N/A N/A
Multi-Story D.U. if Basement is <
600 Square Feet 150 s.f. (b) N/A N/A
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structure (stories/ft.) 2.5/30 3.0/45 3.0/45
Accessory Structure (stories/ft.) 1.0/15 1.0/15 1.0/15
(Ord. 008, Series 2001, Part 2)
N/A = NOT APPLICABLE
(a) Add to minimum required building floor area for each bedroom in excess of three (3).
(b) Add to minimum required floor area and first floor area for each D.U. which has a basement less than 600 s.f.
(c) Plus one (1) additional foot for each two (2) feet more than thirty-five (35) feet of building height.
(d) Plus five (5) additional feet for each additional story above two (2) stories of building height.
(e) Subject to Section 22.04.070 of Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code.
19- 23
SECTION 19.03.0211 MFR-2 LOW DENSITY MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
A. District Intent. The MFR-2 District is intended to establish and preserve low density, multi-family
residential districts in the Village. The MFR-2 District permits low density, urban type, multi-family
residential development in a way that is consistent with the Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan and
components thereof. Areas of open space are to be provided in the MFR-2 District. The MFR-2 District
may be used as a transitional district between the less dense R-4 District, R-5, R-6, and other higher intensity
MFR-1, commercial, or institutional zoning districts with the provision of adequate landscape bufferyards.
The MFR-2 District is the least dense of the multiple-family residential district types. The MFR-2 District is
intended to be served by public sanitary sewer and water supply facilities.
B. District Standards. The MFR-2 District is further intended to have the development standards as set forth
in Table 19.03.0211A.
C. Permitted, Accessory, and Conditional Uses. See Section 19.03.0602, Division 19.03.0700, Section
19.03.0702, and Section 19.03.0802 of this Ordinance.
D. Minimum Total Living Area Per Dwelling Unit in Multiple Family Dwellings. Within the MFR-2
District, the minimum total living area for a one (1) bedroom dwelling unit in a multiple-family dwelling
shall be six hundred fifty (650) square feet floor area, with one hundred fifty (150) additional square feet required for
each bedroom over one (1) bedroom. Dens, libraries, studies, or other similar rooms within a dwelling unit
that can potentially be used as a bedroom shall be considered and counted as a bedroom.
19- 24
Table 19.03.0211A
MFR-2 LOW DENSITY MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Type of Standard Permitted Use:
Maximum Two Attached
D.U.s
(Two-Family Structures)
Conditional Use:
Multiple-Family
Attached Dwelling Units
with More Than Two
D.U.s per Structure
Minimum Open Space Ratio and Maximum Density
Open Space Ratio (OSR) 0.00 0.35
Gross Density (GD) 5.00 6.10
Net Density (ND) 5.00 8.00
Lot Dimensional Requirements
Minimum Lot Area (s.f.) 6,000 per D.U. 6,000 per D.U.
Minimum Lot Width at Setback Line (feet) 60 & 75-corner 150
Minimum Front Yard (feet) 25 30 (c)
Minimum Side Yard (feet) 10 20 (d)
Minimum Side Yard
on Corner Lot (feet) 15 30
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 25-D.U. & 10-garage 50
Minimum Shore Yard (feet) 75 (e) 75 (e)
Maximum Lot Coverage
(maximum percent of lot area) 0.35 N/A
Minimum Total Living Area per Dwelling Unit (D.U.) in Single-Family
and Two-Family Structures
1-Story D.U. ?3 Bedr ooms 1,150 s.f. N/A
1-Story D.U. >3 Bedrooms 150 s.f. (a) N/A
1-Story D.U. if Basement is
< 600 Square Feet 150 s.f. (b) N/A
Multi-Story D.U. ?3 Bedr ooms 1,150 s.f.-total N/A
Multi-Story D.U. >3 Bedrooms 150 s.f. (a) N/A
Multi-Story D.U. if Basement is < 600 Square Feet 150 s.f. (b) N/A
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structure (stories/ft.) 2.5/30 3.0/45
Accessory Structure (stories/ft.) Not Permitted (attached
garages are required) 1.0/15
N/A = NOT APPLICABLE
(a) Add to minimum required building floor area for each bedroom in excess of three (3).
(b) Add to minimum required floor area and first floor area for each D.U. which has a basement less than 600 s.f.
(c) Plus one (1) additional foot for each two (2) feet more than thirty-five (35) feet of building height.
(d) Plus five (5) additional feet for each additional story above two (2) stories of building height.
(e) Subject to Section 22.04.070 of Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code.
19- 25
DIVISION 19.03.0300 NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
This Division sets forth detailed descriptions of the nonresidential zoning districts and their respective dimensional
and bulk regulations, requirements, and design standards. The nonresidential zoning districts are generally grouped
as follows: business districts, industrial districts, public and semi-public districts, agricultural districts, and special
districts.
SECTION 19.03.0301 CBD CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
A. DISTRICT INTENT. The CBD District is intended to provide for the continuation of the Village of
Grafton's traditional central business district and to ensure the compatibility of the diverse uses typical of
the "downtown" area without inhibiting the potential for maximum development of commercial, cultural,
entertainment, and other urban activities which contribute to its role as the "heart" of the Village. In
particular, these regulations are intended to preserve the historic buildings, the variety of building sizes and
heights, various architectural styles and unique detailing. The existing commercial activities are of a
general nature and have been characterized by on-street parking and loading and structures which abut the
street right-of-way or have small setbacks, While it is intended that the existing businesses be continued at
their present level of service, it is also intended that new buildings located in the CBD District--to the
extent possible--be required to provide for off-street parking and loading areas. The CBD District is
designed to prevent land and structures in the CBD District from becoming nonconforming as they would
be if placed under different, more suburban-oriented, zoning classifications. The CBD District also
provides for the minor infilling of vacant or redevelopment areas within the CBD District consistent with
the established character of the "downtown." It is not intended to create additional CBD Districts of this
type elsewhere in the community.
In general, the CBD Central Business District shall:
1. Be designed for “walkable” streets, while properly functioning for all traffic types.
2. Encourage pedestrian activities
3. Enhance user friendliness and safety for pedestrians.
4. Coordinate public streetscapes with private improvements.
5. Include buildings designed in individual or small groupings and shall be designed and sized in a
manner that is architecturally, aesthetically and operationally harmonious with the surrounding
area.
B. CONDITIONS OF USE.
Uses allowed in the CBD Central Business District are subject to the following conditions:
1. All business, servicing, processing, displays, and storage shall be conducted within completely
enclosed buildings, except for the following: outdoor dining, produce or flower markets, the sale
of gasoline, the sale of items of a seasonal nature including Christmas trees, bedding plants and
shall shrubs when authorized by a Certificate of Zoning Compliance.
2. Outdoor storage is permitted only when it is screened from view. The required screening may be
fencing, landscaping or walls and must be of sufficient height and density that the storage area is
screened from view from the ground level up to a point seven (7) feet above the ground level of
the adjoining street or property. No outside storage is permitted to rise above the screening.
3. Outdoor uses, including temporary uses, but not including storage areas, must be located wholly
on private property, shall not impede pedestrian or vehicle circulation, and shall not eliminate or
encroach upon required parking spaces unless the parking spaces are designated only for employee
parking. In addition, no more than three of the required on-site parking spaces may be used and
permits for off-site parking must be purchased prior to authorization of the outdoor use to replace
the lost spaces. The Director of Planning and Development may waive the requirement for
purchase of permits for off-site parking if documentation is submitted by the petitioner to
demonstrate that adequate on-site parking exists to meet the needs of the business.
19- 26
4. No manufacturing or assembling shall be permitted except as incidental to the business occupying
the premises.
5. A certificate of zoning compliance must be obtained consistent with the provisions of this Code
prior to any change of use, expansion of uses on a site and prior to the issuance of a building
permit.
6. The uses and development shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan 2035.
C. PERMITTED USES
Permitted uses in the CBD Central Business District are listed in Table 19.03.0301.B. If an applicant
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Director of Planning and Development that a use that is not
specifically listed in the Table 19.03.0301.B.(the Use Matrix) is consistent with the intent of the zoning
district and is similar and compatible with the listed uses, the Director of Planning and Development may
allow the new use. The Director of Planning and Development shall document all such decisions in writing,
provide a copy of the decision to the Plan Commission for information and make a copy available for
public review upon request.
D. CONDITIONAL USES
Conditional uses may be allowed consistent with the provisions of SECTION 19.03.0703 DETAILED
STANDARDS FOR CONDITIONAL USES IN NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS upon the granting of a
conditional use permit for the specific use. Conditional Uses in the CBD Central Business District are set
forth in Table 19.03.0301.B. (The Use Matrix).
E. DISTRICT STANDARDS.
The CBD District is further intended to have the development standards as set forth in Table 19.03.0301.A
below.
19- 27
Table 19.03.0301.A
CBD CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Type of Standard Standard
Landscape Surface Ratio and Floor Area Ratios
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) 0
Alternative Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) with
Required Mitigation 0
Maximum Gross Floor Area Ratio (GFAR) 4.00
Maximum Net Floor Area Ratio (NFAR) 4.00
Lot Dimensional Requirements
Minimum Lot Area (s.f.) None
Minimum Lot Width at Setback Line (feet) 25
Minimum Front Yard (feet) 0
Minimum Side Yard (feet) 0
Minimum Side Yard on Corner Lot (feet) 0
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 0
Minimum Shore Yard (feet) 75 (a)
Minimum Total Living Area per Dwelling Unit (D.U.)
Minimum Total Living Area per Dwelling Unit (D.U.) Use Requirements
for MFR-1 District
(see Section
19.03.0210D)
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structure (stories/ft.) 4.0/45
Accessory Structure (stories/ft.) 1.0/15
(a) Subject to Section 22.04.070 of Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the
Village of Grafton Municipal Code.
19- 28
F. SITE PLAN REVIEW
The unique character of the CBD Central Business District is reflected not only in the orientation of
buildings and improvements as reflected on a traditional site plan, but also in the vertical orientation of
buildings and the inter-relationship of buildings, landscaping, the streetscape and other features. In order to
ensure the orderly development of properties within the CBD Central Business District in a manner
consistent with the overall character of the District, all proposed development within the District shall be
subject to the site plan and design review requirements of this subsection.
1. Application Requirements - All proposed developments within the CBD Central Business District,
shall be subject to Site Plan and Downtown Design Review standards. In addition to the general
application requirements, the following information shall be provided as part of the application:
a. Lot Area.
b. A site plan showing building foot prints, landscaped areas, locations of outdoor uses, parking
areas and walkways.
c. A floor plan delineating the existing and proposed floor area.
d. Existing and proposed floor area ratio.
e. Existing and proposed number of dwelling units, if included.
f. Parking calculations showing the number of spaces required and the number of existing and
proposed spaces. If parking requirements are to be met through a variance or Conditional
Use Permit, this request must accompany the development application.
g. A narrative that explains how the proposed development meets the District Site Plan and
Design Review Standards.
h. A traffic/parking study shall be submitted including, but not limited to, the following
information: the volume of traffic that will be generated by the proposed uses, the traffic
circulation patterns, a study of how ingress and egress to parking lots and drive thru facilities
will enhance or impair pedestrian activity, and how existing streets will be impacted.
i. A description of the proposed uses of the building and information on any covenants or
restrictions that will be placed on the development to ensure specific uses in the future.
j. A plan illustrating how the building and overall site can be adaptively reused in the future by
an alternative use.
k. Such additional information as the Director of Community Development deems necessary to
properly review the application.
G. DESIGN REVIEW STANDARDS
Development proposals for all properties in this district shall be designed to preserve and enhance the
character and value of the district through the application of the following standards.
a. Buildings should be of varying heights, roof lines and architectural styles, facades shall be
detailed with windows and offsets of building elements, building setbacks, arcades, awnings
and entryways to achieve a human scale and pedestrian friendly street edges.
b. All elevations of the building visible from the streetscape or from adjacent residential
neighborhoods, should be detailed to a consistent level.
c. Architectural styles, building elements, proportions, massing, materials and detailing should
be consistent with, and complimentary to, the overall historic character of the CBD Central
Business District.
d. Natural, high quality building materials should be used for the exterior of buildings.
e. Landscape and streetscape treatments should include, but not be limited to burying utilities,
screening all mechanical equipment, planting street trees, foundation plantings, street
furniture, variety in building setbacks, pedestrian connections and open spaces where
feasible and appropriate.
19- 29
f. Architectural design elements and landscaping should be incorporated to enhance the
pedestrian nature and overall streetscape.
g. Alleyways and pathways should be designed to support and encourage pedestrian use.
h. In order to enhance the character of the District and promote the commercial vitality of the
area, outdoor dining and gathering spaces, as well as other amenities that will promote
evening activities, are encouraged and should be incorporated into developments. In order to
encourage additional pedestrian activity to enhance the commercial vitality of the area, small
spaces such as gardens and courtyards should be designed and incorporated into
developments whenever possible.
i. Retail uses should be located on the ground floor and residential uses above or below the
ground floor.
j. Landscaping and building design elements should be incorporated into development projects
adjacent to residential districts to create a transition from commercial to residential
development.
3. REVIEW OF PROPOSALS FOR DEVELOPMENT IN THE CBD CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
Review of development proposals for the CBD Central Business District shall be reviewed consistent with the
procedures for all properties and with the requirements for site plan review set forth in Chapter 19, Part Six
Required Plans and Part Seven, Section 19.07.0103 Applications for Conditional Use Permit of the Village of
Grafton zoning ordinance
19- 30
Table 19.03.0301.B.
USE MATRIX – CBD CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
PERMITTED USES
Antique Stores
Art Supply Stores
Art Galleries and Studios, but not auction houses
Bakeries, Retail
Barber shops and beauty salons
Bookstores, magazine and newspaper stores
Business Service Centers
Business Offices
Camera and Photo supply stores
Clothing Stores
Coffee shops and Coffee Houses
Custom Dressmaking and tailoring shops
Candy, Ice Cream and Confectionery Stores
Catering Facilities
Delicatessens and Meat Markets
Dry cleaner, drop off/pick up only
Florists, retail.
Fruit and vegetable stores.
Health and Natural Food Stores
Gift, Stationery, Variety and Hobby and Craft Stores
Insurance Offices
Interior Decorator Shops
Jewelry Stores
Locksmiths
Music Stores
Optical Stores
Paint and Wallpaper stores
Pharmacies/Drug Stores without drive up windows
Photography Studios
Professional Offices and studios
Radio and Television stores
Real Estate Offices
Shoe stores and shoe repair shops
Sporting Goods Stores, rental and service shops
Travel Agencies
19- 31
Table 19.03.0301.B.
CONDITIONAL USES
Banks, Credit Unions and retail brokerage houses without drive up facilities
Banquet Facilities with adequate parking
Bars and Taverns
Child Care facilities
Coffee Roasting
Continuing and Adult education facilities
Copy Centers, retail
Day spas
Dry cleaner, full service with on-site treatment
Hotels and Motels
Hardware Stores
Medical and Dental offices
Microbreweries, soft drink production and wineries
Tattoo and body piercing establishment
Tobacco shops
Tourist rooming house
Packaged Beverage stores
Pawn Shops
Recreational Facilities, Family
Restaurants without a drive-thru
Schools, music, dance, commercial
Veterinary Clinics without boarding facilities
19.03.0301 / Ord. 008, Series 2014, Part 1.
19.03.0301 / Ord. 001, Series 2010, Part 1.
19- 32
SECTION 19.03.0302 C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT
A. District Intent. The C-1 District is intended to establish and preserve areas for commercial facilities for the
convenience of persons residing in nearby residential areas and is, thus, limited in its functions to
accommodating the basic day-to-day shopping and service needs of the residents living in the adjacent areas.
Buildings constructed in the C-1 District may be clustered on parcels of land under individual or multiple
ownership. The C-1 District provides for an arrangement of retail trade establishments that are compatible
in function and operation. The C-1 District is intended to be compatible with surrounding land uses of a
lesser intensity. The C-1 District is further intended to minimize the potential undesirable impacts of such
commercial uses on the surrounding residential neighborhoods which they serve. The C-1 District is
generally located away from the Village's central business district and provides amenities such as increased
open space and off-street parking and loading facilities to make the commercial uses more compatible with
the character of adjacent residential districts. The character of the C-1 District is pedestrian-oriented. The
C-1 District is intended to be served by public sanitary sewer and water supply facilities.
B. District Standards. The C-1 District is further intended to have the development standards as set forth in
Table 19.03.0302.
C. Permitted, Accessory, and Conditional Uses. See Sections 19.03.0603, 19.03.0604, 19.03.0605,
19.03.0606, Division 19.03.0700, Section 19.03.0703, and Division 19.03.0800.
19- 33
Table 19.03.0302
C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Type of Standard Standard
Landscape Surface Ratio and Floor Area Ratios
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) 0.45 (a)
Alternative Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) with
Required Mitigation (See Section 19.05.0314) 0.35
Maximum Gross Floor Area Ratio (GFAR) 0.22 (a)
Maximum Net Floor Area Ratio (NFAR) 0.40 (a)
Lot Dimensional Requirements
Minimum District Area (acres) 2 (d)
Minimum Lot Area (s.f.) 10,000 (c)
Minimum Lot Width at Setback Line (feet) 80 (c)
Minimum Front Yard (feet) 30 (b,e)
Minimum Side Yard (feet) 10 (b,e)
Minimum Side Yard on Corner Lot (feet) 30 (b,e)
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 25 (b)
Minimum Shore Yard (feet) 75 (f)
Minimum Total Living Area per Unit (D.U.)
Minimum Total Living Area per Unit (D.U.) Use Requirements
for MFR-1 District
(see Section
19.03.0210D)
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structure (stories/ft.) 2.0/35
Accessory Structure (stories/ft.) 1.0/15
(a) For commercial apartments that may be permitted on a second level only, the minimum
landscape surface ratio (LSR) for the entire site shall be 0.50; the maximum gross floor area ratio
(GFAR) shall be 0.37; and the maximum net floor area ratio (NFAR) shall be 0.74.
(b) See Division 19.05.0300 for the determination of minimum required bufferyards. See Section
19.05.0104 for increased setback requirements along arterial streets and highways.
(c) Restaurants require a minimum of 40,000 square feet with a minimum lot width of 150 feet.
(d) As indicated on the Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan or Village of Grafton zoning map.
(e) No off-street parking area or drive (except a drive which intersects a public street right-of-way
which provides direct access to the lot or parcel from the abutting intersecting public street right-ofway)
is allowed within any required front yard setback or within the required side yard on a corner
lot. No off-street parking area or drive is allowed to be closer than six (6) feet from any side or rear
lot line except where shared access or parking is permitted by the Plan Commission. (Ord. 008,
Series 2001, part 3).
(f) Subject to Section 22.04.070 of Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the Village of Grafton
Municipal Code.
19- 34
SECTION 19.03.0303 C-2 COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT
A. District Intent. The C-2 District is intended and designed to accommodate the needs of a much larger
consumer population than served by the C-1 District. The C-2 District is intended to provide for relatively
large groupings of retail sales and customer service establishments which offer a wide range of goods and
services in a community-serving shopping area. It is further intended that the C-2 District be applied in
locations which abut or front, and have access to, either directly or via frontage roads, heavily traveled major
arterial roadways. While the C-2 District is also intended to be vehicular traffic oriented, vehicular access
points are intended to be limited and the C-2 District is not intended to foster the design of "strip" shopping
areas. The C-2 District is characterized by business establishments that have on-site parking for customer
automobiles combined with a pedestrian-oriented shopping environment. Buildings constructed in the C-2
District may be clustered on parcels of land under individual or multiple ownership. The C-2 District is
intended to provide for an arrangement of retail trade establishments which are compatible in function and
operation. The various other requirements of the C-2 District are established to increase its compatibility
with surrounding areas consistent with the Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan and components thereof.
The C-2 District is intended to be served by public sanitary sewer and water supply facilities.
B. District Standards. The C-2 District is further intended to have the development standards as set forth in
Table 19.03.0303.
C. Permitted, Accessory, and Conditional Uses. See Sections 19.03.0603, 19.03.0604, 19.03.0605,
19.03.0606, Division 19.03.0700, Section 19.03.0703, and Division 19.03.0800.
D. Outdoor Display and Sale of Merchandise.
1. General Display of Merchandise
a. Definition: Point-of-purchase displays for any type of man-made merchandise for the
purpose of display and sale including firewood, ice boxes, and propane tank enclosures.
b. Standards:
i. Shall not require Plan Commission site plan review.
ii. Shall be located within 15 feet of the main customer entrance.
iii. Shall occupy no more than 60 square feet and shall not exceed eight feet high.
iv. Propane tanks may be stored outside the premises in locked metal enclosures which are
inaccessible to the general public without the assistance of an employee. Said propane
enclosure shall meet the requirements of National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 58
and are subject to the review of the Grafton Fire Department. These enclosures shall be
painted as a neutral color or a color than blends with the architectural materials of the
building, shall be located within 10 feet of the principal structure, and shall occupy a
space of no greater than 200 cubic feet.
v. Any such display shall be neatly stacked and maintained at all times. Unmaintained or
unorganized areas shall be deemed in violation of this section and subject to possible
penalty.
vi. Merchandise signage shall be limited to signs that are no more than two square feet.
vii. Vending machines for purposes of selling merchandise including, but not limited to,
beverages, candy, food, movies, toys, etc, are not allowed.
viii. Shall not block vehicular or pedestrian ingress and egress including entrances and/or exits
to a site or building.
ix. All outdoor display areas are subject to the review and approval of the Director of
Planning and Development based on, but not limited to, criteria such as aesthetic appeal,
relationship to the architecture of the primary structure, general placement/location,
traffic and safety issues, operational aspects, and maintenance.
2. Seasonal Display of Merchandise
a. Definition: Decorative point-of-purchase displays for seasonal organic (i.e., not manmade)
materials having a seasonal theme or orientation such as plants, pumpkins,
wreaths, and holiday decorations but excluding organic materials in bags (e.g., garden
soil, salt, sand).
b. Standards:
i. Shall require Plan Commission site plan review. If approved, the conditions of approval
shall include a schedule for when seasonal displays will be set up and removed.
19- 35
ii. Shall occupy no more than 33 percent of the length of the individual store frontage and
shall not exceed eight feet high. For multi-tenant centers, the seasonal display area
allotment per store may not be shared or combined between stores.
iii. Merchandise shall be attractively displayed. Pallets may be used if edges are fully
concealed. Unmaintained or unorganized areas shall be deemed in violation of this
section and subject to possible penalty.
iv. Merchandise signage shall be limited to signs that are no more than two square feet.
v. Display racks and other equipment shall be stored inside when not in use.
vi. Merchandise displays shall not block vehicular or pedestrian ingress and egress including
entrances and/or exits to a site or building. A pedestrian walkway between the outside
edge of the display area and vehicular traffic area shall be required.
vii. All outdoor display areas are subject to the review and approval of the Director of
Planning and Development based on, but not limited to, criteria such as aesthetic appeal,
relationship to the architecture of the primary structure, general placement/location,
traffic and safety issues, operational aspects, and maintenance.
viii. Temporary Outdoor Sales Operation. Activities defined as General Display of
Merchandise and Seasonal Display or Merchandise shall not be considered a Temporary
Outdoor Sales Operation. See Section 19.03.0804 (A) for Temporary Outdoor Sales
Operation regulations.
19- 36
Table 19.03.0303
C-2 COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Type of Standard Standard
Landscape Surface Ratio and Floor Area Ratios
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) 0.25
Alternative Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) with
Required Mitigation (See Section 19.05.0314) 0.20
Maximum Gross Floor Area Ratio (GFAR) 0.30
Maximum Net Floor Area Ratio (NFAR) 0.40
Lot Dimensional Requirements
Minimum Zoning District Area (acres) 10 (a)
Minimum Lot Area (s.f.) 40,000
Minimum Lot Width at Setback Line (feet) 150
Minimum Front Yard (feet) 30 (b,d)
Minimum Side Yard (feet) 15 (b,d)
Minimum Side Yard on Corner Lot (feet) 30 (b,d)
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 30 (b)
Minimum Shore Yard (feet) 75 (c)
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structure (stories/ft.) 3.0/45
Accessory Structure (stories/ft.) 1.0/15
(a As indicated on the Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan or Village of
Grafton zoning map.
(b) See Division 19.05.0300 for the determination of minimum required
bufferyards. See Section 19.05.0104 for increased setback requirements along
arterial streets and highways
(c) Subject to Section 22.04.070 of Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the
Village of Grafton Municipal Code.
(d) No off-street parking area or drive (except a drive which intersects a public
street right-of-way which provides direct access to the lot or parcel from the
abutting intersecting public street right-of-way) is allowed within any required
front yard setback or within the required side yard on a corner lot. No off-street
parking area or drive is allowed to be closer than six (6) feet from any side or rear
lot line. except where shared access or parking is permitted by the Plan
Commission. (Ord. 008, Series 2001, Part 3)
19- 37
SECTION 19.03.0304 C-3 COMMERCIAL SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT
A. District Intent. The C-3 District is intended to accommodate commercial activities which may be
incompatible with other types of commercial activities because of operational characteristics and site
requirements. The permitted uses in the C-3 District may have a service area larger than a neighborhood or
community. The C-3 District is further intended to provide for the orderly and attractive development and
grouping, in appropriate and convenient locations, of small-lot business activities of a general nature. Such
businesses shall provide adequate on-site parking and loading areas. The various requirements of the C-3
District are established to increase its compatibility with surrounding uses consistent with the Village of
Grafton Comprehensive Plan. The C-3 District is intended to be served by public sanitary sewer and water
supply facilities.
B. District Standards. The C-3 District is further intended to have the development standards as set forth in
Table 19.03.0304
C. Permitted, Accessory, and Conditional Uses. See Sections 19.03.0603, 19.03.0604, 19.03.0605,
19.03.0606, Division 19.03.0700, Section 19.03.0703, and Division 19.03.0800.
19- 38
Table 19.03.0304
C-3 COMMERCIAL SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Type of Standard Standard
Landscape Surface Ratio and Floor Area Ratios
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) 0.25
Alternative Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) with
Required Mitigation (See Section 19.05.0314) 0.20
Maximum Gross Floor Area Ratio (GFAR) 0.30
Maximum Net Floor Area Ratio (NFAR) 0.40
Lot Dimensional Requirements
Minimum Lot Area (s.f.) 30,000 (a)
Minimum Lot Width at Setback Line (feet) 100 (a)
Minimum Front Yard (feet) 30 (b,d)
Minimum Side Yard (feet) 15 (b,d)
Minimum Side Yard on Corner Lot (feet) 30 (b,d)
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 30 (b)
Minimum Shore Yard (feet) 75 (c)
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structure (stories/ft.) 3.0/45
Accessory Structure (stories/ft.) 1.0/15
(a) Restaurants shall require a minimum of 40,000 square feet with a minimum
lot width of 150 feet.
(b) See Division 19.05.0300 for the determination of minimum required
bufferyards. See Section 19.05.0104 for increased setback requirements along
arterial streets and highways.
(c) Subject to Section 22.04.070 of Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the
Village of Grafton Municipal Code.
(d) No off-street parking area or drive (except a drive which intersects a public
street right-of-way which provides direct access to the lot or parcel from the
abutting intersecting public street right-of-way) is allowed within any required
front yard setback or within the required side yard on a corner lot. No off-street
parking area or drive is allowed to be closer than six (6) feet from any side or rear
lot line. except where shared access or parking is permitted by the Plan
Commission. (Ord. 008, Series 2001, Part 3).
19- 39
SECTION 19.03.0304-A C-3 COMMERCIAL SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT ELEVENTH AVENUE
AND GREEN BAY OVERLAY
A. District Intent. The intent of the C-3 Commercial Service Business District Eleventh Avenue and Green
Bay Road Overlay is to convey legal conforming status to the existing properties and structures, and any
approved expansion thereof, located at 1002 Eleventh Avenue and 979 North Green Bay Road.
B. District Standards. The C-3 Commercial Service Business District Eleventh Avenue and Green Bay Road
Overlay is further intended to have the development standards as set forth in Table 19.03.0304A.
C. Permitted, Accessory, and Conditional Uses. See Sections 19.03.0603, 19.03.0604, 19.03.0605,
19.03.0606, Division 19.03.0700, Section 19.03.0703, and Division 19.03.0800.
Table 19.03.0304A
C-3 COMMERCIAL SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT ELEVENTH AVENUE
AND GREEN BAY ROAD OVERLAY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Type of Standard Standard
Landscape Surface Ratio and Floor Area Ratios
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) 10 %
Alternative Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) 10 %
Maximum Gross Floor Area Ratio (GFAR) 58 %
Maximum Net Floor Area Ratio (NFAR) 58 %
Lot Dimensional Requirements
Minimum Lot Area (s.f.) 23,000 Sq Ft
Minimum Lot Width at Setback Line (feet) 100 Ft
Minimum Front Yard (feet) 16 Ft
Minimum Side Yard (feet) 13 Ft
Minimum Side Yard on Corner Lot (feet) 22 Ft
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 20 Ft
Minimum Shore Yard (feet) N/A
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structure (stories/ft.) 3.0/45
Accessory Structure (stories/ft.) 1.0/15
(a) Properties zoned C-3 Commercial Service Business District Eleventh Avenue
and Green Bay Road Overlay do not have to meet the minimum requirements of
Section 19.05.0305, General Bufferyard requirements
(Ord. 029, Series 2008)
19- 40
SECTION 19.03.0305 C-4 FREEWAY INTERCHANGE BUSINESS DISTRICT
A. District Intent. The C-4 District is intended to accommodate business establishments located exclusively
within 1/4-mile of IH-43 or as otherwise recommended in the Village's Comprehensive Plan or components.
The C-4 District is not intended to be used in any other area of the Village of Grafton. The C-4 District is
further established to accommodate a wide-range of retail business and complementary uses to serve a
regional trade area reaching out several miles or more and embracing a large segment of an urban, suburban,
and rural region including areas located outside the Village of Grafton, its immediate surrounding
municipalities, and Ozaukee County. The C-4 District is characterized by business establishments that have
on-site parking for customer automobiles. Buildings constructed in the C-4 District can be clustered on
parcels of land under individual or multiple ownership. The C-4 District is intended to be served by public
sanitary sewer and water supply facilities.
B. District Standards. The C-4 District is further intended to have the development standards as set forth in
Table 19.03.0305.
C. Permitted, Accessory, and Conditional Uses. See Sections 19.03.0603, 19.03.0604, 19.03.0605,
19.03.0606, Division 19.03.0700, Section 19.03.0703, and Division 19.03.0800.
D. Sign Standards. See Title 20 titled "Signs and Exterior Lighting" of the Village of Grafton Municipal
Code for special provisions and requirements for signs located in the C-4 District.
E. General Outdoor Storage and Display of Merchandise. Except as provided herein, the outdoor storage or
display of merchandise in the C-4 District shall not be permitted including any ice storage or vending boxes,
and/or vending machines. Point-of-purchase displays or merchandise occupying no more than a total of
thirty (30) cubic feet may be placed within five (5) feet of the front entrance to the premise. Any such
display shall be neatly stacked and maintained. Additionally, propane tanks may be stored outside the
premises in locked, metal enclosures which are inaccessible to the general public without the assistance of
an employee. Said enclosure to meet the requirements of National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 58.
Such enclosures shall be painted in a neutral color, shall be located within five (5) feet of the principal
structure, and shall occupy a space of no greater than two-hundred (200) cubic feet.
F. Garden Center Seasonal Outdoor Display of Merchandise
1. Definition: Decorative point-of-purchase displays solely associated with an enclosed garden center
(existing as of September 5, 2017 for spring, summer, and fall organic (i.e., not man-made)
materials such as flowers and vegetable plants but excluding organic materials in bags (e.g.,
garden soil, mulch) and Christmas trees.
2. Standards:
i. The seasonal display shall require Plan Commission site plan review. If approved, the
conditions of approval shall include a schedule for when seasonal displays will be set up
and removed.
ii. The exact location, area, and height of the seasonal display shall be determined by the
Plan Commission through the site plan review process. However, the display shall be
proportionate to the associated garden center area and in no case shall the display occupy
more than 750 square feet or exceed eight feet high.
iii. Merchandise shall be attractively displayed. Pallets may be used if edges are fully
concealed. Unmaintained or unorganized areas shall be deemed in violation of this
section and subject to possible penalty.
iv. Merchandise signage shall be limited to signs that are no more than two square feet.
v. Display racks and other equipment shall be stored inside when not in use.
vi. Merchandise displays shall not block emergency, vehicular, or pedestrian ingress and
egress including entrances and/or exits to a site or building. A pedestrian walkway
between the outside edge of the display area and vehicular traffic area shall be required.
vii. All outdoor display areas are subject to the review and approval of the Director of
Planning and Development based on, but not limited to, criteria such as aesthetic appeal,
relationship to the architecture of the primary structure, general placement/location,
traffic and safety issues, operational aspects, and maintenance.
G. Screening of All Loading Docks, Storage, and Garbage or Waste Facilities. All loading docks, storage,
and garbage or waste facilities in the C-4 District shall be screened from view and fully enclosed within
19- 41
masonry walls eight (8) feet in height. Masonry materials shall be compatible with the materials on the front
building wall of the main building. Under no circumstances, however, shall such requirements be less than
those specified elsewhere in this Ordinance. In addition, the requirements of Section 19.03.0803(H) of this
Ordinance shall be met.
19- 42
Table 19.03.0305
C-4 FREEWAY INTERCHANGE BUSINESS DISTRICT
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Type of Standard Standard
Landscape Surface Ratio and Floor Area Ratios
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) 0.35 (a)
Alternative Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) with
Required Mitigation (See Section 19.05.0314) 0.30
Maximum Gross Floor Area Ratio (GFAR) 0.29 (a,f)
Maximum Net Floor Area Ratio (NFAR) 0.45 (a,f)
Lot Dimensional Requirements
Minimum Contiguous Zoning District Area (ac.) 10
Minimum Lot Area (square feet) 40,000 (b)
Minimum Lot Width at Setback Line (feet) 150
Minimum Front Yard (feet) 40 (c,d)
Minimum Side Yard (feet) 15 (c,d)
Minimum Side Yard on Corner Lot (feet) 40 (c,d)
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 30 (c)
Minimum Shore Yard (feet) 75 (e)
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structure (stories/feet) 5.0/60
Accessory Structure (stories/feet) 1.0/25
(a) The minimum required landscape surface ratio (LSR) may be reduced by 0.05 and GFAR
increased by 0.05 if primary access to the property is afforded by a single access drive shared with
an abutting property. Proof of grant of such access easement(s) shall be provided to the Village.
(b) For all land uses, except restaurants, the minimum lot size may be reduced to 30,000 if primary
access to the property is afforded by a single access drive shared with an abutting property. Proof
of the grant of such access easement(s) shall be provided to the Village.
(c) See Division 19.05.0300 for the determination of minimum required bufferyards. See Section
19.05.0104 for increased setback requirements along arterial streets and highways.
(d) No off-street parking area or drive (except a drive which intersects a public street right-of-way
which provides direct access to the lot or parcel from the abutting intersecting public street right-ofway)
is allowed within any required front yard setback or within the required side yard on a corner
lot. No off-street parking area or drive is allowed to be closer than six (6) feet from any side or rear
lot line. except where shared access or parking is permitted by the Plan Commission. (Ord. 008,
Series 2001, Part 3).
(e) Subject to Section 22.04.070 of Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the Village of Grafton
Municipal Code.
(f) The maximum gross floor area ratio (GFAR) may be increased by 0.03 for every story over two
stories. Maximum net floor area ratio (NFAR) may be increased by 0.06 for every story over two
stories.
19- 43
SECTION 19.03.0306 O OFFICE DISTRICT
A. District Intent. The O District is established and intended to provide for the orderly and attractive
development and grouping of professional office, financial office, or other office-related activities, in
appropriate and convenient locations. Such businesses are intended to provide adequate on-site parking
areas. The character, appearance, and operation of uses in the O District are intended to be compatible with
the character of the surrounding area. The requirements of the O District are established to increase its
compatibility with the character of the Village as set forth in the Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan and
components thereof. The O District is intended to be served by public sanitary sewer and water supply
facilities.
B. District Standards. The O District is further intended to have the development standards as set forth in
Table 19.03.0306.
C. Permitted, Accessory, and Conditional Uses. See Sections 19.03.0603, 19.03.0604, 19.03.0605,
19.03.0606, Division 19.03.0700, Section 19.03.0703, and Division 19.03.0800.
19- 44
Table 19.03.0306
O OFFICE DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Type of Standard Standard
Landscape Surface Ratio and Floor Area Ratios
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) 0.30 (a)
Alternative Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) with
Required Mitigation (See Section 19.05.0314) 0.25
Maximum Gross Floor Area Ratio (GFAR) 0.45 (a)
Maximum Net Floor Area Ratio (NFAR) 0.65 (a)
Lot Dimensional Requirements
Minimum Lot Area (s.f.) 20,000 (c)
Minimum Lot Width at Setback Line (feet) 100 (c)
Minimum Front Yard (feet) 30 (b,d)
Minimum Side Yard (feet) 15 (b,d)
Minimum Side Yard on Corner Lot (feet) 30 (b,d)
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 30 (b)
Minimum Shore Yard (feet) 75 (e)
Minimum Total Living Area per Dwelling Unit (D.U.)
Minimum Total Living Area per Dwelling Unit (D.U.) Use Requirements
for MFR-1 District
(see Section
19.03.0210D)
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structure (stories/ft.) 3.0/40
Accessory Structure (stories/ft.) 1.0/15
(a) For commercial apartments which may be permitted on a second and/or third level only, the
minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR) for the entire site shall be 0.35; the maximum gross floor
area ratio (GFAR) shall be 0.42; and the maximum net floor area ratio (NFAR) shall be 0.65.
(b) See Division 19.05.0300 for the determination of minimum required bufferyards. See Section
19.05.0104 for increased setback requirements along arterial streets and highways.
(c) Restaurants shall require a minimum of 40,000 square feet with a minimum lot width of 150
feet.
(d) No off-street parking area or drive (except a drive which intersects a public street right-of-way
which provides direct access to the lot or parcel from the abutting intersecting public street right-ofway)
is allowed within any required front yard setback or within the required side yard on a corner
lot. No off-street parking area or drive is allowed to be closer than six (6) feet from any side or rear
lot line. except where shared access or parking is permitted by the Plan Commission. (Ord. 008,
Series 2001, Part 3).
(e) Subject to Section 22.04.070 of Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the Village of Grafton
Municipal Code.
19- 45
SECTION 19.03.0307 BP BUSINESS PARK DISTRICT
A. District Intent. The BP District is intended to provide for the development of the attractive grouping of
office, light manufacturing, light industrial development uses, and limited ancillary service uses in a campus
setting which serve the needs of the occupants of the BP District. Uses in the BP District are intended to be
of a limited intensity and would provide an aesthetically-pleasing, well-landscaped environment. The BP
District is further intended to provide for ample off-street parking and loading areas and landscape planting
and screening of adjacent land uses of a lower intensity. The BP District is further intended to be applied to
those areas of the Village identified for business park development by the adopted Village of Grafton
Comprehensive Plan and components thereof. The BP District is also intended to accommodate those
industrial or business parks under unified design and ownership. The area and bulk requirements of the BP
District are intended to permit moderate intensity development in such a manner that enhances and protects
the character of the Village. Because of their high trip generation rates, the BP District is intended to be
located adjacent to arterial streets and highways. The BP District is intended to be served by public sanitary
sewer and water supply facilities.
B. District Standards. The BP District is further intended to have the development standards as set forth in
Table 19.03.0307.
C. Permitted, Accessory, and Conditional Uses. See Sections 19.03.0603, 19.03.0604, 19.03.0605,
19.03.0606, Division 19.03.0700, Section 19.03.0703, and Division 19.03.0800.
D. Sign Standards. See Title 20 titled "Signs and Exterior Lighting" of the Village of Grafton Municipal
Code for special provisions and requirements for signs located in the BP District.
19- 46
Table 19.03.0307
BP BUSINESS PARK DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Type of Standard Standard
Landscape Surface Ratio and Floor Area Ratios
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) 0.35
Alternative Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) with
Required Mitigation (See Section 19.05.0314) 0.40
Maximum Gross Floor Area Ratio (GFAR) 0.39 (a)
Maximum Net Floor Area Ratio (NFAR) 0.71 (a)
Lot Dimensional Requirements
Minimum District Area (acres) 20
Minimum Lot Area (s.f.) 40,000
Minimum Lot Width at Setback Line (feet) 150
Minimum Front Yard (feet) 50 (b,c)
Minimum Side Yard (feet) 20 (b,c)
Minimum Side Yard on Corner Lot (feet) 50 (b,c)
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 40 (b)
Minimum Shore Yard (feet) 75 (d)
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structure (stories/ft.) 3.0/36 (e)
Accessory Structure (stories/ft.) 1.0/15
(a) For warehousing uses, the maximum gross floor area ratio (GFAR) shall be
0.81; and the maximum net floor area ratio (NFAR) shall be 1.48.
(b) See Division 19.05.0300 for the determination of minimum required
bufferyards. See Section 19.05.0104 for increased setback requirements along
arterial streets and highways.
(c) No off-street parking area or drive (except a drive which intersects a public
street right-of-way which provides direct access to the lot or parcel from the
abutting intersecting public street right-of-way) is allowed within any required
street yard setback, except that where a lot abuts three (3) or more public streets,
this requirement shall only apply within two (2) street yard setback areas as
selected by the Plan Commission. No off-street parking area or drive is allowed
to be closer than six (6) feet from any other lot line. except where shared access
or parking is permitted by the Plan Commission. (Ord. 010, Series 2002, Part 2;
Ord. 008, Series 2001, Part 3).
(d) Subject to Section 22.04.070 of Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the
Village of Grafton Municipal Code.
(e) The maximum building height may be increased to a maximum of five (5)
stories, or sixty (60) feet, if a Conditional Use Permit is granted by the Village.
19- 47
SECTION 19.03.0308 M-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
A. District Intent. The M-1 District is intended to provide for manufacturing, industrial, warehousing, and
ancillary uses of a limited nature and size in locations where the relative proximity to other uses of a lesser
intensity and, therefore, requiring more restrictive regulation than some of the other nonresidential zoning
districts. The M-1 District may be used to accommodate existing scattered uses of an industrial nature so as
not to make them nonconforming uses. The M-1 District is not intended to accommodate industrial or
business parks under unified design and ownership. The M-1 District is intended to provide for industrial
development on existing lots of record existing at the time of the adoption of the Ordinance codified under
this title and already zoned in the M-1 District or for existing lots of record existing at the time of the
adoption of the Ordinance and which abut existing M-1 District lots. The various requirements of the M-1
District are established to increase its compatibility with the character of the Village as set forth in the
Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan and components thereof. The area and bulk requirements of the M-
1 District are intended to permit moderate intensity development in such a manner that enhances and
protects the character of the Village. The M-1 District is intended to be served by public sanitary sewer and
water supply facilities.
B. District Standards. The M-1 District is further intended to have the development standards as set forth in
Table 19.03.0308.
C. Permitted, Accessory, and Conditional Uses. See Sections 19.03.0603, 19.03.0604, 19.03.0605,
19.03.0606, Division 19.03.0700, Section 19.03.0703, and Division 19.03.0800.
19- 48
Table 19.03.0308
M-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Type of Standard Standard
Landscape Surface Ratio and Floor Area Ratios
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) 0.25
Alternative Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) with
Required Mitigation (See Section 19.05.0314) 0.20
Maximum Gross Floor Area Ratio (GFAR) 0.66
Maximum Net Floor Area Ratio (NFAR) 0.88
Lot Dimensional Requirements
Minimum Lot Area (s.f.) 20,000
Minimum Lot Width at Setback Line (feet) 100
Minimum Front Yard (feet) 30 (a)
Minimum Side Yard (feet) 10 (a)
Minimum Side Yard on Corner Lot (feet) 30 (a)
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 30 (a)
Minimum Shore Yard (feet) 75 (b)
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structure (stories/ft.) 3.0/45
Accessory Structure (stories/ft.) 1.0/15
(a) See Division 19.05.0300 for the determination of minimum required
bufferyards. See Section 19.05.0104 for increased setback requirements along
arterial streets and highways.
(b) Subject to Section 22.04.070 of Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the
Village of Grafton Municipal Code.
19- 49
SECTION 19.03.0309 PID PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
A. District Intent. The PID District is intended to be developed according to a detailed site development plan
to provide for manufacturing plants, distribution warehouses, research facilities, offices, and similar uses.
The PID District is intended to accommodate a community of industries, provide those industries with the
necessary utilities and services in an attractive setting to preserve the value of property, protect the land
development investment, provide primary employment, and to assure a harmonious relationship between the
industrial and industrial-related uses and their surrounding areas. Sites in the PID District are also intended
to provide ample off-street parking, setbacks, loading areas, and landscaped bufferyards. The PID District
is also intended to accommodate those industrial and industrial-related uses under unified design control
and/or ownership. The various requirements of the PID District are established to increase its compatibility
with the character of the Village as set forth in the Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan and components
thereof. The PID District is intended to be served by public sanitary sewer and water supply facilities.
B. District Standards. The PID District is further intended to have the development standards as set forth in
Table 19.03.0309.
C. Permitted, Accessory, and Conditional Uses. See Sections 19.03.0603, 19.03.0604, 19.03.0605,
19.03.0606, Division 19.03.0700, Section 19.03.0703, and Division 19.03.0800.
D. Sign Standards. See Title 20 titled "Signs and Exterior Lighting" of the Village of Grafton Municipal
Code for special provisions and requirements for signs located in the PID District.
19- 50
Table 19.03.0309
PID PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Type of Standard Standard
Landscape Surface Ratio and Floor Area Ratios
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) 0.30
Alternative Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) with
Required Mitigation (See Section 19.05.0314) 0.25
Maximum Gross Floor Area Ratio (GFAR) 0.61 (a)
Maximum Net Floor Area Ratio (NFAR) 0.88 (a)
Lot Dimensional Requirements
Minimum District Area (acres) 20
Minimum Lot Area (s.f.) 43,560
Minimum Lot Width at Setback Line (feet) 150
Minimum Front Yard (feet) 30 (b,c)
Minimum Side Yard (feet) 20 (b,c)
Minimum Side Yard on Corner Lot (feet) 30 (b,c)
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 30 (b)
Minimum Shore Yard (feet) 75 (d)
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structure (stories/ft.) 3.0/45
Accessory Structure (stories/ft.) 1.0/15
(a) For warehousing uses, the maximum gross floor area ratio (GFAR) shall be
0.81; and the maximum net floor area ratio (NFAR) shall be 1.48.
(b) See Division 19.05.0300 for the determination of minimum required
bufferyards. See Section 19.05.0104 for increased setback requirements along
arterial streets and highways except that building setbacks when abutting STH 60
shall be a minimum of one-hundred (100) feet from the STH 60 right-of-way line.
(c) No off-street parking area or drive (except a drive which intersects a public
street right-of-way which provides direct access to the lot or parcel from the
abutting intersecting public street right-of-way) is allowed within any required
front yard setback or within the required side yard on a corner lot. No off-street
parking area or drive is allowed to be closer than six (6) feet from any side or rear
lot line. except where shared access or parking is permitted by the Plan
Commission. (Ord. 008, Series 2001, Part 3).
(d) Subject to Section 22.04.070 of Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the
Village of Grafton Municipal Code.
19- 51
SECTION 19.03.0310 I INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT
A. District Intent. The I District is intended to eliminate the ambiguity of maintaining, in unrelated use
districts, areas which are under public or public-related ownership and where the use for public, or quasipublic
purpose, is anticipated to be permanent. The I District is further intended to apply to those lands
where existing or proposed federal, state, or local government activities are conducted, and to major public
and private educational, religious, and other nonprofit organization facilities. The various requirements of
the I District are established to increase its compatibility with the character of the Village as set forth in the
Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan and components thereof. The area and bulk requirements of the I
District are intended to permit moderate intensity development in such a manner that enhances and protects
the character of the Village. The I District is intended to be served by public sanitary sewer and water
supply facilities.
B. District Standards. The I District is further intended to have the development standards as set forth in
Table 19.03.0310.
C. Permitted, Accessory, and Conditional Uses. See Sections 19.03.0603, 19.03.0604, 19.03.0605,
19.03.0606, Division 19.03.0700, Section 19.03.0703, and Division 19.03.0800.
19- 52
Table 19.03.0310
I INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Type of Standard Standard
Landscape Surface Ratio and Floor Area Ratios
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) 0.40 (a)
Alternative Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) with
Required Mitigation (See Section 19.05.0314) 0.30
Maximum Gross Floor Area Ratio (GFAR) 0.39 (a)
Maximum Net Floor Area Ratio (NFAR) 0.65 (a)
Lot Dimensional Requirements
Minimum Lot Area (s.f.) 15,000 (b)
Minimum Lot Width at Setback Line (feet) 100 (b)
Minimum Front Yard (feet) 30 (c)
Minimum Side Yard (feet) 15 (c)
Minimum Side Yard on Corner Lot (feet) 30 (c)
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 30 (c)
Minimum Shore Yard (feet) 75 (d)
Minimum Total Living Area per Dwelling Unit (D.U.)
Minimum Total Living Area per Dwelling Unit (D.U.) Use Requirements
for MFR-1 District
(see Section
19.03.0210D)
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structure (stories/ft.) 3.0/40
Accessory Structure (stories/ft.) 1.0/15 (e)
(a) For commercial apartments that may be permitted on a second level only, the
minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR) for the entire site shall be 0.50; the
maximum gross floor area ratio (GFAR) shall be 0.37; and the maximum net
floor area ratio (NFAR) shall be 0.74.
(b) Restaurants shall require a minimum of 40,000 square feet with a minimum
lot width of 150 feet.
(c) See Division 19.05.0300 for the determination of minimum required
bufferyards. See Section 19.05.0104 for increased setback requirements along
arterial streets and highways.
(d) Subject to Section 22.04.070 of Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the
Village of Grafton Municipal Code.
(e). Except for accessory structures for public works facilities, which may be
increased to a maximum height of thirty-two (32) feet upon Plan Commission
approval. (Ord. 009, Series 2009)
19- 53
SECTION 19.03.0311 PR PARK AND RECREATION DISTRICT
A. District Intent. The PR District is intended to provide for areas where the park and recreational needs, both
public and private, of the populace can be met without undue disturbance of natural resources and uses of
other adjacent zoning districts. The PR District is further intended to include both public and private open
space (including stormwater retention/detention areas) and recreation facilities. The various requirements of
the PR District are established to increase the compatibility of park and recreational uses with the character
of the Village as set forth in the Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan and components thereof. The area
and bulk requirements of the PR District are intended to permit development that enhances and protects the
open space character of the PR District. The PR District is intended to be served by public sanitary sewer
and water supply facilities.
B. District Standards. This PR District is further intended to have the development standards as set forth in
Table 19.03.0311.
C. Permitted, Accessory, and Conditional Uses. See Sections 19.03.0603, 19.03.0604, 19.03.0605,
19.03.0606, Division 19.03.0700, Section 19.03.0703, and Division 19.03.0800.
19- 54
Table 19.03.0311
PR PARK AND RECREATION DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Type of Standard Standard
Landscape Surface Ratio and Floor Area Ratios
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) 0.50
Alternative Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) with
Required Mitigation (See Section 19.05.0314) 0.45
Maximum Gross Floor Area Ratio (GFAR) 0.29 (a)
Maximum Net Floor Area Ratio (NFAR) 0.58 (a)
Lot Dimensional Requirements
Minimum Lot Area (s.f.) 20,000 (a)
Minimum Lot Width at Setback Line (feet) 100 (a)
Minimum Front Yard (feet) 50 (b,c)
Minimum Side Yard (feet) 20 (b,c)
Minimum Side Yard on Corner Lot (feet) 50 (b,c)
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 50 (b)
Minimum Shore Yard (feet) 75 (d)
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structure (stories/ft.) 2.0/35
Accessory Structure (stories/ft.) 1.0/15
(a) The minimum for a restaurant shall be 40,000 square feet with a minimum lot
width of 150 feet.
(b) See Division 19.05.0300 for the determination of minimum required
bufferyards. See Section 19.05.0104 for increased setback requirements along
arterial streets and highways.
(c) No off-street parking area or drive (except a drive which intersects a public
street right-of-way which provides direct access to the lot or parcel from the
abutting intersecting public street right-of-way) is allowed within any required
front yard setback or within the required side yard on a corner lot. No off-street
parking area or drive is allowed to be closer than six (6) feet from any side or rear
lot line. except where shared access or parking is permitted by the Plan
Commission. (Ord. 008, Series 2001, Part 3).
(d) Subject to Section 22.04.070 of Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the
Village of Grafton Municipal Code.
19- 55
SECTION 19.03.0312 A-1 PRIME AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
A. District Intent. The A-1 District is intended to provide for, maintain, enhance, and preserve agricultural
lands historically used for the production and raising of livestock. The A-1 District is further intent upon
preventing the premature conversion of agricultural land to scattered urban and suburban uses such as
residential, commercial, and industrial uses. The lands placed in the A-1 District are intended to be limited
to those lands shown as "Prime Agricultural Land" on the adopted Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan
and components thereof and any Ozaukee County adopted farmland preservation plan. The overall intent of
the A-1 District is to retain the rural character of areas in which the A-1 District is used as set forth in the
Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan and components thereof.
B. District Standards. The A-1 District is further intended to have the standards as set forth in Table
19.03.0312. Those developments served by on-site sewage disposal systems must meet all requirements set
forth under Section 19.02.0103(B)(3)((d) of this Ordinance.
C. Permitted, Accessory, and Conditional Uses. See Sections 19.03.0603, 19.03.0604, 19.03.0605,
19.03.0606, Division 19.03.0700, Section 19.03.0703, and Division 19.03.0800.
19- 56
Table 19.03.0312
A-1 PRIME AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Type of Standard Standard
Landscape Surface Ratio and Floor Area Ratios
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) Not Applicable
Alternative Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) with
Required Mitigation (See Section 19.05.0314) Not Applicable
Maximum Gross Floor Area Ratio (GFAR) 0.05 (a)
0.10 (b)
Maximum Net Floor Area Ratio (NFAR) Not Applicable
Lot Dimensional Requirements
Minimum Lot Area (acres) 35
Minimum Lot Width at Setback Line (feet) 600
Minimum Front Yard (feet) 50 (c)
Minimum Side Yard (feet) 35 (c)
Minimum Side Yard on Corner Lot (feet) 50 (c)
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 50 (c)
Minimum Shore Yard (feet) 75 (d)
Minimum Total Living Area per
Single-Family Dwelling Unit (D.U.)
1-Story D.U. ?3 Bedr ooms 1,400 s.f.
1-Story D.U. >3 Bedrooms 200 s.f. (e)
1-Story D.U. if Basement is
< 600 Square Feet 200 s.f. (f)
Multi-Story D.U. ?3 Bedr ooms 1,500 s.f.-total
900 s.f.-1st floor
Multi-Story D.U. >3 Bedrooms 200 s.f. (e)
Multi-Story D.U. if Basement is < 600 Square Feet 200 s.f. f)
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structure (stories/ft.) 3.0/35
Accessory Structure (ft.) 100
(a) For single-family dwelling structures.
(b) For other farm-related structures including housing for farm laborers.
(c) See Division 19.05.0300 for the determination of minimum required
bufferyards. See Section 19.05.0104 for increased setback requirements along
arterial streets and highways.
(d) Subject to Section 22.04.070 of Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the
Village of Grafton Municipal Code.
(e).Add to minimum required building floor area for each new bedroom in excess
of three (3). (Ord. 008, Series 2001, Part 4)
(f). Add to minimum required building floor area for each dwelling unit which
has a basement less than 600 s.f. (Ord. 008, Series 2001, Part 4)
19- 57
SECTION 19.03.0313 A-2 AGRICULTURE DISTRICT
A. District Intent. The A-2 District is intended to provide for, maintain, preserve, and enhance agricultural
lands historically utilized for crop production but which are not included within the A-1 District and which
are generally best suited for smaller farm units, including truck farming, horse farming, hobby farming,
orchards, and other similar agricultural-related activity. The overall intent of the A-2 District is to retain the
rural character of those areas in which the A-2 District is used. The A-2 District may also be used as a
transitional district between the A-1 District and the A-3 District.
B. District Standards. The A-2 District is further intended to have the standards as set forth in Table
19.03.0313. Those developments served by on-site sewage disposal systems must meet all requirements set
forth under Section 19.02.0103(B)(3)((d) of this Ordinance.
C. Permitted, Accessory, and Conditional Uses. See Sections 19.03.0603, 19.03.0604, 19.03.0605,
19.03.0606, Division 19.03.0700, Section 19.03.0703, and Division 19.03.0800.
19- 58
Table 19.03.0313
A-2 AGRICULTURE DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Type of Standard Standard
Landscape Surface Ratio and Floor Area Ratios
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) Not Applicable
Alternative Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) with
Required Mitigation (See Section 5.0314) Not Applicable
Maximum Gross Floor Area Ratio (GFAR) 0.05
Maximum Net Floor Area Ratio (NFAR) Not Applicable
Lot Dimensional Requirements
Minimum Lot Area (acres) 20
Minimum Lot Width at Setback Line (feet) 300
Minimum Front Yard (feet) 50 (a)
Minimum Side Yard (feet) 35 (a)
Minimum Side Yard on Corner Lot (feet) 50 (a)
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 50 (a)
Minimum Shore Yard (feet) 75 (b)
Minimum Total Living Area per
Single-Family Dwelling Unit (D.U.)
1-Story D.U. ?3 Bedr ooms 1,400 s.f.
1-Story D.U. >3 Bedrooms 200 s.f (c).
1-Story D.U. if Basement is
< 600 Square Feet 200 s.f. (d)
Multi-Story D.U. ?3 Bedr ooms 1,500 s.f.-total
900 s.f.-1st floor
Multi-Story D.U. >3 Bedrooms 200 s.f (c).
Multi-Story D.U. if Basement is < 600 Square Feet 200 s.f (d).
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structure (stories/ft.) 3.0/35
Accessory Structure (ft.) 70
(a) See Division 19.05.0300 for the determination of minimum required
bufferyards. See Section 19.05.0104 for increased setback requirements along
arterial streets and highways.
(b) Subject to Section 22.04.070 of Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the
Village of Grafton Municipal Code.
(c). Add to minimum required building floor area for each new bedroom in
excess of three (3). (Ord. 008, Series 2001, Part 5)
(d) Add to minimum required building floor area for each dwelling unit which
has a basement less than 600 s.f. (Ord. 008, Series 2001, Part 5)
19- 59
SECTION 19.03.0314 A-3 AGRICULTURAL HOLDING DISTRICT
A. District Intent. The A-3 District is intended to provide for, maintain, preserve, and enhance agricultural
lands historically utilized for crop production and the raising of livestock but which are not prime
agricultural lands. The A-3 District is intended to avoid the premature conversion of agricultural land to
scattered urban and/or suburban uses and to thereby protect the lands contained therein from premature
urban and/or suburban development until the orderly transition of those lands into urban and/or suburban
uses is required. A-3 District lands are generally best suited for smaller farm units, including horse farming,
hobby farming, orchards, and other similar agricultural-related activity. The A-3 District is further intended
to allow the continuation of agricultural and related uses as interim land uses in those areas that are
committed to urban and/or suburban development in the adopted Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan
and components thereof but which are not yet ripe for such development. The A-3 District is intended to be
served by on-site soil absorption sewage disposal systems, holding tanks, and private wells on an interim
basis until such time as public sanitary sewer service and public water supply facilities are made available.
(Also see the requirements of Section 19.03.0105 of this Ordinance for additional regulations pertaining to
annexed lands placed into the A-3 District.)
B. District Standards. The A-3 District is further intended to have the standards as set forth in Table
19.03.0314. Those developments served by on-site sewage disposal systems must meet all requirements set
forth under Section 19.02.0103(B)(3)((d) of this Ordinance.
C. Permitted, Accessory, and Conditional Uses. See Sections 19.03.0603, 19.03.0604, 19.03.0605,
19.03.0606, Division 19.03.0700, Section 19.03.0703, and Division 19.03.0800.
19- 60
Table 19.03.0314
A-3 AGRICULTURAL HOLDING DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Type of Standard Standard
Landscape Surface Ratio and Floor Area Ratios
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) Not Applicable
Maximum Gross Floor Area Ratio (GFAR) 0.05
Maximum Net Floor Area Ratio (NFAR) Not Applicable
Lot Dimensional Requirements
Minimum Lot Area (acres) 5
Minimum Lot Width at Setback Line (feet) 200
Minimum Front Yard (feet) 50 (a)
Minimum Side Yard (feet) 35 (a)
Minimum Side Yard on Corner Lot (feet) 50 (a)
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 50 (a)
Minimum Shore Yard (feet) 75 (b)
Minimum Total Living Area per
Single-Family Dwelling Unit (D.U.)
1-Story D.U. ?3 Bedr ooms 1,400 s.f.
1-Story D.U. >3 Bedrooms 200 s.f (c).
1-Story D.U. if Basement is
< 600 Square Feet 200 s.f (d).
Multi-Story D.U. ?3 Bedr ooms 1,500 s.f.-total
900 s.f.-1st floor
Multi-Story D.U. >3 Bedrooms 200 s.f (c).
Multi-Story D.U. if Basement is < 600 Square Feet 200 s.f. (d)
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structure (stories/ft.) 2.5/30
Accessory Structure (ft.) 70
(a) See Division 19.05.0300 for the determination of minimum required
bufferyards. See Section 19.05.0104 for increased setback requirements along
arterial streets and highways.
(b) Subject to Section 22.04.070 of Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the
Village of Grafton Municipal Code.
(c). Add to minimum required building floor area for each new bedroom in
excess of three (3). (Ord. 008, Series 2001, Part 6)
(d) Add to minimum required building floor area for each dwelling unit which
has a basement less than 600 s.f. (Ord. 008, Series 2001, Part 6)
19- 61
SECTION 19.03.0315 HPO HISTORIC PRESERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT
A. District Intent. The HPO District is intended to provide for the protection and preservation of those
structures whose historic or architectural interests are valuable contributions to the character and charm of
the Village or areas of the Village. Such structures and areas are hereby deemed to represent a community
asset justifying the public regulation of such structures and areas to ensure their preservation. It is further
intended that the HPO District be used to protect the historic community character of such structures and
districts. The purpose of the HPO District is to affect and accomplish the protection, enhancement, and
perpetuation of improvements and of districts that represent or reflect elements of the Village's cultural,
social, economic, political, and architectural history; safeguard the Village's historic and cultural heritage, as
embodied and reflected in such landmarks and historic districts; stabilize and improve property values;
foster civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the past; protect and enhance the Village's
attractions to residents, tourists, and visitors for education, pleasure, and general welfare; serve as a support
and stimulus to business and industry; and strengthen the economy of the Village.
B. District Standards. District standards shall conform to that required in the underlying basic use district and
those other standards as may be set forth under Sections 19.07.0111 and 19.07.0210 and Division
19.08.0400 of this Ordinance.
C. Permitted, Accessory, and Conditional Uses. See Sections 19.03.0603, 19.03.0604, 19.03.0605,
19.03.0606, Division 19.03.0700, Section 19.03.0703, and Division 19.03.0800.
19- 62
DIVISION 19.03.0400 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
SECTION 19.03.0401 INTENT OF THE PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
A. General Intent. The PUD Districts are intended to be created, pursuant to Section 62.23(7)(b) of the
Wisconsin Statutes as amended, to foster developments that will: derive maximum benefit from coordinated
area site planning, diversified location of structures, mixed compatible uses that result in the provision of a
safe and efficient system for pedestrian and vehicular traffic, attractive recreation and landscaped open
spaces, economic design and location of public and private utilities and community facilities; and ensure
adequate standards of construction and planning. The unified and planned development of a site, in single or
corporate ownership or control at the time of application, may be permitted in a PUD District with one (1) or
more principal uses or structures and related accessory uses and structures. The regulations within a PUD
District need not be uniform throughout the individual PUD District except those types of intensity standards
set forth in this Division shall be followed unless otherwise specifically approved by the Village.
B. Open Space, Land Use Intensity, and Residential Density Intent. Each PUD district shall set forth its
land use intensity including, where applicable: the open space ratio (OSR), a maximum gross residential
density, maximum net residential density, maximum floor area ratio (GFAR and NFAR), and a minimum
landscape surface ratio (LSR). These shall be established on an individual PUD District basis to ensure the
intensity of development on the site is compatible with the context of the surrounding area, the Village’s
comprehensive plan, and intensity standards in comparable zoning district(s).
C. Natural Resource Features Protection Intent. While the PUD District is intended to be flexible in its
application, it is not the intent of the PUD Districts to be used to alter or amend any of the prescribed natural
resource base protection standards advanced by this Ordinance.
SECTION 19.03.0402 CONSISTENCY OF THE PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT WITH
THE ADOPTED COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
A PUD District shall be in general conformance with or shall carry out the general objectives of the adopted Village
of Grafton Comprehensive Plan or other element or component of the Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan.
SECTION 19.03.0403 MINIMUM AREA AND USE REQUIREMENTS AND OTHER STANDARDS
A. Minimum Area Requirements. To be approved under the provisions of this Division, each proposed PUD
District shall be a minimum of five (5) acres in area, except as follows:
1. Within the area subject to the Grafton Downtown Master Plan, as adopted by the Village Plan
Commission on February 23, 1999, there shall be no minimum area required for PUD
Districts.
2. Within the area subject to the South Commercial District Redevelopment Plan, as adopted by
the Village Plan Commission on October 28, 2003, there shall be no minimum area required
for PUD Districts.
(Ord. 019, Series 2006, Part 1).
B. Natural Resource Features Protection Standards. All development in a PUD District shall meet the
natural resource protection standards set forth in Division 19.04.0100 of this Ordinance.
C. Maximum Site Intensity and Density Standards. Site intensity and capacity calculations shall be done
pursuant to the requirements of Division 19.03.0500 of this Ordinance. Maximum site intensity and density
standards shall be based on similar standards in the nearest comparable residential, business, or industrial
zoning district which would accommodate the proposed use(s), as determined by the Plan Commission. Any
variations from such standards shall be specifically requested by the petitioner and approved by the Plan
Commission. Individual uses and structures in a PUD District shall comply with the specific use, building
location, height, building size, gross and net floor area ratios (GFAR and NFAR), lot size, open space ratio
(OSR), and landscape surface ratio (LSR) requirements as set forth by the Plan Commission as conditions
and restrictions of approval.
D. Minimum Required Setbacks from the Ultimate Rights-of-Way of Arterial Streets and Highways. See
Section 19.05.0104 for increased setback requirements along the ultimate rights-of-way of arterial streets
and highways.
19- 63
E. Minimum Dwelling Unit Size Standards. Minimum dwelling unit size standards shall be based on similar
standards in the nearest comparable residential zoning district which would accommodate the proposed
use(s), as determined by the Plan Commission. Any variations from such standards shall be specifically
requested by the petitioner and approved by the Plan Commission. Individual uses and structures in a PUD
District shall comply with the specific dwelling unit sizes and maximum number of dwelling units per
building as set forth by the Plan Commission as conditions and restrictions of approval.
F. Residential Permitted, Accessory, and Conditional Uses. Allowable residential uses classified as
permitted or conditional uses will be determined specifically as part of each PUD – Planned Unit
Development zoning district and listed specifically in PUD – Planned Unit Development zoning ordinance
pertinent to that district. The Plan Commission shall review each allowable residential use (permitted or
conditional) and make a recommendation to the Village Board as part of the PUD – Planned Unit
Development zoning ordinance consideration process. Residential uses that are not listed specially in the
PUD – Planned Unit Development zoning ordinance will be considered not permitted. Any modification of
the listed allowed residential uses for a given PUD – Planned Unit Development zoning district will require
the amendment of that particular PUD –Planned Unit Development zoning ordinance and all appropriate
processes under this zoning code. (Ord. 003, Series 2010, Part 1)
G. Nonresidential Permitted, Accessory, and Conditional Uses. Allowable nonresidential uses classified as
permitted or conditional uses will be determined specifically as part of each PUD – Planned Unit
Development zoning district and listed specifically in PUD – Planned Unit Development zoning ordinance
pertinent to that district. The Plan Commission shall review each allowable nonresidential use (permitted or
conditional) and make a recommendation to the Village Board as part of the PUD – Planned Unit
Development zoning ordinance consideration process. Nonresidential uses that are not listed specially in the
PUD – Planned Unit Development zoning ordinance will be considered not permitted. Any modification of
the listed allowed nonresidential uses for a given PUD – Planned Unit Development zoning district will
require the amendment of that particular PUD –Planned Unit Development zoning ordinance and all
appropriate processes under this zoning code. (Ord. 003, Series 2010, Part 2)
SECTION 19.03.0404 PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT PROCEDURES
See Division 19.07.0209 of this Ordinance.
19- 64
DIVISION 19.03.0500 SITE INTENSITY AND CAPACITY CALCULATIONS
SECTION 19.03.0501 SITE INTENSITY AND CAPACITY CALCULATIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL
AND NONRESIDENTIAL USES REQUIRED
A. Recognition of Natural Resource Features. This Ordinance recognizes that landforms, parcel size and
shape, and natural resource features vary from site to site and that development regulations must take into
account these variations. The maximum density or intensity of use allowed in any zoning district is
controlled by the various district standards set forth for each of the various zoning districts of this
Ordinance. For properties zoned as a residential district, in no case, other than in the R-RE Rural Estate
Single Family Residential and the R-E Estate Single Family Residential districts, shall the calculations for
the total Resource Protection Land (Table 19.03.0503) or Minimum Required on-Site Open Space (Table
19.03.0504) exceed more than 50% of the Base Site Area. (Ord. 013, Series 2011)
B. When Site Intensity and Capacity Calculations Are Required. The site intensity and capacity
calculations set forth in this Division shall be made for each parcel of land to be used or built upon in the
Village of Grafton including all new Condominiums, all new residential and multiple-family residential
developments including all Certified Survey Maps, Condominiums, and Subdivisions, all nonresidential
development; and as may be required elsewhere in this Ordinance.
C. Exclusions (When Site Intensity and Capacity Calculations Are Not Required). The site intensity and
capacity calculations set forth in this Division shall not be required for the construction of single-family
and two-family residential development located within existing platted subdivisions (with an approved final
plat), certified survey maps, and condominiums existing at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance.
SECTION 19.03.0502 CALCULATION OF BASE SITE AREA
The base site area shall be calculated as indicated in Table 19.03.0502 for each parcel of land to be used or built
upon in the Village of Grafton as referenced in Section 19.03.0501 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 19.03.0503 CALCULATION OF THE AREA OF NATURAL RESOURCES TO BE
PROTECTED
All land area with those natural resource features as described in Division 19.04.0100 of this Ordinance and as listed
in Table 19.03.0503 and lying within the base site area (as defined in Section 19.03.0502), shall be measured for
each natural resource feature present. The actual land area encompassed by each type of resource is then entered
into the column of Table 19.03.0503 titled "Acres of Land in Resource Feature." The acreage of each natural
resource feature shall be multiplied by its respective natural resource protection standard (to be selected from
Table 19.04.0100 of this Ordinance for applicable agricultural, residential, or nonresidential zoning district) to
determine the amount of resource protection land or area required to be kept in open space to protect the resource or
feature. The sum of all resource protection land on the site equals the total resource protection land. The total
resource protection land shall be calculated as indicated in Table 19.03.0503.
19- 65
Table 19.03.0502
WORKSHEET FOR THE CALCULATION OF BASE SITE AREA
FOR BOTH RESIDENTIAL AND NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
STEP 1: Indicate the total gross site area (in acres) as determined by an actual onsite
boundary survey of the property. _________acres
STEP 2: Subtract ( - ) land which constitutes any existing dedicated public street
rights-of-way, land located within the ultimate road rights-of-way of
existing roads, and the rights-of-way of major utilities.
- _________acres
STEP 3: Subtract ( - ) land required to be dedicated for public parks under the
requirements of the Village of Grafton Subdivision Ordinance as amended. - _________acres
STEP 4: Subtract ( - ) land which, as a part of a previously approved development
or land division, was reserved for open space. - _________acres
STEP 5: In the case of "Site Intensity and Capacity Calculations" for a proposed
residential use, subtract ( - ) the land proposed for nonresidential uses;
or
In the case of "Site Intensity and Capacity Calculations" for a proposed
nonresidential use, subtract ( - ) the land proposed for residential uses.
- _________acres
STEP 6: Equals "Base Site Area" = ________acres
19- 66
Table 19.03.0503
WORKSHEET FOR THE CALCULATION OF
RESOURCE PROTECTION LAND
Natural Resource
Feature
Protection Standard Based Upon
Zoning District Type
(circle applicable standard from
Table 19.04.0100 for the type of zoning
district in which the
parcel is located) Acres of Land in
Resource Feature
Acres of Land
in Resource
Feature to be
Protected
Agricultural
Districts
Residential
Districts
Non-
Residential
Districts
Steep Slopes:
20 to <=30%
>30%
0.65
0.90
0.75
0.85
0.70
0.80
X ____________ =
X ____________ =
_____________
_____________
Woodlands & Forests:
Mature
Young
0.70
0.50
0.70
0.50
0.60
0.50
X ____________ =
X ____________ =
_____________
_____________
Lakes & Ponds 1 1 1 X ____________ = _____________
Streams 1 1 1 X ____________ = _____________
Shore Buffer 1 1 1 X ____________ = _____________
Floodplains 1 1 1 X ____________ = _____________
Wetlands & Shoreland
Wetlands
1 1 1 X ____________ = _____________
TOTAL RESOURCE PROTECTION LAND
(Total Acres of Land in Resource Features to be Protected)
_____________
(Ord. 010, Series 2002, Part 3)
Note: In conducting the calculations in Table 19.03.0503, if two or more natural resource features are present on
the same area of land, only the most restrictive resource protection standard shall be used. For example, if
floodplain and young woodlands occupy the same space on a parcel of land, the resource protection standard would
be 1.0 which represents the higher of the two standards. However, each natural resource located on a development
site is required to be protected under the Division 19.04.0100 Natural Resources and Division 19.06.0200 Natural
Resource Protection Plan. (Ord. 013, Series 2011)
19- 67
SECTION 19.03.0504 CALCULATION OF SITE INTENSITY AND CAPACITY FOR RESIDENTIAL
USES
To determine the maximum number of dwelling units which may be permitted on a parcel of land zoned in a
residential zoning district, the site intensity and capacity calculations set forth in Table 19.03.0504 shall be done. The
purpose of these calculations is to determine the total maximum allowable dwelling units allowed on a given
residential development’s Base site Area and is not intended to calculate the appropriate natural Resource Protection
standards. Each natural resource located on a residential development site is required to be protected under the
Division 19.04.0100 Natural Resources and division 19.06.0200 Natural Resource Protection Plan. (Ord. 013, Series
2011)
Table 19.03.0504
WORKSHEET FOR THE CALCULATION OF SITE INTENSITY AND
CAPACITY FOR RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
STEP 1: CALCULATE MINIMUM REQUIRED ON-SITE OPEN SPACE:
Take Base Site Area (from Step 6 in Table 19.03.0502): ________
Multiply by Minimum Open Space Ratio (OSR)
(See specific residential zoning district OSR standard): X ________
Equals MINIMUM REQUIRED ON-SITE OPEN SPACE =
________ acres
STEP 2: CALCULATE NET BUILDABLE SITE AREA:
Take Base Site Area (from Step 6 in Table 19.03.0502): _________
Subtract Total Resource Protection Land from Table 19.03.0503)
or Minimum Required On-Site Open Space (from Step 1 above),
whichever is greater: -
_________
Equals NET BUILDABLE SITE AREA =
________ acres
STEP 3: CALCULATE MAXIMUM NET DENSITY YIELD OF SITE:
Take Net Buildable Site Area (from Step 2 above): _________
Multiply by Maximum Net Density (ND)
(See specific residential zoning district ND standard): X _________
Equals MAXIMUM NET DENSITY YIELD OF SITE =
________ D.U.s
STEP 4: CALCULATE MAXIMUM GROSS DENSITY YIELD OF SITE:
Take Base Site Area (from Step 6 of Table 19.03.0502): __________
Multiple by Maximum Gross Density (GD)
(See a specific residential zoning district GD standard): X _________
Equals MAXIMUM GROSS DENSITY YIELD OF SITE =
________ D.U.s
STEP 5: DETERMINE MAXIMUM PERMITTED D.U.s OF SITE:
Take the lowest of Maximum Net Density Yield of Site (from Step 3
above) or Maximum Gross Density Yield of Site (from Step 4 above): ________ D.U.s
(Ord. 010, Series 2002, Part 4)
19- 68
SECTION 19.03.0505 CALCULATION OF SITE INTENSITY AND CAPACITY FOR
NONRESIDENTIAL USES
To determine the maximum floor area which may be permitted on a parcel of land zoned in a nonresidential zoning
district, the site intensity and capacity calculations set forth in Table 19.03.0505 shall be done.
Table 19.03.0505
WORKSHEET FOR THE CALCULATION OF SITE INTENSITY AND
CAPACITY FOR NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
STEP 1: CALCULATE MINIMUM REQUIRED LANDSCAPE SURFACE:
Take Base Site Area (from Step 6 in Table 19.03.0502): ________
Multiple by Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR)
(See specific zoning district LSR standard): X ________
Equals MINIMUM REQUIRED ON-SITE LANDSCAPE SURFACE =
________ acres
STEP 2: CALCULATE NET BUILDABLE SITE AREA:
Take Base Site Area (from Step 6 in Table 19.03.0502): __________
Subtract Total Resource Protection Land from Table 19.03.0503)
or Minimum Required Landscape Surface (from Step 1 above),
whichever is greater: - _________
Equals NET BUILDABLE SITE AREA = ________ acres
STEP 3: CALCULATE MAXIMUM NET FLOOR AREA YIELD OF SITE:
Take Net Buildable Site Area (from Step 2 above): ___________
Multiple by Maximum Net Floor Area Ratio (NFAR)
(See specific nonresidential zoning district NFAR standard): X _________
Equals MAXIMUM NET FLOOR AREA YIELD OF SITE = ________ acres
STEP 4: CALCULATE MAXIMUM GROSS FLOOR AREA YIELD OF SITE:
Take Base Site Area (from Step 6 of Table 19.03.0502): ________
Multiple by Maximum Gross Floor Area Ratio (GFAR)
(See specific nonresidential zoning district GFAR standard): X _________
Equals MAXIMUM GROSS FLOOR AREA YIELD OF SITE =
________ acres
STEP 5: DETERMINE MAXIMUM PERMITTED FLOOR AREA OF SITE:
Take the lowest of Maximum Net Floor Area Yield of Site (from Step 3
above) or Maximum Gross Floor Area Yield of Site (from Step 4 above):
(Multiple results by 43,560 for maximum floor area in square feet):
________ acres
(_______ s.f.)
19- 69
DIVISION 19.03.0600 ZONING DISTRICT USES AND USE REGULATIONS
SECTION 19.03.0601 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Division is to establish which uses are either permitted or not permitted to locate in each zoning
district, floodplain, floodway, and wetland areas. A further distinction is made for uses which may locate in a given
zoning district only after obtaining a Conditional Use Permit (see Division 19.07.0100 of this Ordinance). All uses
and structures must comply with the applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
SECTION 19.03.0602 TABLE OF PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES IN ALL RESIDENTIAL
ZONING DISTRICTS
Table 19.03.0602 sets forth those uses which are permitted uses and conditional uses in the residential R-RE, R-E, R-
1, R-S, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, MFR-1, MFR-2, and residential PUD Districts. In addition, Table 19.03.0602 lists
those residential uses which are permitted uses or conditional uses in the A-1, A-2, and A-3 Districts.
19- 70
Table 19.03.0602
PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES IN THE
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
19- 71
SECTION 19.03.0603 TABLE OF PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES IN ALL
NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
Table 19.03.0603 sets forth those uses which are permitted uses and conditional uses in the CBD, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4,
O, BP, M-1, PID, I, PR, A-1, A-2, A-3, and HPO Districts. In interpreting the various use designations, reference
should be made to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual (1987, or latest edition) published by Executive
Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget. Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code numbers
are given for each use type listed in Table 19.03.0603.
Table 19.03.0603
PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES IN THE
NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
Table 19.03.0603 Begins at Top of Next Page
19- 72
SECTION 19.03.0604 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES IN THE FW FLOODWAY, FF FLOOD
FRINGE, AND GFP GENERAL FLOODPLAIN ZONING DISTRICTS
Permitted and/or conditional uses in floodplain and/or floodway areas are as may be specified under the provisions of
Title 21 "Floodplain Zoning," of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code as amended.
SECTION 19.03.0605 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES IN SHORELAND WETLAND AND
WETLAND AREAS
This Section sets forth those uses which are permitted uses and conditional uses in shoreland wetland and other
wetland areas.
A. Permitted and Conditional Uses in Shoreland Wetland Areas. Permitted and/or conditional uses in
shoreland wetland areas are as may be specified under the provisions of Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland
Zoning," of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code as amended.
B. Permitted Uses in Other Wetland Areas (Wetlands which are not Shoreland Wetlands). The following
uses are allowed by the Village of Grafton if all other required and applicable County, federal, and State
permits, including U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources permits,
have been granted. A copy of all such permits shall be transmitted to the Village of Grafton prior to any
approvals granted by the Village. The following are permitted as a matter of right:
1. Hiking, fishing, trapping, swimming, and boating, unless prohibited by other ordinances and laws.
2. The harvesting of wild crops such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild rice, berries, tree fruits, and tree
seeds, in a way that is not injurious to the natural reproduction of such crops, and that does not
involve filling, earthmoving, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching, tiling, or excavating.
3. The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning, and harvesting of timber, if no filling,
earthmoving, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching, tiling, or excavating is done except for
temporary water level stabilization measures to alleviate abnormally wet or dry conditions which
would have an adverse impact on silvicultural activities if not corrected.
4. Construction and maintenance of fences.
5. Existing agricultural uses provided they do not involve extension of cultivated areas, extension of
or creation of new drainage systems, and further provided they do not substantially disturb or
impair the natural fauna, flora, topography, or water regimen.
6. Earthmoving, ditching, tiling, dredging, excavating, or filling done to maintain or repair an existing
agricultural drainage system only to the extent necessary to maintain the level of drainage required
to continue the existing agricultural use.
7. The construction and maintenance of piers, docks, and walkways, including those built on pilings.
8. The maintenance, repair, replacement, and reconstruction of existing streets, roads, and bridges.
C. Conditional Uses in Other Wetland Areas (Wetlands which are not Shoreland Wetlands). The
following uses may be allowed by Conditional Use Permit by the Village of Grafton if all other required and
applicable County, federal, and State permits, including U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resource permits, have been granted. A copy of all such permits shall be transmitted
to the Village of Grafton prior to any approvals granted by the Village.
1. The construction of streets which are necessary for the continuity of the Village street system,
necessary for the provision of essential utility and public safety services, or necessary to provide
access to permitted open space uses, if:
a. The street cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside a wetland; and
b. The street is designed and constructed to minimize the adverse impact upon the natural
19- 73
functions of the wetland and meets the following standards:
1) The street shall be designed and constructed for the minimum cross-section
practical to serve the intended use;
2) Street construction activities shall be limited to the immediate area of the roadbed
only; and
3) Any earthmoving, filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching, tiling, or
excavating that is to be done must be necessary for the construction or
maintenance of the street.
2. The establishment and development of public and private parks and recreation areas, public boat
access sites, natural and outdoor education areas, historic and scientific areas, wildlife refuges,
game preserves, and private habitat areas, if:
a. Any private recreation or wildlife habitat area must be used exclusively for that purpose;
b. No filling is to be done; and
c. Earthmoving, ditching, excavating, dredging, and dike and dam construction may be done
in wildlife refuges, game preserves, and private wildlife habitat areas, but only for
improving wildlife habitats or to otherwise enhance wetland values.
3. The construction and maintenance of electric, gas, telephone, water, and sewer transmission and
distribution lines, and related facilities in the wetland by public utilities and cooperative
associations organized for producing or furnishing heat, light, power, or water to members, if:
a. The transmission and distribution lines and related facilities cannot as a practical matter be
outside a wetland; and
b. Any earthmoving, filling, excavating, ditching, or draining that is to be done must be
necessary for such construction or maintenance, and must be done in a manner designed to
minimize flooding and other adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the wetlands.
4. The construction and maintenance of railroad lines, if:
a. The railroad lines cannot as a practical matter be outside a wetland; and
b. Any earthmoving, filling, excavating, ditching, or draining that is to be done must be
necessary for such construction or maintenance, and must be done in a manner designed to
minimize flooding and other adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the wetlands.
SECTION 19.03.0606 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES IN THE HPO HISTORIC
PRESERVATION OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT
This Section sets forth those uses which are permitted uses and conditional uses in the HPO District.
A. Permitted Uses in the HPO District. All permitted uses in the underlying zoning district(s) shall be
permitted by right.
B. Conditional Uses in the HPO District. All conditional uses which may be allowed in the underlying
zoning district(s) may be permitted as conditional uses.
19- 74
SECTION 19.03.0607 USES NOT SPECIFICALLY PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS
When a use is not specifically listed as a "Permitted Use," "Conditional Use," or "Accessory Use," it shall be assumed
that such a use is expressly prohibited unless by a written decision of the Plan Commission it is determined that said
use is similar to, and not a more measurably intense use, than the use listed.
DIVISION 19.03.0700 CONDITIONAL USE STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS
SECTION 19.03.0701 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR CONDITIONAL USES
A. General Standards. No Conditional Use Permit shall be recommended or granted pursuant to this
Ordinance unless the applicant shall establish the following:
1. Ordinance and Comprehensive Plan Purposes and Intent. The proposed use and development
will be in harmony with the general and specific purposes for which this Ordinance was enacted
and for which the regulations of the zoning district in question were established and with the
general purpose and intent of the Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan or element thereof.
2. Adverse Impact. The proposed use and development will not have a substantial or undue adverse
or detrimental effect upon or endanger adjacent property, the character of the area, or the public
health, safety, morals, comfort, and general welfare and will not substantially diminish and impair
property values within the community or neighborhood.
3. Interference with Surrounding Development. The proposed use and development will be
constructed, arranged, and operated so as not to dominate the immediate vicinity or to interfere with
the use and development of neighboring property according to the applicable zoning district
regulations.
4. Adequate Public Facilities. The proposed use and development will be served adequately by
essential public facilities and services such as streets, public utilities including public water supply
system and sanitary sewer, police and fire protection, refuse disposal, public parks, libraries,
schools, and other public facilities and utilities or the applicant will provide adequately for such
facilities as provided by the Village Municipal Code.
5. Traffic Management. That vehicular ingress and egress at the proposed site shall not cause a
significant increase of traffic on residential streets. Unless waived by the Village Engineer, the
applicant shall submit a traffic study including existing, volumes, trip generation, and existing and
proposed level of service on adjacent arterial and collector streets for Plan Commission review.
6. Destruction of Significant Features. The Plan Commission may impose reasonable conditions on
the proposed use and development to avoid or minimize the destruction, loss, or damage of any
natural, scenic, or historic feature of significant importance, taking into account the surrounding
uses, the existing use of the site, and public convenience. (Ord. 005, Series 2004, Part 1)
7. Compliance with Standards. The conditional use shall, in all other respects, conform to the
applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such regulations may, in each
instance, be modified to a more restrictive requirement by the Village Board pursuant to the
recommendations of the Plan Commission. The proposed use and development shall comply with
all additional standards imposed on it by the particular provision of this Division. (Also see
Sections 19.03.1001 and 19.03.1004 of this Ordinance.) (Ord.. 005, Series 2004, Part 1)
B. Special Standards for Specified Conditional Uses. When the zoning district regulations authorize a
conditional use in a particular zoning district and that the conditional use is indicated as having special
standards as set forth in either Section 19.04.0702 and 19.04.0703 of this Division, a Conditional Use Permit
for such use in such zoning district shall not be recommended or granted unless the applicant shall establish
compliance with all such special standards.
C. Considerations. The Plan Commission shall review the site, existing and proposed structures, architectural
plans, neighboring uses, parking areas, driveway locations, highway access, traffic generation, circulation
and safety, drainage, sewerage and water systems, and the proposed operation. In determining whether the
19- 75
applicant’s evidence establishes that the foregoing standards have been met, the Plan Commission shall also
consider the following:
1. Public Benefit. Whether and to what extent the proposed use and development at the particular
location requested is necessary or desirable to provide a service or a facility that is in the interest of
the public convenience or will contribute to the general welfare of the neighborhood or community.
2. Alternative Locations. Whether and to what extent such public goals can be met by the location
of the proposed use and development at another site or in another area that may be more
appropriate based upon public need than the proposed site as determined by the Plan Commission
and Village Board.
3. Mitigation of Adverse Impacts. Whether and to what extent all steps possible have been taken to
minimize any adverse effects of the proposed use and development on the immediate vicinity
through building design, site design, landscaping, and screening.
(Ord. 005, Series 2004, Part 1)
D. Conditions on Conditional Use Permits. The Plan Commission such conditions and limitations
concerning use, architectural design, type of construction, construction commencement and completion
dates, sureties, character, location, landscaping, maintenance, screening, fencing, operation, hours of
operation, improved circulation, deed restrictions, highway and arterial street access restrictions, increased
yards, off-street parking requirements, and any other matters relating to the purposes and objectives of this
Ordinance upon the premises benefited by the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit as may be necessary or
appropriate to prevent or minimize adverse effects upon other property and improvements near the subject
property, upon such public facilities and services, protection of the public interest, and to secure compliance
with the standards and requirements specified in this Ordinance. Such conditions shall be expressly set forth
in the approval of the Conditional Use Permit, and the Plan Commission may require the unconditional
consent of the applicant to such conditions. Violation of any such condition or limitation shall be a violation
of this Ordinance and shall constitute grounds for revocation of the Conditional Use Permit. (Ord. 005,
Series 2004, Part 1)
E. Affidavit of Compliance with Conditions. In all cases in which conditional uses are granted, the Plan
Commission shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the
conditions stipulated to in connection therewith are being, and will be, complied with. Whenever any
Conditional Use Permit granted pursuant to this Ordinance is made subject to conditions or limitations to be
met by the applicant, the applicant shall, upon meeting such conditions, file an affidavit with the Building
Inspector so stating. (Ord. 005, Series 2004, Part 1)
F. Effect of Issuance of a Conditional Use Permit. The grant of a Conditional Use Permit shall not authorize
the establishment or extension of any such use nor the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration,
or moving of any building or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing, and processing of
applications for any other permits or approvals that may be required by the ordinances and codes of the
Village of Grafton, including but not limited to Building Permit, land division approval, landscape plan
approval, site plan approval, or other type of permit or approval.
G. Limitations on Conditional Use Permits.
1. Time Limitations. Subject to an extension of time granted by the Plan Commission, no
Conditional Use Permit shall be valid for a period longer than one (1) year, from the date of
issuance, unless a Building Permit is issued and construction is actually begun within that period
and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion. (Ord. 005, Series 2004, Part 1)
2. Use Discontinuance. A Conditional Use Permit shall be deemed to authorize only the particular
use for which it was issued. Such permits shall automatically expire and cease to be of any force or
effect if such use shall be discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive months or more; provided,
however, that if such use is discontinued due to labor strikes, war, natural disasters, or other similar
cause(s) beyond the reasonable control of the holder of the Conditional Use Permit, such twelve
(12) month period may be extended for a period equal to the period that the holder of the
Conditional Use Permit is prevented from engaging in the particular use for which the Conditional
Use Permit was issued.
19- 76
3. Conditional Use Permit Runs with Land and Not the Applicant. Unless otherwise provided in
the approval of the Conditional Use Permit, a Conditional Use Permit shall be deemed to relate to,
and to be for the benefit of, the use and lot in question rather than the applicant, owner, or operator
of such use or lot. (Ord. 005, Series 2004, Part 1)
4. Additions and Enlargements to Legal Conditional Uses. Any additions or enlargements of an
existing legal conditional use may be completed only pursuant to the procedures and subject to the
standards and limitations provided in this Ordinance for its original approval. A legal conditional
use shall be defined as a use for which the Village had issued a Conditional Use Permit or which
was otherwise legally established before said type of use became a conditional use under this
Ordinance. (Ord. 010, Series 2002, Part 7).
5. Additions and Enlargements to Illegal Conditional Uses. Any additions or enlargements of an
existing illegal conditional use shall not be allowed unless the entire use is made to conform to all
the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located and pursuant to the procedures and
subject to the standards and limitations provided in this Ordinance. An illegal conditional use shall
be defined as a use for which the Village had not issued a Conditional Use Permit or which was
otherwise not legally established before said type of use became a conditional use under this
Ordinance. (Ord. 010, Series 2002, Part 7).
H. Amendments to Conditional Use Permits. A Conditional Use Permit may be amended, varied, or altered
only pursuant to the procedures and subject to the standards and limitations provided in this Ordinance for
its original approval.
SECTION 19.03.0702 DETAILED STANDARDS FOR CONDITIONAL USES IN RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS
A. Open Space Subdivision. The following specific requirements and standards shall apply to all "Open
Space Subdivision" options in the R-RE, R-E, R-1, R-S, and R-4 Districts:
1. Must Meet District Standards. All "Open Space Subdivisions" shall meet the applicable open
space ratio, density, lot dimension, living area per dwelling unit, and height requirements for both
the zoning district and "Open Space Subdivision" option selected.
2. Conservation and/or Open Space Preservation Easements. All "Open Space Subdivisions"
shall have submitted conservation and/or open space preservation easements regulating the
protection of natural resource features and/or open space in the proposed development. Such
documents shall assure that all such conservation and/or open space preservation easements are
held privately and in perpetuity under a Wisconsin nonprofit membership corporation
(homeowners' association). Said conservation and/or open space preservation easements shall
cover the total required Open Space Ratio (OSR) area of the Open Space Subdivision. In addition:
a. Covenants and Restrictions. All covenants, deed restrictions, easements, and similar
restrictions to be recorded in connection with the "Open Space Subdivision" shall provide
that they may not be modified, removed, or released without the express consent of the
Village Board or Plan Commission, as applicable. (Ord. 005, Series 2004, Part 1)
b. Limitation on Construction of Any Structure or Improvement in Areas Covered by a
Conservation and/or Open Space Preservation Easement. No areas covered by a
conservation and/or open space preservation easement shall be used for the construction of
any structure or improvement except such structures and improvements as may be
approved by the Village.
c. Continued Preservation of Open Space Required. The conservation and/or open space
preservation easement must be permanent, not be for a given period of years, and must run
with the land. Such conservation and/or open space preservation easements may provide
that they may be released, but only with the approval of the Village Board.
d. Ownership and Maintenance. The "Open Space Subdivision" plans shall include such
19- 77
provisions for the ownership and maintenance of such open space and improvements as
are reasonably necessary to ensure their continuity, care, conservation, maintenance, and
operation according to predetermined standards and to ensure that remedial measures will
be available to the Village if such open space or improvements are permitted to deteriorate
or are not maintained in a condition consistent with the best interests of the subject "Open
Space Subdivision" or the Village.
3. Wisconsin Nonprofit Membership Corporation (Homeowners' Association). All "Open Space
Subdivisions" shall have submitted the legal instruments and rules for the creation of a Wisconsin
nonprofit membership corporation (homeowners' association). Said nonprofit membership
corporation shall be responsible for maintaining all open space areas and conservation and/or open
space easements in the development. In addition, such nonprofit membership corporation shall
meet each of the following standards:
a. That the bylaws and rules of the nonprofit membership corporation and all declarations,
covenants, and restrictions to be recorded must be approved as part of the "Open Space
Subdivision" plans before becoming effective. Each such document shall provide that it
shall not be amended in any manner that would result in it being in violation of the
requirements of this Ordinance.
b. That the nonprofit membership corporation must be established and all declarations,
covenants, and deed restrictions must be recorded before the sale of any property within
the area of the "Open Space Subdivision" designated to have the exclusive use of the
proposed open space or improvements.
c. That the nonprofit membership corporation must be responsible for casualty and liability
insurance, taxes, and the maintenance of the open space and improvements to be deeded to
the nonprofit membership corporation.
d. That membership in the nonprofit membership corporation must be mandatory for each
property owner of the "Open Space Subdivision" and any successive property owner
having a right to the use or enjoyment of such open space or improvements.
e. That every property owner having a right to the use or enjoyment of such open space or
improvements must pay its pro rata share of the cost of the nonprofit membership
corporation by means of an assessment to be levied by the nonprofit membership
corporation that meets the requirements for becoming a lien on the property according to
the State statutes.
f. That the nonprofit membership corporation must have the right to adjust the assessment to
meet changed needs. The membership vote of the nonprofit membership corporation
required to authorize such adjustment shall not be fixed at more than two-thirds (2/3) of
the nonprofit membership corporation members voting on the issue.
g. That the Village must be given the right to enforce the protective covenants, deed
restrictions, conservation and/or open space preservation easements as they relate to
common property.
h. The Village must be given the right, after a minimum of ten (10) days' written notice to the
nonprofit membership corporation, to perform any maintenance or repair work that the
nonprofit membership corporation has neglected to perform, to assess the nonprofit
membership corporation membership for such work and to have a lien against the property
of any member failing to pay such assessment. For this purpose alone, the Village shall
have all the rights and powers of the nonprofit membership corporation and its governing
body under the agreements and declarations creating the nonprofit membership
corporation. In the case of emergency, the Village may issue a forty-eight (48) hour
enforcement correctional order. In the event the nonprofit membership corporation ceases
to exist, the Village shall have the right to assess the property owner(s) directly.
4. Village Attorney Review. The Village Attorney shall review all conservation and/or open space
19- 78
easements and homeowners' associations and shall approve said instruments as to form.
5. Minimum Required Width of Open Space When Abutting an Adjacent "Conventional
Subdivision." A minimum fifty (50) foot wide open space buffer shall be provided between an
"Open Space Subdivision" and an abutting "Conventional Subdivision." Said open space buffer
shall be protected by a conservation and/or open space preservation easement and shall count
toward the total required amount of open space for the "Open Space Subdivision."
6. Village Board Shall Determine Public Sewer and Public Water Supply in the R-RE District.
The Village Board shall determine public sewer and public water supply as a condition in the R-RE
District.
B. Stables, Private. The following specific standards shall be used in the R-RE District:
1. Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be two (2.0) acres. This minimum lot area shall
be increased by forty thousand (40,000) square feet for each equine in addition to two (2).
2. Required Setbacks. The following minimum setbacks shall also be provided:
a. On parcels of land less than two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet, all feed and
bedding shall be stored indoors.
b. On parcels of land two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet or more, piles of feed or
bedding shall be located seventy-five (75) feet from any public street right-of-way or lot
line of an adjacent nonresidential district and one hundred (100) feet from any lot line of
an adjacent residential district lot line, to minimize odor and nuisance problems.
3. Pasture Location. Pasture area may extend to the setback line.
4. Manure Maintenance. Manure piles shall be stored, removed, and/or applied according to Village
requirements.
5. Stable Location. All points on the perimeter of any stable building or corral shall be at least fifty
(50) feet from the nearest boundary line or right-of-way line of the parcel on which it is located.
C. Institutional Residential Facility. Residential development designed to accommodate institutional
residential uses, such as retirement homes, assisted living facilities, nursing homes, hospices, group homes,
group religious residences, dormitories, convalescent homes, limited care facilities, rehabilitation houses,
and similar land uses not considered to be community living arrangements, adult group homes, or
community based residential facilities under the provisions of Wisconsin Statutes. The following standards
shall apply to all Institutional Residential Facilities:
1. The number of residents shall be limited to two per bedroom.
2. There shall be an on-site manager present at all times.
3. All residents and managers shall park vehicles on-site. Visitors may utilize on-street parking
consistent with Village ordinances.
4. All refuse containers shall be stored behind the front façade of the house or screened from view as
approved by the Director of Planning and Development.
5. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building, accessory structure(s), or
premises because of such facility. (Ord. 014, Series 2014, Part 2;)
19- 79
SECTION 19.03.0703 DETAILED STANDARDS FOR CONDITIONAL USES IN NONRESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS
A. Amusement Parks. The following standards shall apply to all amusement parks:
1. Contiguity with Arterial of Collector Street Required. All amusement parks shall be contiguous
to an arterial or collector street.
2. Bufferyard Requirements. A landscaped bufferyard intensity factor of five (5) (see Division
19.05.0300 of this Ordinance) shall be provided along all property lines of the entire amusement
park and said amusement park shall be enclosed with a masonry wall of at least eight (8) feet or
more in height to discourage entrance from areas other than the designated entrances to said
facilities; or enclosed by an earthen berm of at least eight (8) feet in height or higher and a chainlink
fence, fully screened from view by vegetation to discourage entrance from areas other than the
designated entrances to said facilities
3. Property Abutting Residential Zoning District. If the property abuts a residential zoning district,
then a bufferyard with a minimum width of one hundred (100) feet consisting of an earthen berm
equal to the height of the top of the roofs shall be constructed with a slope of no greater than two to
one (2:1) shall be constructed and landscaping installed to provide one hundred (100) percent
canopy cover over said bufferyard area. The minimum bufferyard intensity factor shall be five (5)
(see Division 19.05.0300 of this Ordinance).
4. Lighting. All off-street parking areas and access ways shall be adequately illuminated. Total cutoff
lighting shall be required. The total cut-off of light shall be at an angle of less than ninety (90)
degrees and shall be located so that the bare light bulb, lamp, or light source is completely shielded
from the direct view of an observer five (5) feet above the ground at the point where the cut-off
angle intersects the ground and so that no light can be viewed from said residential districts.
5. Loudspeaker and Announcement Systems. Loudspeaker and announcement systems shall be so
located with respect to the zoning district boundaries so that the level of sound, as measured in
decibels, as measured at the property line shall not exceed 40 dB during the hours of 9 A.M. to 6
P.M. or 35 dB during the time period from 6 P.M. to 10 P.M. There shall be a prohibition of the
use of such loudspeaker and announcement systems between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 9:00
A.M.
6. Hours of Operation. Hours of operation shall be approved by the Plan Commission as a
component of the Conditional Use Permit. (Ord. 005, Series 2004, Part 1)
B. Animal Hospitals and Veterinary Clinics. Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics shall meet the
following requirements:
1. Activities to be Conducted within Enclosed Building. All activities, except animal exercise
areas, shall be conducted within an enclosed building which allows for adequate ventilation. (Ord.
016, Series 2002, Part 2)
2. No New Animal Hospital or Veterinary Clinic Shall Abut a Residential Zoning District. No
animal hospital or veterinary clinic, constructed after June 1, 2002, shall abut a residential zoning
district. (Ord. 016, Series 2002, Part 2)
3. Mitigation of Impacts and Enclosed Exercise Areas. The operator of the animal hospital or
veterinary clinic shall be responsible for using good management practices to discourage
undesirable odors, insects, and excessive noise. Building site, and landscape design shall also
mitigate noise and other impacts. All exercise areas shall either be indoors or contiguous to the
principal building. If contiguous to the building, exercise areas shall be fully enclosed by a
decorative fence or wall with a design and materials that are compatible with the principal building.
(Ord. 016, Series 2002, Part 2)
C. Automated Teller Machines (ATM). Automated teller machines shall meet the following requirements:
19- 80
1. Lighting. With respect to an open and operating automated teller machine during hours of
darkness:
a. There shall be a minimum of ten (10) footcandles at the face of the automated teller
machine and extending in an unobstructed direction outward five (5) feet.
b. There shall be a minimum of two (2) footcandles within fifty (50) feet from all
unobstructed directions from the face of the automated teller machine.
c. There shall be a minimum of two (2) footcandles in that portion of the parking and/or
drive area within fifty feet of the automated teller machine.
d. All lighting and luminaires provided shall be of the full cut-off type.
2. Landscaping. No landscaping shall be located within proximity of an automated teller machine
which would hamper or obstructed the view of the automated teller machine from all adjoining
public street rights-of-way.
3. Signage. All signage shall comply with requirements of the Village Sign Ordinance.
4. Automated Teller Machines Considered as Accessory Uses. All automated teller machines shall
be considered as an accessory use and shall not be allowed to be constructed until a principal use is
constructed upon a site.
D. Bus Terminals and Park and Ride Lots. Bus terminals and park and ride lots shall meet the following
requirements:
1. Direct Access to Collector or Arterial Street. All bus terminals and park and ride lots shall have
direct access to an arterial street which is a federal, state, or county designated highway.
2. Use Abutting Residential Zoning District Prohibited. Such use shall not adjoin a residential
zoning district.
E. Cemeteries, Human. Cemeteries for humans shall meet the following requirements:
1. State Requirements. All requirements of the Wisconsin State Statutes regarding the interment of
human dead shall be met.
2. Minimum Required Site Area. A minimum required site size for the entire cemetery site shall be
three (3) acres.
3. Off-Street Parking and Maneuvering of Funeral Corteges. There shall be adequate space
within the site for the parking and maneuvering of funeral corteges.
4. Minimum Interment Setbacks. No interment shall take place within fifty (50) feet of any
adjoining lot line.
5. Minimum Structure Setback. All structures shall be set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from
any boundary line of the cemetery property plus two (2) feet for each one (1) foot of structure
height more than twenty-five (25) feet to the maximum height permitted by the zoning district in
which it is located.
F. Convenience Stores. Convenience stores shall meet the following requirements:
1. Direct Access to Arterial Streets Required. All convenience stores shall have direct access to
an arterial street which is a federal, state, or county designated highway, except where it is part of
a nonresidential development where access is provided by a parallel access road, or reverse
frontage road, where nonresidential uses will be on both sides of the street.
2. Required Additional Landscape Bufferyard When Abutting Residential Zoning Districts.
When abutting a residential zoning district, convenience stores shall provide one (1) additional
bufferyard intensity factor to that already required under the provisions set forth in Section
19- 81
19.05.0307 of this Ordinance.
3. Architectural Design. All convenience stores abutting residential uses and zoning districts shall
have pitched roofs matching the roof lines of adjoining residential structures. All such buildings
shall be constructed of brick masonry, split face concrete block, or stone.
4. Fuel Pump Location. Any fuel pumps and pump islands shall be at least seventy-five (75) feet
from any street or abutting lot line and meet all other State of Wisconsin regulations.
Underground storage tanks shall be located in compliance with State and Federal regulations.
5. Canopies. The canopies provided over the pump islands of convenience stores with gas pumps
shall meet the yard requirements of a principal structure. In addition:
a. Obstruction of Visibility at Rights-of-Way Prohibited. The canopy shall not block
visibility at intersections of rights-of-way or drives.
b. Zoning District Front Yard Requirements Shall Be Met. All pump islands, their
surrounding structures, and the canopy overhang shall meet the zoning district's front
yard requirement.
c. Canopies to be Counted Toward Maximum Permitted GFAR and NFAR. All
canopies shall be counted toward the maximum permitted gross floor area ratio (GFAR)
and maximum net floor area ratio (NFAR) of the nonresidential zoning district in which
the canopy is to be constructed.
d. Maximum Height. Under no circumstances shall the underside of the canopy as
measured at the bottom of its exterior fascia be higher than sixteen (16) feet.
e. Signs Not Permitted. No signs shall be permitted on canopy roofs or fascia; provided,
however, that this requirement shall not prevent use of distinctive color schemes on the
canopy fascia generally identified with the owner or operator of the convenience store.
6. Lighting. The off-street parking and fueling area may be illuminated. Total cut-off of light shall
be at an angle of less than ninety (90) degrees and shall be located so that the bare light bulb,
lamp, or light source is completely shielded from the direct view of an observer five (5) feet above
the ground at the point where the cut-off angle intersects the ground and so that no light can be
viewed from any abutting residential zoning districts. Maximum foot-candle levels allowed shall
be four (4.0) foot-candles as measured at the property line, except at vehicular entrances at the
street right-of-way line which shall be a maximum of six (6.0) foot-candles.
7. Concrete Curb and Gutter Required. Concrete curb and gutter shall be required throughout all
off-street parking, drive, and loading areas of the development.
8. Window Display and Sales Signs. Window display and/or sales signage, including merchandise
used as signage, shall be limited to covering no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the exterior
window area. In no case shall fluorescent colors be used for such signage.
9. Hours of Operation. Hours of operation shall be approved by the Plan Commission as a
component of the Conditional Use Permit. (Ord. 005, Series 2004, Part 1)
10. Rental Trucks, Automobiles, and/or Trailers. The rental of trucks, automobiles, and/or trailers
on the premises shall not be permitted.
11. Prohibited Signs. The following signs are hereby prohibited:
a. Any sign which, or any part of which, is in motion by any means, including fluttering or
rotating, or other signs set in motion by movement of the atmosphere. This includes all
flags, except the American flag, pennants, whirling objects, banners, or other entity(s)
attached to strings or lines.
19- 82
b. Inflatable advertising devices or signs.
c. Changeable copy and portable trailer signs, either fixed or moveable except signs
advertising gas prices consistent with State and/or federal regulations and practice of the
industry.
d. Banners which are temporary signs or devices of paper, fabric, plastic, or other flexible
materials and are suspended by wires or poles to advertise a special event.
e. Statues.
f. A sign on a motor vehicle or trailer parked on public or private property so as to be seen
from the public right-of-way for more than three (3) consecutive hours, which has
attached thereto or located thereon any sign for the purpose of advertising a product or
directing people to a business activity.
12. Other Requirements. Any other requirements and/or conditions deemed appropriate by the Plan
Commission. (Ord. 005, Series 2004, Part 1)
G. Gas Stations (including Automotive Repair Facilities and Gas Stations with Automotive Repair
Facilities). Gas stations, gas stations with automotive repair facilities, and automotive repair facilities shall
meet the following requirements:
1. Direct Access to Arterial Streets Required. All gas stations shall have direct access to an
arterial street which is a federal, State, or county designated highway, except where it is part of a
nonresidential development where access is provided by a parallel access road or reverse frontage
road where nonresidential uses will be on both sides of the street.
2. Required Additional Landscape Bufferyard When Abutting Residential Zoning Districts.
When abutting a residential zoning district, gas stations shall provide and one (1) additional
bufferyard intensity factor to that already required under the provisions set forth in Section
19.05.0307 of this Ordinance.
3. Architectural Design. All gas stations abutting residential uses and zoning districts shall have
pitched roofs matching the roof lines of adjoining residential structures. The buildings shall use
the same architectural materials on all sides of the building. All such buildings shall be
constructed of brick masonry, split face concrete block, or stone.
4. Fuel Pump Location. Any fuel pumps and pump islands shall be at least seventy-five (75) feet
from any street or abutting lot line and meet all other State of Wisconsin regulations.
Underground storage tanks shall be located in compliance with State and Federal regulations.
5. Canopies. The canopies provided over the pump islands of gas pumps shall meet the yard
requirements of a principal structure. In addition:
a. Obstruction of Visibility at Rights-of-Way Prohibited. The canopy shall not block
visibility at intersections of rights-of-way or drives.
b. Zoning District Front Yard Requirements Shall Be Met. All pump islands, their
surrounding structures, and the canopy overhang shall meet the zoning district's front
yard requirement.
c. Canopies to be Counted Toward Maximum Permitted GFAR and NFAR. All
canopies shall be counted toward the maximum permitted gross floor area ratio (GFAR)
and the maximum net floor area ratio (NFAR) of the nonresidential zoning district in
which the canopy is to be constructed.
d. Maximum Height. Under no circumstances shall the underside of the canopy as
measured at the bottom of its exterior fascia be higher than sixteen (16) feet.
19- 83
e. Signs Not Permitted. No signs shall be permitted on canopy roofs or fascia; provided,
however, that this requirement shall not prevent use of distinctive color schemes on the
canopy fascia generally identified with the owner or operator of the convenience store.
6. Lighting. The off-street parking and fueling area may be illuminated. Total cut-off of light shall
be at an angle of less than ninety (90) degrees and shall be located so that the bare light bulb,
lamp, or light source is completely shielded from the direct view of an observer five (5) feet above
the ground at the point where the cut-off angle intersects the ground and so that no light can be
viewed from any abutting residential zoning districts. Maximum foot-candle levels allowed shall
be four (4.0) foot-candles as measured at the property line, except at vehicular entrances at the
street right-of-way line which shall be a maximum of six (6.0) footcandles.
7. Repair Services. All repair services shall be done within a completely enclosed building and
shall meet the following requirements:
a. No more than the required off-street parking set forth under the provisions of Section
19.05.0203 of this Ordinance shall be allowed.
b. All storage of vehicles awaiting needed parts shall be within the building or in an
enclosed or screened-in yard. Said screening shall consist of a masonry wall of a
minimum height of six (6) feet.
c. All damaged or nonoperable parts shall be stored indoors until removed from the
premises.
d. An automotive repair facility shall store all vehicle parts within a completely enclosed
building.
e. The maximum allowable number and size of tow trucks which can be parked at the site
shall be determined by the Plan Commission as a condition of approval of the
Conditional Use Permit.
8. Concrete Curb and Gutter Required. Concrete curb and gutter shall be required throughout all
off-street parking, drive, and loading areas of the development.
9. Window Display and Sales Signs. Window display and/or sales signage, including merchandise
used as signage, shall be limited to covering no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the exterior
window area. In no case shall fluorescent colors be used for such signage.
10. Hours of Operation. Hours of operation shall be approved by the Plan Commission as a
component of the Conditional Use Permit. (Ord. 005, Series 2004, Part 1)
11. Rental Trucks, Automobiles, and/or Trailers. The rental of trucks, automobiles, and/or trailers
on the premises shall not be permitted.
12. Prohibited Signs. The following signs are hereby prohibited:
a. Any sign which, or any part of which, is in motion by any means, including fluttering or
rotating, or other signs set in motion by movement of the atmosphere. This includes all
flags, except the American flag, pennants, whirling objects, banners, or other entity(s)
attached to strings or lines.
b. Inflatable advertising devices or signs.
c. Changeable copy and portable trailer signs, either fixed or moveable except signs
advertising gas prices consistent with State and/or federal regulations and practice of the
industry.
d. Banners which are temporary signs or devices of paper, fabric, plastic, or other flexible
materials and are suspended by wires or poles to advertise a special event.
19- 84
e. Statues.
f. A sign on a motor vehicle or trailer parked on public or private property so as to be seen
from the public right-of-way for more than three (3) consecutive hours, which has
attached thereto or located thereon any sign for the purpose of advertising a product or
directing people to a business activity.
13. Other Requirements. Any other requirements and/or conditions deemed appropriate by the Plan
Commission. (Ord. 005, Series 2004, Part 1)
H. Golf Driving Ranges. Golf driving ranges shall meet the following requirements:
1. Minimum Required Site Area. The site shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) acres in area and
shall be of such configuration to permit a minimum driving distance of three hundred (300) yards
from each proposed tee, exclusive of all required bufferyard areas.
2. Additional Site Plan Requirements. A site plan of the facility shall be submitted showing the
layout of the property with all ranges, roughs, tees, structures, off-street parking areas, fencing,
and proposed plant materials and location.
3. Site Lighting. Lighting used at the site shall be designed, located, and constructed to prevent
glare and minimize reflection onto neighboring property. Those lighting standards set forth in
Division 19.05.0400 shall be followed.
4. Minimum Setbacks. Minimum setbacks for front, rear, and side yards shall be one hundred (100)
feet.
5. Direct Access to Arterial Streets Required. All golf driving ranges shall have direct access to
an arterial street which is a federal, State, or county designated highway.
6. Hours of Operation. Hours of operation shall be approved by the Plan Commission as a
component of the Conditional Use Permit. (Ord. 005, Series 2004, Part 1)
I. Helistops. Helistops shall meet the following requirements:
1. Minimum Site Size. The area proposed for this use shall be sufficient in size, and the site shall
otherwise be adequate to meet the standards for the type of facility proposed of the Federal
Aviation Administration and the Department of Transportation according to their published Rules
and Regulations.
2. Location of Landing Area on the Site. Any proposed landing area shall be situated so that any
structures, high voltage power lines, towers, chimneys, and natural obstructions within the
approach zones, shall comply with regulations for height restrictions in airport approach zones of
the Federal Aviation Administration, Wisconsin Division of Aeronautics, or other airport authority
qualified by law to establish hazard zoning regulations. Landing and takeoff areas shall be located
a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet from any zoning lot boundary and a minimum of five
hundred (500) feet from any dwelling unit or residential zoning district.
3. Limitations on the Location of Nearby Residential Structures. Residential uses shall not be
located within the approach path or within the sixty-five (65) Ldn unless measures to achieve a
noise level reduction of 25 dBA (outdoor to indoor) are incorporated into the design and
construction of the residential structures.
4. Applicable Federal, State, and Local Regulations to be Met. Helistops shall meet all
applicable federal, State, and local regulations.
J. Kennels. Kennels shall meet the following requirements:
1. Solid Waste and Feces Removal. The disposal of all feces and other solid waste generated by
19- 85
the kennel operation shall be reviewed and approved by the Village.
2. Required Fencing. All runs and kennel areas shall be fenced with chain link, solid wood fencing,
or a masonry wall of a height to be determined by the Plan Commission. The fence or wall shall
be of quality material and be neat in appearance.
3. Noises, Smoke, and Odor. Any training of animals shall not include the use of loud noises or
produce smoke or odor. The kennel facility shall not generate adverse, off-site noise or odor
impacts.
4. Humane Society of the United States (HSUS) Guidelines to be Used. Humane Society of the
United States (HSUS) Guidelines shall be used, at a minimum, for the flooring, walls between
kennels, drainage, heating and cooling, cage sizes, and runs.
5. No Kennel Shall Abut a Residential Zoning District. No kennel shall abut a residential zoning
district.
6. Number of Animals Limited. The total number of animals housed in the kennel shall not
exceed eight (8).
7. Hours of Operation. Hours of operation shall be approved by the Plan Commission as a
component of the Conditional Use Permit. (Ord. 005, Series 2004, Part 1)
K. Mini-Warehouses. Mini-warehouse facilities shall meet the following requirements:
1. Limitations on Use of Facilities. Such facilities shall be used only for the storage of materials or
articles and shall not be used for assembly, fabrication, processing, or repair.
2. Services and Sales Activities Prohibited. No services or sales shall be conducted from any
storage unit. Garage sales and/or flea market type activities are prohibited.
3. Practice Rooms, Meeting Rooms, and Residences Prohibited. Facilities shall not be used for
practice rooms, meeting rooms, or residences.
4. Outdoor Storage Prohibited. No outdoor storage shall be permitted.
5. Storage of Explosive or Highly Flammable Material Prohibited. Storage of explosive or
highly flammable material shall be prohibited.
L. Motorcycle and Related Recreational Vehicle Sales and Service Uses (excluding boats). Motorcycle
and related recreational vehicle sales and service uses in the CBD District (excluding boats) shall meet the
following requirements:
1. Minimum Site Area. The minimum total site area for a motorcycle and related recreational
vehicle sales and service uses (excluding boats) in the CBD District shall be fifteen thousand
(15,000) contiguous square feet.
2. Required Landscape Bufferyard When Abutting Residential Zoning Districts. When
abutting a residential zoning district, motorcycle and related recreational vehicle sales and service
uses (excluding boats) shall provide a sight-proof fence of approval landscaped screen between
said motorcycle and related recreational vehicle sales and service uses (excluding boats) and the
abutting residential zoning district.
3. Screening of All Storage and Garbage or Waste Facilities. All storage and garbage or waste
facilities shall be screened from view, fully enclosed and permanently maintained.
4. Lighting. The site may be illuminated. Total cut-off light shall be at an angle of less than ninety
(90) degrees and shall be located so that the bare light bulb, lamp or light source is completely
shielded from the direct view of an observer five (5) feet above the ground at the point where the
cut-off angle intersects the ground and so that no light can be viewed from any abutting residential
zoning district. The maximum footcandle level shall be two (2.0) footcandles as measured at the
19- 86
property line.
5. Repair Services. All repair services shall be performed within a completely enclosed building
and shall meet the following requirements:
a. All storage of vehicles awaiting needed parts or repairs shall be within the building.
b. All damaged or non-operable parts shall be stored indoors until moved from the premises.
c. No outdoor vehicle testing shall be allowed, on premises.
6. Hours of Operation. Hours of operation shall be approved by the Plan Commission as a
component of the Conditional Use Permit. (Ord. 005, Series 2004, Part 1)
M. Outdoor Nursery and Garden Sales. Outdoor nursery and garden sales as either a principal use or
accessory use shall meet the following requirements:
1. Outdoor Sales of Merchandise to be Accessory to Enclosed Building. There shall be an
enclosed building with outdoor sales of merchandise accessory to said building.
2. No Outdoor Display Permitted Not Accessory to Enclosed Building. No outdoor display shall
be permitted which is not accessory to an enclosed building.
3. Maximum Area of Outdoor Sales. The overall area of any outdoor sales accessory use shall not
exceed the area of the principal enclosed building.
4. Chemicals and Fertilizers. The Plan Commission shall determine the extent, type, amount, and
location of all chemicals and fertilizers.
5. Bufferyards. The required bufferyard intensity level factor shall be as indicated in Table
19.05.0307 of this Ordinance for the applicable zoning district(s).
6. Hours of Operation. Hours of operation shall be approved by the Plan Commission as a
component of the Conditional Use Permit. (Ord. 005, Series 2004, Part 1)
N. Radio and Television Transmitting and Receiving Facilities. Radio and television transmitting and
receiving facilities shall meet the following requirements:
1. Interference With Air Traffic Prohibited. The proposed structure shall not result in restriction
or interference with air traffic or air travel to or from any existing or proposed airport.
2. Interference With Radio and Television Reception Prohibited. The proposed structure shall
not result in interference with radio and television reception in nearby residential or nonresidential
areas based upon the applicable Federal Communications Commission regulations.
3. Minimum Setback Requirements. There shall be a setback of sufficient radius around the
antenna structure (as measured from the extremities of the antenna base) equal to the antenna
tower height plus twenty-five (25) feet so that its collapse will be contained on the property.
4. On-Site Locational Requirements for Radio and Television Receiving Facilities.
a. An antenna structure shall be located within the rear yard of the property except for
corner lots. On corner lots, the antenna may be located in the portion of the lot which
functions as a rear yard, but shall not be located closer to the street than the principal use
(that portion of the principal use closest to the street). Any antenna located within a
required side yard shall be located behind (further from the street than) the principal
structure on any lot abutting the side yard.
b. All satellite antennas shall be screened from view from any street by an opaque fence,
wall, or hedge of a minimum of six (6) feet in height.
19- 87
c. Adequate space, as determined by the Plan Commission, shall be provided on-site for
antenna and antenna structure maintenance vehicles to access and maneuver on the
property.
5. Maximum Height. Such antennas and antenna structures shall not exceed a maximum height of
one-hundred and fifty (150) feet.
6. Antennas and Antenna Structures To Be Structurally Self-Supporting. All antennas and
antenna structures shall be structurally self-supporting without the use of guy wires and shall be
designed by a structural professional engineer licensed in the State of Wisconsin.
7. Advertising. No form of advertising shall be allowed on the antenna, antenna structure, base, or
framework.
8. Cable Installation. All cable to and from the antenna and/or antenna structure shall be installed
underground unless the antenna is mounted on a building where cable will go directly into the
structure.
9. Minimum Distance Between Antennas and/or Antenna Towers. The minimum distance
between any antennas which exceed a height of fifty (50) feet shall be one-half (0.5) mile as
measured from the exterior base of the antenna or antenna structure.
10. Detailed Site and Landscape Plan Required to be Approved. A detailed Site Plan and
Landscape Plan shall be submitted to the Village Plan Commission pursuant to the Site Plan
submittal requirements of Division 19.06.0100 and the Landscape Plan requirements of Division
1906.00300 of this Ordinance. (Ord. 005, Series 2004, Part 1)
O. Retail and Commercial Service Buildings In Excess of 20,000 Square Feet of Area. The following
requirements are applicable to all new retail and commercial service buildings in excess of twenty thousand
(20,000) gross square feet and shall be conditional uses in the zoning districts in which they are allowed,
except that a separate Conditional Use Permit is not required where such buildings are part of a PID
District, PUD District, or BP District. All additions to existing retail and commercial service buildings,
built either before or after the adoption of this Ordinance, which brings the total building size to over
twenty thousand (20,000) gross square feet shall also require a Conditional Use Permit. The following
standards are intended to ensure that large retail and commercial service buildings, and the sites they
occupy, are properly located and compatible with the surrounding area and community character of the
Village. Such projects shall also be subject to the more general standards for the approval of Conditional
Use Permits or PUD Districts. (Ord. 008, Series 2001, Part 11).
1. Compatibility with Village Plans. The applicant shall provide, through a written report
submitted with the petition for a Conditional Use Permit or rezoning application for the BP, PID,
or PUD Districts, adequate evidence that the proposed building and overall development project
shall be compatible with the Village's community character, urban design, natural area
preservation, commercial development, redevelopment, or community facility objectives as
expressed in adopted elements of the Village's master plan.
2. Building Materials. Building materials shall be unified throughout the building, and shall
complement other buildings in the vicinity. Exterior building materials shall be of high and
comparable aesthetic quality on all sides. Building materials such as glass, brick, decorative
concrete block, or stucco shall be used, as determined by the architectural review board, plan
commission, and village board. Decorative architectural metal with concealed fasteners may be
approved if sensitively incorporated into the overall design of the building.
3. Building Design. The building exterior shall be unified in design throughout the structure, and
shall complement other buildings in the vicinity. The building shall employ varying building
setbacks, height, roof treatments, door and window openings, and other structural and decorative
elements to reduce apparent size and scale. A minimum of twenty (20) percent of all of the
combined façades of the structure shall employ actual façade protrusions or recesses. A minimum
of twenty (20) percent of all of the combined linear roof eave or parapet lines of the structure shall
employ differences in height, with such differences being six (6) feet or more as measured eave to
19- 88
eave or parapet to parapet for buildings over fifty thousand (50,000) square feet. Roofs with
particular slopes may be required by the Village to complement existing buildings or otherwise
establish a particular aesthetic objective. Ground floor facades that face and are within one
hundred (100) feet of public streets shall have arcades, display windows, entry areas, awnings, or
other such features along no less than fifty (50) percent of their horizontal length. The integration
of windows into building design is strongly encouraged.
4. Building Entrances. Public building entryways shall be clearly defined and highly visible on the
building’s exterior design, and shall be emphasized by on-site traffic flow patterns. Two (2) or
more of the following design features shall be incorporated into all public building entryways:
canopies or porticos, overhangs, projections, arcades, peaked roof forms, arches, outdoor patios,
display windows, distinct architectural details. All sides of the building that directly face or abut a
public street or public parking area shall have at least one public entrance, except that the Village
shall not require building entrances on more than two (2) sides of any building or on frontages
facing and within three hundred (300) feet of the Interstate Highway.
5. Building Color. Building façade colors shall be non-reflective, subtle, neutral, or earth tone. The
use of high intensity colors, metallic colors, black, or fluorescent colors on façades shall be
prohibited. Building trim and architectural accent elements may feature brighter colors, but such
colors shall be muted, not metallic, not fluorescent, and not specific to particular uses or tenants.
Standard corporate and trademark colors shall be permitted only on sign face and copy areas,
subject to the limitations in Section 19.03.0703(Q)(13).
6. Building Location. Modest building setbacks are encouraged. Where buildings are proposed to
be distant from a public street, the overall development design shall include smaller buildings on
pads or outlots closer to the street.
7. Screening. Mechanical equipment, refuse containers and any permitted outdoor storage shall be
fully concealed from on-site and off-site ground level views, with materials identical to those used
on the building exterior. Loading docks shall be completely screened from surrounding roads and
properties. Said screening may be accomplished through loading areas internal to buildings,
screen walls which match the building exterior in materials and design, fully opaque landscaping
at time of planting, or combinations of the above. Gates and fencing may be used for security and
access, but not for screening, and shall be of high aesthetic quality.
8. Traffic Impact. All projects that include buildings over twenty thousand (20,000) square feet
shall have direct access to an arterial street, or shall dedicate public roads which have direct access
to a public street. Vehicle access shall be designed to accommodate peak on-site traffic volumes
without disrupting traffic on public streets or impairing pedestrian safety. This shall be
accomplished through adequate parking lot design and capacity; access drive entry throat length,
width, design, location, and number; and traffic control devices; and sidewalks. The site design
shall provide direct connections to adjacent land uses if required by the Village. Prior to
development approval, the applicant’s traffic engineer shall complete and present a traffic impact
analysis following Wisconsin Department of Transportation District Two guidelines. Where the
project will cause off-site public roads, intersections, or interchanges to function below level of
service C, as defined by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, the Village may deny the
application, require a size reduction in the proposed development, or require that the developer
construct and/or pay for required off-site improvements.
9. Parking. Not more than fifty (50) percent of the off-street parking spaces shall be located directly
between the front façade of the building and the public street, unless additional buildings in the
overall development are or will be located between the main building and the public street. Such
additional buildings must be sufficient in size, location, and number to provide an effective visual
break between the public street and the parking lot. Parking lots in which the number of spaces
significantly exceeds the minimum number of parking spaces required in Division 19.05.0200 of
this Ordinance shall be allowed only with specific and reasonable justification. Parking lot design
shall employ interior, curbed landscaped islands at all parking aisle ends. In addition, the project
shall provide landscaped islands within each parking aisle spaced at intervals no greater than one
island per every twenty (20) spaces in that aisle. Islands at the ends of aisles shall count toward
meeting this requirement. Each required landscaped island shall be a minimum of three hundred
19- 89
(300) square feet in area. Landscaped medians shall also be used to break large parking areas into
smaller pods, with a maximum of one hundred (100) spaces in any one pod.
10. Natural Resources Protection. Each project shall meet the natural resource protection standards
set forth in Division 19.04.0100 of this Ordinance. In general, existing natural features shall be
integrated into the site design as a site and community amenity.
11. Landscaping. On-site landscaping shall be provided per the landscaping requirements of the C-4
District. In addition to the number of plant units required in the C-4 District based on the total site
area, the project shall provide:
a. Extensive building foundation landscaping for all building frontages facing public streets,
parking lots, or residential districts to provide visual breaks in the mass of the building.
Building foundation landscaping shall be placed so that, at maturity, the plant’s drip line
is within ten (10) feet of the foundation. Canopy/shade trees shall not be used to meet
this requirement.
b. Extensive paved area landscaping for all parking, driveway, and loading areas to screen
and provide visual breaks in the size of such paved areas. Canopy/shade trees shall be
emphasized within landscaped islands, with shrubs, groundcover, or grass preferred to
mulch or stones.
12. Lighting. On-site exterior lighting shall meet all the standards of Division 19.05.0400 of this
Ordinance, except that total cut-off luminaires with angles of less than ninety (90) degrees shall be
required for all pole and building security lighting. The color and design of pole lighting
standards shall be compatible with the building and the Village’s public lighting in the area, if a
particular public lighting theme has been established for the area.
13. Signage. The plan for exterior signage shall provide for modest, coordinated, and complimentary
exterior sign locations, configurations, and colors throughout the development. All freestanding
signage within the development shall compliment on-building signage. Monument style ground
signs are strongly preferred over pole signs, and consolidated signs for multiple users are strongly
preferred over multiple individual signs. The Village may require the use of muted corporate
colors on signage if proposed colors are not compatible with the Village’s design objectives for
the area.
14. Bicycle and Pedestrian Access. The entire development shall provide for safe pedestrian and
bicycle access to all uses within the development, connections to existing and planned public
pedestrian and bicycle facilities, and connections to adjacent properties. Sidewalks shall be
provided along the entire length of any façade containing a public entrance, leaving room for
foundation planting beds. Pedestrian walkways shall be provided from all building entrances to
existing or planned public sidewalks or pedestrian/bike facilities. Internal pedestrian walkways
must be distinguished from driving surfaces. Site design shall allow pedestrians to walk parallel
to moving cars. The development shall provide secure, integrated bicycle parking and pedestrian
furniture in appropriate quantities and location. The building shall provide awnings or other
weather protection features within thirty (30) feet of all customer entrances.
15. Central Areas/Features. Each development which contains a building over fifty thousand
(50,000) square feet in area shall provide central area(s) or feature(s) such as a patio/seating area,
pedestrian plaza with benches, outdoor playground area, water feature, and/or other such
deliberately designated areas or focal points that adequately enhance the development or
community. All such areas shall be openly accessible to the public, connected to the public and
private sidewalk system, designed with materials compatible with the building and remainder of
the site, and maintained over the life of the building and project.
16. Cart Returns. A minimum of one (1) two hundred (200) square foot cart return area shall be
provided for every one hundred (100) parking spaces. Cart corrals shall be of durable, all season
construction, and shall be designed and colored to be compatible with the building and parking lot
light standards. There shall be no exterior cart return or cart storage areas located within twenty19-
90
five (25) feet of the building.
17. Impact on Existing Grafton Business Locations. Where such a building is proposed as a
replacement location for a business already located within the Village, the Village shall prohibit
any privately imposed limits on the type of reuse of the previously occupied building through
conditions of sale or lease. If the applicant requires such limits, the applicant may seek Village
approval to demolish the previously occupied structure and prepare the site for future
redevelopment.
18. Waiver of Standards. The Plan Commission may waive any of the above standards by a threequarters
(3/4) vote of members in attendance, but only if supplemental design elements or
improvements are incorporated into the project which compensate for the waiver of the particular
standard. (Ord. 005, Series 2004, Part 1)
19. Hours of Operation. Hours of operation shall be approved by the Plan Commission as a
component of the Conditional Use Permit. (Ord. 005, Series 2004, Part 1)
P. Retail and Commercial Service Buildings in Excess of 50,000 Square Feet of Area
The following requirements are applicable to all new retail and commercial service buildings in excess of
fifty thousand (50,000) gross square feet (Large Format Commercial Uses) and shall require a Conditional
Use Permit in the zoning districts in which they are allowed, except that a separate Conditional Use Permit
is not required where such buildings are part of a PID District, PUD District, or BP District. The following
standards are intended to ensure that:
• Large retail and commercial service buildings and the sites they occupy are properly located and
are compatible with the surrounding area and the community character of the Village,
• Such projects meet a demonstrated public need.
• Such projects promote a practical and viable re-use of the structures and the development site
within the context of the surrounding area.
Such projects shall also be subject to the more general standards for the approval of Conditional Use
Permits or PUD Districts and to all of the requirements in Section 19.03.0703 (P) above.
1. Reuse Plan Requirements. As a condition to issuance of a building permit, the property
owner/developer of large format commercial buildings shall provide one of the following to the
Village as a condition of the approval of a conditional use permit for such buildings in excess of
50,000 square feet.
a. Option I - Cash Contribution. A cash contribution to the Village of $15,000 for the first
50,000 square feet of floor area and $0.10 for every additional square foot of usable space
to fund the future costs to the Village of preparing a reuse plan. The Village will deposit
the cash contribution in a separate non-lapsing interest bearing account with interest
accruing to the benefit of the Village. The Village may use the funds to market the
building for re-use and/or prepare or implement a redevelopment plan in the event that a
building remains vacant for more than 24 months and during that time, (a) the owner fails
to respond to written inquiries from the Village as to owner’s marketing and re-use
efforts, or (b) the owner requests the Village to undertake such efforts.
b. Option II - Re-Use Plan. A detailed reuse plan that clearly identifies the opportunities
and challenges of planning for redevelopment of any large retail or commercial building.
1) The Re-Use Plan for the large retail or commercial building shall:
a) Reaffirm the neighborhood vision and development characteristics of
the area.
b) Enhance the quality of life and promotes a sense of community.
c) Integrate storm water management facilities as an essential design
component of the site.
d) Ensure the appearance, visibility and the distinctive character of the
development.
e) Provide site pedestrian and bicycling amenities
19- 91
f) Provide appropriate road access and internal traffic circulation.
g) Promote mixed use residential and commercial development concepts
in the layout of the Re-Use Plan if appropriate.
2) Adoption of the Re-Use Plan. When the Re-Use Plan is complete, the Village Plan
Commission shall recommend, and the Village Board shall accept, the Re-Use Plan. The
Plan Commission shall review and modify the Re-Use Plan to reflect any adopted
amendments to the Comprehensive Plan and then-current zoning regulations prior to
implementing the Re-Use Plan. The Plan Commission may only modify the Re-Use Plan
after mailing to the owner, by certified mail sent at least 10 days prior to the hearing, the
proposed modifications and notice of a public hearing at which the Plan Commission
shall consider the owner's comments.
3) Implementation of the Re-Use Plan. To reap the benefits of an Adopted Re-Use Plan
requires consistent implementation. The Village must be prepared to:
a) Review proposed land divisions, conditional use permits and planned
developments based on conformance with the Plan.
b) Facilitate and approve only those developments that are consistent with
the Adopted Re-Use Plan, paying particular attention to the proposed
land use pattern, the density and intensity of the proposed development,
community character and the availability of the appropriate
infrastructure to support
2. Waiver of Standards. The Plan Commission may waive any of the above standards by a threequarters
(3/4) vote of members in attendance, but only if supplemental re-use elements are
incorporated into the project which compensate for the waiver of the particular standard.
3. Vacant Sites Maintenance Requirements. As a condition of issuance of the conditional use
permit for a large format commercial building, the property owner shall execute and the Village
shall record, with the Ozaukee County Register of Deeds, a written notice stating that the owner of
any vacated building shall:
a. Remove snow and ice from all drives and sidewalks,
b. Eliminate weeds,
c. Maintain landscaping and keep lawns mowed,
d. Dispose of garbage and refuse,
e. Repair or replace broken windows with protective barriers, and
f. Maintain and illuminate security lighting.
These maintenance requirements shall run with the land and be binding on the then-current owner of the vacant
building.
(Ord. 026, Series 2007, Part 1)
Q. Stables, Public. Public stables shall meet the following requirements:
(Ord. 026, Series 2007, Part 2)
1. Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be ten (10) acres.
2. Required Minimum Setbacks. Front, rear, and side yard setbacks shall be a minimum of
seventy-five (75) feet.
3. Pasture Location. Pasture area may extend to thirty (30) feet from the lot line.
4. Manure Removal and General Maintenance. Manure piles shall be stored, removed, and/or
applied, according to applicable Village requirements. The operator of the stable shall be
responsible for using good management practices to discourage undesirable odors and insects.
19- 92
5. Stable Location. All points on the perimeter of any stable building or coral shall be at least
seventy-five (75) feet from the nearest boundary line or right-of-way line of the parcel on which it
is located.
6. Feed and Bedding Storage. All feed and bedding shall be stored indoors.
7. Plan of Operation Required. The applicant shall submit a plan of operation for the Plan
Commission's review and consideration. (Ord. 005, Series 2004, Part 1)
R. Pawn Shops and Check Cashing Stores. Pawn and check cashing stores shall meet the following criteria:
1. Pawn Shops defined. A pawn shop is defined as any establishment which is involved in pawn
brokerage, or the business of loaning money for himself or herself or for another person, receiving
as security for payment thereof pawns or pledges of property, or the business of purchasing
personal property and reselling or agreeing to resell, trade, or exchange such articles to vendors,
their personal representatives, or their assignees at a price agreed upon at or before the time of
such purchase, whether such business be the principal or sole business so carried on or be merely
incidental to, in connection with, or a branch or a department of some other business.
2. Check cashing places, check cashing stores, pay day loan stores, non-chartered financial
institution, and deferred presentment business defined. A check cashing place, check cashing
store, or non-chartered financial institution is defined as a business other than a state or federally
chartered bank, credit union, mortgage lender or savings and loan association that offers check
cashing services and loans for payment of a percentage fee for cashing a check or negotiable
instrument, “payday loan” businesses that make loans upon assignment of wages to be received,
businesses that provide loans secured by title of vehicle unless the loan is made for the purpose of
purchasing the vehicle, and businesses that function as deferred presentment business. A deferred
presentment business is a business that makes transactions pursuant to a written agreement in
which the licensee accepts a check and agrees to hold the check for at least three (3) days before
presentment for payment or deposit. To simplify all references in this ordinance, from this point
forward this use will be referenced in the all encompassing term “check cashing store.”
3. Conditional use consideration process. When pawn shops and check cashing stores check are
allowed for consideration in certain zoning districts by conditional use application all rules and
regulations shall be applicable pertaining to Sections 19.03.0700 Conditional Use Standards and
Regulations, Section 19.07.0103 Applications for Conditional Use Permit and all other pertinent
rules and regulations of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code. In addition, this section of the
Municipal Code shall provide specific rules and further regulations regarding pawn shops and
check cashing stores. These rules and regulations will include collective standards that include
both pawn shops and check cashing stores and exclusive standards that have specific application.
The Plan Commission, in its authority, may utilize all required information and documentation to
be submitted by the applicant as part of the application process in considering the conditional use
permit application for a pawn shop or check cashing store.
4. Collective standards that include both pawn shops and check cashing stores. Pawn shops and
check cashing stores shall meet the following requirements:
a. The place of business shall not be conducted in a disorderly manner, or in a manner that
constitutes a public nuisance. The applicant shall take all measures reasonably within its
power, including the refusal of service, if necessary, to insure that its customers do not
congregate in a disorderly manner outside the place of business, do not obstruct the
public sidewalks and street outside the place of business and do not act in a menacing or
harassing manner on said sidewalks and streets.
b. The store operators shall adequately police the store and storefront to prevent the
accumulation of litter, and shall maintain a sufficient number of trash receptacles in and
in front of the premises. The premises shall be utilized only for the type of business (use)
described and represented in a plan of operation document submitted to the Plan
Commission as part of the conditional use consideration process. Full compliance with
the submitted and Plan Commission approved plan of operation document is mandated.
c. Any change of operation or in operation, as well as any change in the ownership of the
premises including a transfer of stock (certificate) which results in a change of control,
19- 93
shall require full review of an amended plan of operation by Plan Commission, at which
time they may be amended, modified, supplemented, or revoked as necessary. The Plan
Commission may also, dependent upon the size and type of amendment to the plan of
operation, may require the applicant to formally amend the conditional use permit
pursuant to Section 19.07.0103 of the Municipal Code.
d. All requirements of Chapter 9.63 Digital Imaging Security System Requirements of the
Municipal Code will apply to pawn shops and check cashing stores.
e. Pawn shops and check cashing stores shall comply with all federal law and regulation and
all State of Wisconsin law and regulations.
f. A background check of the owner and/or store operator will be conducted by the Village
of Grafton Police Department and provided to the Plan Commission prior to
consideration of a conditional use permit.
5. Specific standards and regulations for pawn shops. Pawn shops will be required to provide
additional information as part of their conditional use permit application to the Plan Commission.
These requirements for individuals, partnerships, and corporate pawn shops are as follows:
a. The name, place and date of birth, street resident address, and phone number of the
applicant.
b. Any other name used by the applicant, and if so, the name or names used and information
concerning dates and places where used.
c. The name of the business if it is to be conducted under a designation, name, or style other
than the name of the applicant.
d. The street addresses at which the applicant has lived during the preceding 5 years.
e. The type, name, and location of every business or occupation in which the applicant has
been engaged during the preceding 5 years and the name(s) and addresses of the
applicant's employers and partners, if any, for the preceding 5 years.
f. Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, crime, or violation of any
ordinance other than a traffic ordinance. If so, the applicant shall furnish information as
to the time, place, and offenses for which convictions were had.
g. The physical description of the applicant and identification card of the applicant, agent,
owner, operator, and all store management.
h. The name of the store and all management staff, proprietor(s), or other agent(s) in charge
of the business and all applicable information concerning each manager, proprietor, or
agent.
i. While in operation the pawn shop must provide the Village of Grafton Police Department
a report of all weekly receipts that thoroughly describe the items received and sold by the
store including a copy of a photograph identification card of the customer pawning a
given item.
6. Pawn shop bond requirements. As an additional requirement for pawn shops a bond will be
required in the amount of to be determined by the Plan Commission for a period that is valid for
up to 3 months after the pawn shop closes permanently or relocates to another location. The
purpose of this bond is to insure that the original owners of pawned items in the pawn shops
possession prior to the permanent closing are given the opportunity to procure these items. In
determining the bond amount at the time of the conditional use consideration process the Plan
Commission may take into account the size of the proposed store, the type of items that will
commonly be obtained by the pawn shop, projected revenue and inventory, and operational
history.
7. Technology. The Village of Grafton Police Department may use any available technology or data
as allowable by Wisconsin Statutes to accomplish the goals and objectives of this ordinance.
8. Legal non-conforming uses. Any legal operation of a pawn shop or check cashing store prior to
the adoption of this ordinance shall be considered a legal non-conforming use pursuant to Section
19.03.1000 of the Municipal Code. However, any expansion or modification of a legal non19-
94
conforming use under the provisions of these regulations as it relates to pawn shops or check
cashing stores will evoke the requirements of this ordinance.
(19.03.0703(S) – Ord. 002, Series 2010, Part 1)
S. Tourist Rooming Houses. Tourist rooming houses shall meet the following requirements:
1. Occupancy shall be limited to two persons per bedroom, plus an additional two persons. At no
time may the number of guests exceed eight regardless of the number of bedrooms in the dwelling
unit.
2. The maximum stay for any party other than the owner of the premises shall be 30 consecutive
days.
3. The number of guest vehicles allowed on-site is limited to the number of bedrooms in the unit.
4. No recreational vehicle or tent may be used for living or sleeping purposes.
5. The appearance of the dwelling shall not be altered in a manner that would cause the premises to
differ from its residential character either by the use of colors, materials, construction, lighting,
signs, or the emission of sounds, odors, dust, or vibrations that can carry beyond the premises.
6. The availability of the tourist rooming house to the public shall not be advertised on-site.
7. The tourist rooming house must be licensed by the State of Wisconsin and meet all requirements
including room tax payments.
(Ord. 008, Series 2014, Part 2)
SECTION 19.03.0704 SITING AND CONSTRUCTION OF MOBILE SERVICE SUPPORT
STRUCTURES AND FACILITIES
A. This section shall regulate (1) the siting and construction of any new mobile service support structure and
facilities; (2) with regard to a class 1 collocation, the substantial modification of an existing support
structure and mobile service facilities; and (3) with regard to a class 2 collocation, collocation on an
existing support structure which does not require the substantial modification of an existing support
structure and mobile service facilities. The proposed tower, antenna, and equipment shall meet the
requirements of Wis Stats. 66.0404, as amended, including the following.
B. Definitions.
1. Class 1 Collocation: The placement of a new mobile service facility on an existing support
structure such that the owner of the facility does not need to construct a free standing support
structure for the facility but does need to engage in substantial modification.
2. Class 2 Collocation: The placement of a new mobile service facility on an existing support
structure such that the owner of the facility does not need to construct a free standing support
structure for the facility or engage in substantial modification.
3. See Wis Stats. 66.0404, as amended, for other definitions.
C. Application Process.
1. The siting and construction of any new mobile service support structure and facilities and a class 1
collocation is a conditional use. A written permit application must be completed by any applicant
and submitted to the Village. The application information and review process listed in Wis. Stats.
66.0404 (2) shall apply.
2. A class 2 collocation is a permitted use. A written permit application must be completed by any
applicant and submitted to the Village. The application information and review process listed in
Wis. Stats. 66.0404 (3) shall apply.
3. General review standards in this Zoning Ordinance for conditional uses shall not apply to mobile
service support structure and facilities.
D. On-site Locational Requirements.
1. An antenna shall be located within the rear yard of the property except for corner lots. On corner
lots, the antenna may be located in the portion of the lot which functions as a rear yard, but shall
not be located closer to the street than the principal use (that portion of the principal use closest to
19- 95
the street). Any antenna located within a required side yard shall be located behind (further from
the street than) the principal structure on any lot abutting the side yard.
2. All equipment shall be screened from view from any street by an opaque fence, wall, or hedge of a
minimum of six (6) feet in height.
3. Adequate space, as determined by the Plan Commission, shall be provided on-site for antenna and
antenna structure maintenance vehicles to access and maneuver on the property.
E. Interference With Air Traffic Prohibited. The proposed antenna or antenna structure shall not result in
restriction or interference with air traffic or air travel to or from any existing or proposed airport.
F. Antennas and Antenna Structures To Be Structurally Self-Supporting. All antennas and antenna
structures shall be structurally self-supporting without the use of guy wires and shall be designed by a
structural professional engineer licensed in the State of Wisconsin.
G. Screening. All ground equipment shall be screened from view from any street by an opaque fence, wall, or
hedge of a minimum of six (6) feet in height.
H. Advertising. No form of advertising shall be allowed on the antenna, antenna structure, base, or
framework.
I. Cable Installation. All cable to and from the antenna and/or antenna structure shall be installed
underground unless the antenna is mounted on a building where cable will go directly into the structure.
J. Removal of Antenna Facilities Upon Abandonment. A bond or irrevocable letter of credit will be
provided to the Village for use by the Village for the removal of the antenna facilities if the antenna
facilities are abandoned or no longer used.
K. More Than One Service Provider Allowed To Use Antenna Facilities. The applicant shall allow the
sharing of antenna facilities with at least two other service providers through the use of a “co-location”
agreement.
(Ord. 006, Series 2014, Part 2)
DIVISION 19.03.0800 ACCESSORY AND TEMPORARY USE STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS
SECTION 19.03.0801 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY USES
A. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses and structures are permitted in any zoning district but not until the
principal structure is present or under construction on the lot or parcel. Residential accessory uses shall not
involve the conduct of any business, trade, or industry. Accessory uses include incidental repairs; storage;
parking facilities; gardening; servants, owners, itinerant agricultural laborers, and watchmen's temporary
quarters, not for rent; detached decks; private swimming pools; and private emergency shelters.
B. Location. No part of an accessory building shall be within the front yard or required side yard or rear yard,
except:
1. Required Minimum Distance from Alley Right-of-Way. When an alley exists, no part of an
accessory building shall be closer than five (5) feet to the right-of-way line of said alley.
2. Area of Accessory Building (except Garages). That this shall not prohibit the erection of one (1)
accessory building not exceeding one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area to be no closer than
three (3) feet to the side and rear lot lines.
3. Garages. (See Title 16 "Buildings and Construction" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code
for applicable location requirements.)
C. Time of Construction. No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot before the start
of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory.
19- 96
D. Percentage of Required Rear Yard Occupied. No accessory building or buildings shall occupy more
than twenty (20) percent of the area of a required rear yard.
E. Height of Accessory Buildings, Structures, or Garages in Required Rear Yards.
1. No accessory building or structure, or portion thereof, located in a required rear yard shall exceed
the maximum permitted height of the zoning district in which the accessory building or structure is
located.
2. No accessory building or structure shall exceed a high of fifteen (15) feet except in the A-1, A-2,
and A-3 Districts.
F. No Slab Required for Accessory Buildings of 150 Square Feet or Less in Area. Accessory buildings of
one hundred fifty (150) square feet or less in area (excluding trash and garbage waste receptacles, or
dumpsters, in all zoning districts) shall not require a concrete slab foundation. If a concrete slab foundation
is not provided for such accessory building, the flooring shall be constructed of decay resistant wood and
the building shall be securely anchored to the ground.
G. Maximum Number of Accessory Buildings (including Garages) Per Lot. There shall be no limitation
on the maximum number of accessory buildings in the A-1, A-2, and A-3 Districts. The maximum number
of accessory buildings plus attached garages per zoning lot in the R-RE, R-E, R-1, R-S, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5,
and R-6 Districts shall be two (2). The maximum number of accessory buildings and structures per zoning
lot in the MFR-1, MFR-2, CBD, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, O, BP, M-1, PID, I, PR, and PUD Districts shall be
determined by the Plan Commission at the time of Site Plan review. (Also see Section 19.02.0206
regarding the maximum number of principal buildings on a zoning lot.) (Ord. 008, Series 2001, Part 12)
SECTION 19.03.0802 DETAILED STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY USES IN RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS
The following are detailed standards for certain accessory uses which are permitted accessory uses in residential
districts:
A. Automobile or Motor Vehicle Repair in Residential Districts. The repair of an automobile or a motor
vehicle in any residential or agricultural zoning district is subject to the following restrictions:
1. Minor Repairs and Maintenance. Only minor repairs and maintenance may be done on vehicles
owned by the occupant of the structure which, for purposes of this Paragraph, are the changing and
replenishment of fluid levels, such as hydraulic fluid, windshield washer fluid, and lubricating oil;
the replacement of sparkplugs or ignition points; the rotation of tires and the checking of adequate
pressure; and the replacement of drive belts and hydraulic lines.
2. Other Repairs. Any other repairs on the motor vehicle or automobile shall be restricted to totally
enclosed spaces that are properly ventilated and only accomplished on privately registered
vehicles lawfully licensed.
B. Fences.
1. General. The following are required of all fences installed in the Village of Grafton:
a. All fences shall be maintained in good repair and in structurally sound condition. All
fences shall be constructed and maintained in a good aesthetic condition and in such a
manner and of such materials and colors so as not to adversely affect the value of
adjoining property or property in the immediate neighborhood. No fence may be
constructed or maintained which is detrimental to human life or safety or causes a traffic
hazard. All fences shall be constructed and maintained straight, plumb, and of an even
height along its length, except such deviations as required by grade.
19- 97
b. No advertising or signs shall be permitted on any fence in any zoning district.
c. No materials shall be stored between a fence located adjacent to a lot line and the lot line.
d. Fencing shall be constructed with the finished or decorative side facing the adjacent or
abutting property or public street.
e. Snow fencing will only be permitted between November 15 and April 15 of the
following year.
2. Fencing in Residential Zoning Districts.
a. Fences having a height of six (6) feet or less may be used to locate property lines within
the required side and rear yard areas in the residential districts.
b. Fences may not be within the front yard, except decorative fencing not exceeding a
maximum height of four (4) feet may be installed within the front yard areas in the
residential districts. Chain-link fences shall not be allowed in the front yards of
residential districts.
c. In MFR-1, MFR-2, and residential PUD Districts, where aesthetic appearance may
require a fence or wall to shield parking lots or other unattractive areas or to generally
improve the aesthetics of the development, a wall or fence may be erected in the front
yard of the development by approval of the Plan Commission, and which approval may
include design or other architectural requirements.
d. No barbed wire, chicken wire (except for gardening purposes), razor wire, or electrically
charged fences shall be allowed in residential zoning districts.
C. Accessory Buildings. Accessory buildings not elsewhere defined in this Section shall meet the following
minimum requirements in the R-RE, R-E, R-S, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, and R-6 Districts:
1. Minimum Required Setbacks.
a. Accessory buildings (excluding detached garages) one hundred fifty (150) square feet or
less shall have a minimum side and rear yard setback of three (3) feet.
b. Accessory buildings (including detached garages) between one hundred fifty (150) and
seven hundred twenty (720) square feet in area on parcels of land or lots having an area
of forty thousand (40,000) square feet or less, shall have side and rear yard setbacks the
same as those of the principal structure.
c. Masonry constructed accessory buildings (including detached garages) up to twelve
hundred (1,200) square feet in area, shall have the side and rear yard setbacks the same as
those of the principal structure on lots greater than forty thousand (40,000) square feet in
area.
2. Maximum Accessory Building Area.
a. On parcels of land or lots having an area of forty thousand (40,000) square feet or more,
maximum size of wood-frame constructed accessory buildings (including detached
garages) shall be nine hundred (900) square feet.
b. Any masonry constructed accessory building (including detached garages) may be up to
twelve hundred (1,200) square feet in area on lots greater than forty thousand (40,000)
square feet in area.
D. Home Occupations and Home Offices. The following specific standards shall be used for home
occupations and home offices located as accessory uses in all residential districts and in the A-1, A-2, and
A-3 Districts:
19- 98
1. Home Occupation Employees. No more than one (1) person shall be employed on the premises
at any one time other than persons residing on the premises.
2. Maximum Floor Area Permitted to be Used for Home Occupation. The use of the dwelling
unit for the home occupation or home office shall be clearly incidental and secondary to its use for
residential purposes. No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit
habitable living area shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation or home office. No
outside display, storage, or use of land is permitted.
3. No Change in the Outside Appearance of the Building, Accessory Structure, or Premises
Permitted. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building, accessory
structure, or premises because of such home occupation or office, except for an unlighted sign or
nameplate, not more than one (1) square foot in total area, attached to and not projecting from the
building.
4. Conduct of Home Occupation in Accessory Building or Structure Prohibited. No home
occupation or home office shall be conducted in any accessory building or structure or outdoors.
5. Use of Mechanical and Electrical Equipment. No mechanical equipment shall be used on the
premises, except such that is normally used for purely domestic or household purposes. In the
case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or
audible interference in any radio or television sets off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line
voltage greater than that normally associated with household use. Computer and communication
equipment that meets the aforementioned criteria which can be purchased for use in the home shall
be considered as "normally associated with household use."
6. Sale and Display of Commodities and Goods. No commodity or good not produced on the
premises shall be sold on the premises nor displayed on the exterior or interior of the premises, or
warehoused on the premises for sale elsewhere. This does not preclude taking orders for sales or
provision of services off-site.
7. Traffic. No vehicular or pedestrian traffic shall be generated by such home occupation or home
office in greater volume than would normally be expected from the principal use. For measuring
vehicular traffic, criteria established in the most current edition of the Institute of Transportation
Engineer's publication titled Trip Generation shall be used. There shall be no more than one (1)
commercial delivery or pick-up per day.
8. Levels of Noise, Emissions, Radiation, Vibration, Heat, Glare, Smoke, Dust, Fumes, Odors,
or Electrical Interference. There shall be no levels of noise, emissions, radiation, vibration, heat,
glare, smoke, dust, fumes, odors, or electrical interference created which is detectable to the
normal senses outside the dwelling unit greater than that normally associated with household use.
9. Refuse. No refuse greater than the amount allowable for regular residential pickup shall be
generated by any home occupation.
10. Nuisance Causing Activities. No home occupation shall cause or create any nuisance, cause or
create any substantial or undue adverse impact on any adjacent property or the character of the
area; or threaten the public health, safety or general welfare; or be noxious, offensive, or
hazardous.
11. Materials Which Decompose by Detonation Prohibited. No dangerous or unlawful amounts of
hazardous or volatile materials, or dangerous or unlawful amounts of materials which decompose
by combustion or detonation shall be allowed with a home occupation in excess of the amount that
would be allowed by law if the home occupation did not exist.
12. Public Utility Use Exceeding Typical Residential Dwelling Unit Demand Not Permitted. No
home occupation shall be permitted which generates sewerage or water use greater than what is
typical for a residential dwelling unit.
19- 99
E. Trash Dumpsters and Garbage Receptacles (Trash and Garbage Storage). The following
requirements shall be met for trash dumpsters and garbage receptacles located in the MFR-1, MFR-2, and
multiple-family PUD residential districts:
1. Centralized Location(s) of Trash Dumpsters and Garbage Receptacles Required. All new
multiple-family residential buildings and uses, except for single-family and two-family dwellings,
shall provide facilities for the central and accessible storage of solid waste within the parcel or lot.
The location of said facilities shall be approved by the Plan Commission. Multiple locations may
be required by the Plan Commission.
2. Trash Dumpster and Garbage Receptacle Enclosures Required. All garbage cans, trash
dumpsters, trash containers, and other storage devices situated on any property shall be closed
containers with lids and shall be concealed or suitably screened from public view. Sight-proof
fencing (wood or masonry) and landscaping shall be used to obstruct vision into the storage areas
totally. Where such facilities are provided outside a building, they shall be screened from public
rights-of-way and adjacent property by an enclosure constructed of materials compatible with the
materials on the front building wall of the main building.
3. Trash Dumpster and Garbage Receptacle Maintenance Required. Fencing and landscaping
for storage areas shall be maintained in good condition and kept litter-free. All garbage cans, trash
containers, and other garbage storage devices shall be emptied and the contents thereof properly
disposed of not less than once every seven (7) days.
4. Unenclosed Storage of Trash or Waste Prohibited. No portion of the lot shall be used for open
or unenclosed storage of trash or waste of any kind.
5. Trash Dumpster and Garbage Receptacle Location in Off-Street Parking Space or Drive
Prohibited. No trash dumpster or other trash or waste receptacle shall be permitted in any offstreet
parking space or drive.
6. Concrete Slab Required. All trash dumpsters and garbage receptacles shall be placed upon a
concrete slab that has a thickness of not less than five (5) inches.
7. Adequate Size to Accommodate Recycling Materials. All trash dumpster and garbage
receptacle areas shall be of an adequate size to accommodate the storage of materials to be
recycled.
SECTION 19.03.0803 DETAILED STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY USES IN NONRESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS
A. Agricultural Equipment, Storage of. The storage of agricultural equipment such as but not limited to
tractors, trailers, fertilizer spreaders, wagons, planters, and the like, as a use accessory to a permitted use in
the A-1, A-2, and A-3 Districts, shall be subject to the following requirements:
1. Use of Equipment. The equipment shall be used in association with the permitted use.
2. Outdoor Storage of Junk. The outdoor storage of junk is prohibited.
3. Motor Vehicle Sales Prohibited. This provision shall not be used to permit the establishment of
motor vehicle sales as a use within the A-1, A-2, and A-3 Districts.
4. Outdoor Inoperable Machinery Prohibited. The outdoor accumulation of inoperable
machinery is prohibited.
B. Canopies as Accessory Uses. The canopies provided over the pump islands at gas stations, convenience
stores with gas pumps, automobile and motor vehicle service stations, drive-in and drive-thru facilities
associated with financial institutions, restaurants, cleaners, and similar uses, shall meet the yard
19- 100
requirements of a principal structure. In addition:
1. Obstruction of Visibility at Rights-of-Way Prohibited. The canopy shall not block visibility at
intersections of rights-of-way or drives.
2. Zoning District Front Yard Requirements Shall Be Met. All pump islands, their surrounding
structures, and the canopy overhang shall meet the zoning district's front yard requirement.
3. Canopies to be Counted Toward Maximum Permitted GFAR and NFAR. All canopies shall
be counted toward the maximum permitted gross floor area ratio (GFAR) and maximum net floor
area ratio (NFAR) of the nonresidential zoning district in which the canopy is to be constructed.
4. Maximum Height. Under no circumstances shall the underside of the canopy as measured at the
bottom of its exterior fascia be higher than sixteen (16) feet.
5. Signs Not Permitted. No signs shall be permitted on canopy roofs or fascia; provided, however,
that this requirement shall not prevent use of distinctive color schemes on the canopy fascia
generally identified with the owner or operator.
C. Fences.
1. General. The following are required of all fences installed in the Village of Grafton:
a. All fences shall be maintained in good repair and in structurally sound condition. All
fences shall be constructed and maintained in a good aesthetic condition and in such a
manner and of such materials and colors so as not to adversely affect the value of
adjoining property or property in the immediate neighborhood. No fence may be
constructed or maintained which is detrimental to human life or safety or causes a traffic
hazard. All fences shall be constructed and maintained straight, plumb and of an even
height along its length, except such deviations as required by grade.
b. No advertising or signs shall be permitted on any fence in any zoning district.
c. No materials shall be stored between a fence located adjacent to a lot line and the lot line.
d. Fencing shall be constructed with the finished or decorative side facing the adjacent or
abutting property or street.
e. Snow fencing will only be permitted between November 15 and April 15 of the following
year.
2. Fencing in Nonresidential Zoning Districts (excluding A-1, A-2, A-3, I, and PR Districts).
a. Fences may be located in side and rear yards only (not in street yard) in nonresidential
zoning districts.
b. Fences installed in nonresidential zoning districts shall not exceed six (6) feet in height,
except when required to enclose outside storage areas or when approved by the Plan
Commission may be up to ten (10) feet in height.
c. Fencing constructed to enclose outside storage areas shall be at least eight (8) feet in
height and in no case lower in height than the enclosed storage area.
d. Barbed wire may be allowed on the top of fences eight (8) feet or more in height.
e. All fencing constructed to enclose outside storage areas in nonresidential zoning districts
shall be approved by the Plan Commission.
19- 101
3. Fencing in the A-1, A-2, and A-3 Zoning Districts.
a. Fencing shall be permitted in all yards in the A-1, A-2, and A-3 Districts and in all yards
on legal nonconforming agricultural uses for replacement of existing fencing. Fencing
shall be permitted in front yards only for the enclosure of cultivated fields, pastures and
animal pens.
b. Fencing for areas other than those described in Paragraph a. above shall comply with the
residential zoning district fencing requirements.
c. Fencing may be constructed in the A-1, A-2, and A-3 Districts for cultivated fields and
pastures before a principal structure is present.
4. Location of Fencing in the I and PR Zoning Districts. Fencing more than six (6) feet in height,
enclosing a park, elementary, middle or a high school site shall be permitted in all yards.
D. Mechanical Penthouses and Mechanical Accessory Structures. Where mechanical penthouses are
installed, they shall be designed to blend into the building's architecture and shall not cause the building's
total height to exceed the maximum height allowed as required under the zoning district dimensional
requirements set forth in Divisions 19.03.0200 and 19.03.0300 of this Ordinance. A penthouse shall not be
counted as a story, if:
1. The penthouse is less than ten (10) feet in height.
2. The penthouse floor area covers less than twenty-five (25) percent of the roof area.
3. If a mechanical accessory structure is supplied, it shall be fully screened from view by a
combination of berms and evergreens. This screening shall be approved by the Plan Commission.
E. Open Storage, Screening of. Non-residential outdoor storage areas shall be screened from view of any
public street and from the view from all residential zoning districts as follows:
1. Plan Commission Approval Required. All proposed outdoor storage areas for non-residential
uses shall require Plan Commission review and approval. The Plan Commission will review the
outdoor storage area taking into account characteristics such as aesthetic design, traffic
management, minimal adverse impact to adjacent properties, minimal interference with
surrounding development, compliance with development standards, and any criteria the Plan
Commission sees fit within its powers and duties as established by the zoning code. (Ord. 014,
Series 2011)
2. Visible from a Public Street. When an outdoor storage area is visible from a public street, the
method of screening shall consist of solid masonry walls or solid wooden fences at least six (6)
feet in height, with access only through solid gates that shall be closed except when said storage
area is in use or customer service is being provided. An existing permanent structure may be used
to screen such storage areas. If the outdoor storage area is comprised of a solid masonry wall the
gates shall be non-opaque and decorative in nature. If the wooden fence option is utilized the gates
shall match the fencing and be non-opaque in nature. In no case shall an outdoor storage area be
allowed in the actual front yard of any non-residential property. (Ord. 014, Series 2011)
3. Abutting a Residential Zoning District. When an outdoor storage area abuts a residential zoning
district or any legally conforming residential use, the method of screening shall consist of a solid
non-opaque wooden fence or masonry walls at least six (6) feet in height along the boundary of
the storage areas. The gates shall not face any residential zoning district or legally conforming
residential use. In addition, the entire residential district boundary must be screened with a solid
non-opaque wooden fence or masonry wall at least six (6) feet in height with deciduous trees
planted every twelve (12) feet (on center) with a minimum tree height at planting of six (6) feet.
(Ord. 014, Series 2011)
19- 102
4. Fencing. All fencing shall conform to the requirements of Section 19.03.0803(C). (Ord. 014,
Series 2011) (Ord. 014, Series 2011)
5. Temporary Outdoor Uses. Temporary uses identified in Section 19.03.0804 such as farmers
markets, greenhouses and other temporary uses as approved by the Plan Commission are exempt
from this section. (Ord. 014, Series 2011)
F. Roadside Stands for the Sale of Agricultural Products. The following specific standards shall be used
in the A-1, A-2, and A-3 Districts:
1. Off-Street Parking and Loading. The use shall provide for all required off-street parking and
loading on private property.
2. Vehicular Access to Public Street. The use shall be located along and have direct vehicular
access to a public street.
3. Sales or Display on Public Lands Prohibited. No sales or display activity shall be located on
public land.
4. Access. Access to and from the site shall be in accord with the requirements of the applicable
highway or arterial street access authority including the Wisconsin Department of Transportation,
Ozaukee County, and/or the Village of Grafton.
5. Use Location. The use shall be located on a commercially productive farm.
G. Stables, Private. The following specific standards shall be used in the A-1, A-2, and A-3 Districts:
1. Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be two (2.0) acres. This minimum lot area
shall be increased by forty thousand (40,000) square feet for each equine in addition to two (2).
2. Required Setbacks. The following minimum setbacks shall also be provided:
a. On parcels of land less than two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet, all feed and
bedding shall be stored indoors.
b. On parcels of land two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet or more, piles of feed or
bedding shall be located a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet from any public street rightof-
way or lot line of an adjacent nonresidential district and one hundred (100) feet from
any lot line of an adjacent residential district lot line, to minimize odor and nuisance
problems.
3. Pasture Location. Pasture area may extend to the lot line.
4. Manure Maintenance. Manure piles shall be stored, removed, and/or applied according to
applicable Village requirements.
5. Stable Location. All points on the perimeter of any stable building or corral shall be at least
thirty (30) feet from the nearest boundary line or right-of-way line of the parcel on which it is
located.
H. Trash Dumpsters and Garbage Receptacles (Trash and Garbage Storage). The following
requirements shall be met for trash dumpsters and garbage receptacles in nonresidential districts:
1. Trash Dumpster and Garbage Receptacle Enclosures Required. All garbage cans, trash
dumpsters, trash containers, and other storage devices situated on any property shall be closed
containers with lids and shall be concealed or suitably screened from public view. Sight-proof
fencing (wood or masonry) and landscaping shall be used to obstruct vision into the storage areas
totally. Where such facilities are provided outside a building, they shall be screened from public
19- 103
rights-of-way and adjacent property by an enclosure constructed of materials compatible with the
materials on the front building wall of the main building.
2. Trash Dumpster and Garbage Receptacle Maintenance Required. Fencing and landscaping
for storage areas shall be maintained in good condition and kept litter-free. All garbage cans, trash
containers, and other garbage storage devices shall be emptied and the contents thereof properly
disposed of not less than once every seven (7) days.
3. Unenclosed Storage of Trash or Waste Prohibited. No portion of the lot shall be used for open
or unenclosed storage of trash or waste of any kind.
4. Trash Dumpster and Garbage Receptacle Location in Off-Street Parking Space or Drive
Prohibited. No trash dumpster or other trash or waste receptacle shall be permitted in any offstreet
parking space or drive.
5. Concrete Slab Required. All trash dumpsters and garbage receptacles shall be placed upon a
concrete slab that has a thickness of not less than five (5) inches.
6. Adequate Size to Accommodate Recycling Materials. All trash dumpster and garbage
receptacle areas shall be of an adequate size to accommodate the storage of materials to be
recycled.
I. Car Wash Facilities. General. Car wash facilities shall be allowed only as an accessory use to a primary
use or building, that is a permitted use or has an approved conditional use permit, and that has the primary
focus of selling retail gasoline or fuel. The accessory use allowance does not apply if the car wash facility
use is already specified as a permitted or conditional use in a particular zoning district. The following
specific standards shall apply:
1. Stand-alone car washes not associated with, on the same premises as, coincide with or contiguous
to a retail or gasoline fuel station are not allowed, unless already outright specified as a conditional
use in a particular zoning district.
2. Only automated wash facilities may be used.
3. The proposed accessory use of a car wash must show no negative impact on the storm sewer
system and environment including wetlands, woodlands, streams, ponds, slopes, flora, and fauna.
4. The proposed accessory use of a car wash must demonstrate safe internal site traffic patterns and
external site traffic patterns and counts acceptable to the Plan Commission.
5. The proposed accessory use must not have a detrimental impact on surrounding uses within the
area.
6. A maximum of one vehicle in the washing cycle will be allowed per car wash bay facility.
7. A maximum of 2 vacuum machines per car wash bay facility.
8. The operating doors of the car wash facility should be closed at all times except vehicle entry and
exit or maintenance.
9. Car wash facility will conform to all density, setback, and other site requirements spelled out in
the particular zoning district that it is to be located.
10. All water and chemical usage shall comply with State and Federal Regulations or any further
measures established by the Plan Commission.
11. A maintenance plan focused on keeping the facility and site clean shall be submitted to the Plan
Commission.
12. The car wash facility shall only operate during the established hours of the primary use.
(Ord. 014, Series 2004)
J. Transient Street Merchant. It shall be unlawful, except for listed exceptions, for any street merchant to
engage in direct retail sales within the Village of Grafton limits without being registered as a “Transient
19- 104
Street Merchant” at the Village of Grafton Planning and Development Department.“Transient Street
Merchant” registration is not required for events held or sponsored by the Grafton Area Chamber of
Commerce, Village of Grafton or other similar civic institutions, or charitable entities with operations in or
related to the Village of Grafton as approved by the Plan Commission. Further exemptions or common
situations that do not require registration: 1) Any person or entity involved in typical home deliveries such
as, but not limited to, medicinal products, newspapers, fuel products, dairy products or bakery goods to
regular customers; 2) Any person selling agricultural products, such as a farmer’s market, which such
person(s) has grown and is sold based on restrictions identified in Section 19.03.0803 (F) of the Village of
Grafton Zoning Code; 3) Any person(s) holding a sale required by Wisconsin State Statute or by order of
any court and any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law; 4) any religious
organizations for which there is provided proof of tax-exempt status pursuant to Sec. 501(c)(3) of the
United States Internal Revenue Code shall be exempt from the requirements of providing an application
and registration fee, and 5) any veteran of the United States Armed Forces who holds a special State of
Wisconsin license pursuant to Section 440.151, Wis. Stats., shall be exempt from of providing an
application and registration fee, if such veteran provides the Director of Planning and Development with
the following information: a) the veteran's name and permanent address; b) the nature of the proposed
transient street business; c) proposed dates and times of transient street operation; and d) copy of State of
Wisconsin license pursuant to Sec. 440.151, Wis. Stats. The sponsoring entity, as allowed in this ordinance
or by the Plan Commission will then have the authority to approve or deny any street merchant operation
within 50 feet of the event boundaries.
1. Definitions.
a. Transient Street Merchant is defined as a direct seller without a permanent business
establishment of address in the Village of Grafton and an individual who, for him/herself,
or for a partnership, association or corporation, or as an employee, sells goods directly or
takes sales orders for the promised future delivery of retail goods. These businesses may
sell, but are not limited to retail items such as special event clothing, periodicals, tourist
merchandise, food from a cart, food from a stand or food from a bicycle or automotive
vehicle;
b. Goods shall include personal property items for retail sale in the present or for a
promised future delivery date;
c. Charitable Organization shall include any benevolent, religious, philanthropic, patriotic
or eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation, or one purporting to be
such;
d. Director of Planning and Development shall mean the Director of Planning and
Development of the Village of Grafton;
e. Applicant shall mean each individual or entity applying for registration and licensing as
a Transient Street Merchant;
f. Registrant shall mean each individual registered by the Director of Planning and
Development whom a Transient Street Merchant permit has been issued.
2. Registration. Applications for the registration and permit for a Transient Street Merchant business
must be completed and returned to the Director of Planning and Development. The registration
forms furnished by the Director of Planning and Development which shall require the following
information from the applicant: 1) name, permanent address and telephone number, and temporary
address, if applicable; 2) height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and date of birth; 3) name, address
and telephone number of the person, firm, association or corporation that the Transient Street
Merchant represents or is employed by, or whose merchandise is being sold; 4) temporary address
and telephone number from which business will be conducted, if applicable; 5) nature of business
to be conducted and a brief description of the goods offered and any services offered; 6) proposed
method of delivery of goods, if applicable; 7) make, model and license number of any vehicle to
be used by applicant in the conduct of his business; 8) last cities, villages, towns, not to exceed
three, where applicant conducted similar business just prior to making this registration; 8) place
where applicant can be contacted for at least seven days after leaving the Village of Grafton; 9)
statement as to whether applicant has been convicted of any crime or ordinance violation related to
applicant's transient merchant business within the last five years, the nature of the offense and the
place of conviction, and 10) proof of insurance shall be provided to the Director of Planning and
19- 105
Development with a copy of the policy and shall include additional liability coverage in the name
of the Village of Grafton and covering the Village of Grafton at a minimum limit of $1,000,000.
3. Documentation. Each applicant shall present to the Director of Planning and Development: 1) a
valid driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be reasonably required; 2) a certificate
of examination and approval from the designated State of Wisconsin sealer of weights and
measures where applicant's business requires use of weighing and measuring devices as approved
by the designated State of Wisconsin authority; 3) the designated health officer's certificate where
applicant's business involves the handling of food or clothing and is required to be certified under
Wisconsin State law; such certificate to indicate that applicant is apparently free from any
contagious or infectious disease, dated not more than ninety days prior to the date the application
for license is made.
4. Application/Registration Fee. No application shall be processed until the registration fee of
$300.00 has been paid to the Director of Planning and Development. A separate application and
registration fee of $300.00 shall be paid for each additional Transient Street Merchant within a
given organization or entity. Only one cart/mobile stand will be allowed for each Transient Street
Merchant, but organizations/entities may have up to three individual attended carts (assuming
three Transient Street Merchant permits have been issued for that organization/entity). All permits
shall expire after one year and must be renewed annually with a registration fee of $300.00. If a
Transient Street Merchant permit has expired prior to the applicant’s/registrant’s submittal for
renewal, the registration fee will increase to $400.00. Transient Street Merchant fees are nontransferrable.
5. Review of Application and Appeal of Non-Registration Decision.
a. Upon receipt of each application, the Director of Planning and Development will refer a
copy immediately to the Chief of Police who may make and complete an investigation of
the information provided and statements made in such registration.
b. The Director of Planning and Development shall refuse to register the applicant and issue
a Transient Street Merchant permit if it is determined, pursuant to investigation, that: the
application contains any material omission or materially inaccurate statement; complaints
of a material nature have been received against the applicant by authorities in the last
cities, villages and towns in which the applicant conducted similar business; the applicant
was convicted of a crime, statutory violation or ordinance violation within the last five
years and the nature of which is directly related to the applicant's suitability to engage in
the direct selling as a Transient Street Merchant; or the applicant failed to comply with
any applicable provision of this section.
c. Any person denied registration and a permit may appeal this denial before the Plan
Commission.
6. Registration and Issuance of Transient Street Merchant Permit. Upon compliance with the
foregoing requirements and payment of the registration fee as hereinafter set forth, the Director of
Planning and Development shall register the applicant as a Transient Street Merchant and issue a
permit to the applicant. The registrant shall be operative only during the days requested on the
registration form. The permit shall contain the signature of the Director of Planning and
Development, the name and address of the Transient Street Merchant, the type of goods or
services being sold, the dates during which the permit is operative and the license number of any
vehicle used for sales or solicitations. Registrants shall display their permit at the request of any
citizen, customer, or police officer.
7. Regulation of Transient Street Merchants. Prohibited Transient Street Merchant operational
practices shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. Calling at any dwelling or other place by telephone or door in an attempt to stimulate
business activity and remaining on any premises with equipment (cart) after being asked
to leave by the owner.
19- 106
b. Misrepresent or make false, deceptive or misleading statements concerning the quality,
quantity or character of any goods offered for sale, his/her identity or the identity of the
organization he/she represents (a charitable organization Transient Street Merchant shall
specifically disclose what portion of the sale price of goods being offered will actually be
used for the charitable purpose for which the organization is soliciting and said portion
shall be expressed as a percentage of the sale price of the goods).
c. No Transient Street Merchant shall impede the free use of sidewalks and streets by
pedestrians and vehicles.
d. Loud noises or use any sound amplifying device to attract customers if the noise
produced is capable of being plainly heard outside a one hundred foot radius of the
source.
e. Rubbish or litter accumulation in or around the area in which he/she is conducting
business.
8. Food Sales Made From Automobiles. Where food sales are made from vehicles, all traffic and
parking regulations shall be observed. No Transient Street Merchant shall have exclusive right to
any location in the public streets or right of way, nor shall any be permitted a stationary location
thereon in excess of fifteen minutes, nor shall any be permitted to operate in a congested area
where such operation might impede or inconvenience the public use of such streets. Any move
from a stationary location shall be to a place not less than one hundred feet from such location and
the Transient Street Merchant shall not return to within one hundred feet of any previously
occupied location within four hours of having moved from said location. For the purpose of this
Section, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to
whether the area is congested and public impeded or inconvenienced.
9. Revocation of Transient Street Merchant Permit.
a. Appropriate reasons for revocation of the Transient Street Merchant permit may include
material omissions or materially inaccurate statements in the registrant’s application for
permit, any fraudulent, false, deceptive or misleading statements or representation in the
course of engaging in direct sales or interaction with the general public while working as
a transient street merchant, violation of any provision of this Section, conviction of any
crime or ordinance or statutory violation which is directly related to the registrant's
suitability to engage in transient selling, or the involvement by the registrant in any
prohibited transient street merchant business practices. The Chief of Police or designee
shall report to the Director of Planning and Development any/all violations of these
regulations and the Director of Planning and Development shall note any such violation
on the record of the registrant;
b. A Transient Street Merchant permit may be revoked by the Director of Planning and
Development after notice is given by certified mail to the registrant 72 hours prior to
revocation and provides the registrant with information regarding the right to a formal
appeal process before the Plan Commission.
K. Unattended Donation Boxes. Unattended donation boxes are prohibited in all zoning districts except for
properties that are either (a) zoned I – Institutional or (b) are an existing place of group assembly, place of
worship, or non-for-profit entity that, as part of its mission, aims to help those in need and is classified as a
permitted, conditional or legal non-conforming use. In those cases where unattended donation boxes are
allowed, the owner and/or operator of an unattended donation box shall adhere to the following
requirements:
1. The applicant shall provide, to the Director of Planning and Development, written permission
from the owner of the property consenting to the placement and maintenance of the donation box.
The permission shall include a statement indicating that the property owner is aware of the
property owner's responsibility to maintain the current operator contact information and, if
necessary, to maintain and remove the donation box if the operator fails to follow the provisions of
this ordinance.
2.
19- 107
Donation boxes shall be limited to 150 cubic feet. The height of each donation box shall not
exceed 6 feet in height from finished grade to the highest point of the roof or top of the donation
box.
3. Donation boxes shall be placed on a hard surface, such as asphalt or concrete, and fastened or
mounted securely.
4. Donation boxes shall be painted or stained with a low reflectance and subtle, neutral or earth-tone
color scheme. High intensity colors, metallic colors, black, or fluorescent colors shall not be used.
5. The owner/operator shall provide a site plan to the Director of Planning and Development that
indicates the location of donation boxes on the site and the specifications of the donation box to be
used.
6. Signage shall be allowed on three sides of a donation box, but the total combined area for all
signage on the box shall be not greater than 3 square feet. At least one sign shall also include the
name and contact information for the owner of each donation box.
7. No more than two donation boxes shall be allowed on each property.
8. Donation boxes shall not be located within any building setback or an established buffer area and
shall not be located in such a manner as to impede the vision clearance as defined in Section
19.05.0201.
9. All donation boxes shall be maintained in good condition and appearance with no structural
damage, holes, or visible rust, and shall be free of graffiti. All donation boxes shall be free of
debris and shall be cleared of contents at least once every two weeks and shall not be permitted to
overflow with donations or accumulate junk, debris, or other material.
SECTION 19.03.0804 DETAILED STANDARDS FOR TEMPORARY USES
A. Temporary Outdoor Sales Operation Temporary outdoor sales operations typically include the display
of items for sale outside the confines of a building, including but not limited to seasonal garden shops, tent
sales, food stands, Christmas tree lots, fireworks stands, and garage sales. Except for residential garage or
yard sales, all such uses shall be required to obtain a Zoning Permit under the provisions of Section
19.07.0102. The following specific standards shall be used and presented on a site plan submitted with the
Zoning Permit application: (Ord. 010, Series 2002, Part 8)
1. Location. Materials for sale shall not be located in any public right-of-way. Aside from
residential garage and yard sales, no temporary outdoor sales operation may be located in a
residential zoning district, industrial zoning district, any other zoning district in which outdoor
sales or display of merchandise is prohibited, or an any development or site where the Plan
Commission or Village Board has expressly prohibited outdoor sales or display or merchandise in
any previous approval of a Site Plan, Conditional Use Permit and/or Planned Unit Development
covering the lot. (Ord. 010, Series 2002, Part 8)
2. Parking. All parking shall be on-site and shall meet the numerical requirements of Table
19.05.0203. In no case shall the placement of a temporary outdoor sales operation reduce the
amount of parking available for permanent uses(s) on the lot below the minimum required under
Table 19.05.0203 or as previously required with any Conditional Use Permit or Planned Unit
Development covering the lot. (Ord. 010, Series 2002, Part 8)
3. Visibility. The location of materials for sale on the property shall not block visibility for vehicles
or pedestrians on or off the lot in a way that would create a safety hazard.
4. Hours of Operation. The sales shall be limited to between the hours of 7 AM and 9 PM, except
that where the temporary outdoor sales operation is on land adjacent to residentially zoned land,
sales shall be limited to daylight hours only. (Ord. 010, Series 2002, Part 8)
19- 108
5. Trash and Debris. All trash and debris shall be removed or contained daily.
6. Written Consent May Be Required. Written consent from the owner, or authorized agent, of the
property shall be provided if required by the Zoning Administrator.
7. Use of Recreational Vehicles as Temporary Sales Office or Residence Prohibited. Except for
temporary outdoor sales operations which have been open seasonally since before April 17, 2000,
no electrical or utility hookups shall be permitted for any recreational vehicle and no recreational
vehicle shall be permitted as a temporary sales office or residence. (Ord. 010, Series 2002, Part 8)
8. Signage and Lighting. All signage shall be according to the sign regulations set forth in Title 20
"Signs and Exterior Lighting" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code. All exterior lighting
shall be according to Division 19.05.0400. (Ord. 010, Series 2002, Part 8)
9. Timeframe. The Zoning Permit shall specify the number of days over which the temporary
outdoor sales operation can be operational. Temporary outdoor sales on any lot shall be limited to
fifteen (15) calendar days in any one calendar year, except for seasonal sales of trees, plants, and
accessory items. All materials shall be removed within forty-eight (48) hours of the end of the
operation. (Ord. 010, Series 2002, Part 8)
B. Construction Trailers as Temporary Offices. A licensed contractor engaged upon a public works
contract, utility, or construction project for which a Building Permit has been issued by the Building
Inspector may temporarily use a construction trailer for office facilities in the location where the work is
being done, provided such construction trailer shall not be placed upon the streets but upon the property on
which the Building Permit authorizes the construction. The construction trailer shall not be placed more
than fifteen (15) days prior to the commencement of the work for which the Building Permit has been
issued. The construction trailer shall be removed within fifteen (15) days after completion of the work for
which the Building Permit has been issued.
C. Model Homes, Model Dwelling Units, and Pre-Construction Sales Offices. Model homes, model
dwelling units, and preconstruction sales offices are residential type structures used as sales offices by a
builder/developer and to display the builder/developer's product. The same may be furnished within, since
its purpose is to display to perspective buyers the builder/developer's features (such as exterior siding
treatments, roofing materials, interior trim, moldings, floor coverings, etc.) in the environment of a
completed home, and may be staffed by the builder/developer's sales force. Model homes, model dwelling
units, and pre-construction sales offices shall be subject to the following restrictions:
1. District Dimensional Requirements to be Met. The model dwelling unit shall meet all district
requirements for lot and yard dimensions.
2. Sign Illumination. Signs shall not be illuminated after 9:00 P.M.
3. Business Activity Not Permitted Before 9:00 A.M. Nor After 9:00 P.M. The model dwelling
unit shall not be used for any business activity before 9:00 A.M. nor later than 9:00 P.M.
4. Lighting. All exterior lighting shall be full cut-off "downlighting," so that absolutely no light
shall be cast onto adjoining residential properties. All off-street parking areas must be
illuminated. All exterior lighting shall be extinguished at the closing time of the model home.
5. Off-Street Parking. All model homes shall provide off-street, paved parking for the public.
Such off-street, paved parking shall be located as directed by the Plan Commission. The number
of required off-street parking spaces shall be six (6) per model home. The driveway of the model
home may be used for not more than two (2) of the required spaces.
6. Screening and Trash Receptacles. Landscape drawings shall be required and show adequate
landscaping and screening from adjoining residential lots, with the clear marking of the boundaries
of the model home lot. Trash receptacles shall be provided around the model home for use by the
public.
19- 109
7. Construction and Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy. Certificates of Occupancy shall not be
issued until after the abutting street has been provided with an all weather roadway access, public
fire protection, and all public utilities.
8. Termination of Use. The use of model homes within a residential subdivision, or within any
single phase of a multi-phase subdivision, shall terminate when building permits have been issued
for eighty-five (85) percent of the lots therein.
9. Temporary Sales Structure in Multiple-Family Developments. In those zoning districts where
multi-family dwelling uses are permitted, a temporary structure may be used as a preconstruction
sales office for displaying a typical dwelling unit arrangement, subject to the following
restrictions:
a. The structure shall be limited to two (2) stories in height.
b. The structure shall be appropriately landscaped.
c. The structure shall be subject to the same front yard requirements as the principal
structure to be erected and shall otherwise be subject to all yard requirements for the
district in which located.
d. Adequate off-street parking facilities (a minimum of six [6] spaces) and access driveways
shall be developed within those locations approved for such facilities in conjunction with
the permanent multiple-family structure, and no additional parking areas or access
driveways shall be permitted.
e. Signs shall be permitted only according to the regulations set forth for the use within the
district and according to this Ordinance.
f. The structure shall comply fully with all existing building codes and ordinances of the
Village of Grafton.
g. The structure shall be completely and totally removed within six (6) months from the date
of the issuance of a Building Permit or upon the completion of the permanent residential
dwelling structure whichever date is later.
h. If the structure should not be removed or demolished by the owner or other parties in
interest within the terms of this Section, the Village of Grafton, to the extent permitted by
law, acting through its Building Inspector, is authorized to vacate, demolish, or remove,
either with forces or by independent contractor submitting the lowest and best bid, any
such building or structure. The Village of Grafton shall assess the entire costs of such
vacation, demolition, or removal against the owner or other parties in interest.
D. Temporary Roadside Stands for the Sale of Agricultural Products. The following specific standards
shall be used:
1. Off-Street Parking and Loading. The use shall provide for all required off-street parking and
loading on private property.
2. Access. The use shall be located along and have direct vehicular access to a public street. Access
to and from the site shall be in accord with the requirements of the applicable highway or arterial
street access authority including the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, Ozaukee County,
and/or the Village of Grafton.
3. Sales or Display Prohibited on Public Land. No sales or display activity shall be located on
public land.
5. Location. The use shall be located within a nonresidential district only.
19- 110
E. Outdoor Assembly Uses. Outdoor assembly uses include but are not limited to events of limited duration
such as festivals, carnivals, fundraisers, community celebrations, and performances. The following specific
standards shall apply to all outdoor assembly uses in the Village:
1. Location. Outdoor assembly uses are not permitted in any residential zoning district or in any
development or site where the Plan Commission or Village Board has expressly prohibited
outdoor assembly uses in any previous approval of a Site Plan, Conditional Use Permit, and/or
Planned Unit Development covering the lot.
2. Parking. Parking shall be on the lot or conveniently located to the lot, but in no case on privately
owned land in a residential zoning district. The placement of the outdoor assembly use shall not
reduce the amount of parking for the permanent use(s) of the lot below the requirements of Table
19.05.0203 or as previously required with Conditional Use Permit or Planned Unit Development
covering the lot, unless such permanent use(s) are not in operation during the same time that the
outdoor assembly use is in operation.
3. Access and Visibility. The location of materials, parking, or equipment on the lot shall not block
access and visibility for vehicles or pedestrians on or off the lot in a way that would create a safety
hazard.
4. Crowd and Traffic Control. The operator of the outdoor assembly use shall provide adequate
crowd and traffic control measures to protect public health, safety, and welfare. The Police Chief
shall determine whether crowd and traffic control methods are adequate.
5. Sanitary Conditions, Trash and Debris. Drinking water, toilet facilities, and wash facilities
shall be provided if required by applicable laws and industry standards. All trash and debris shall
be removed or contained daily. All materials associated with the outdoor assembly use shall be
removed within forty-eight (48) hours of the end of the operation of the use.
6. Signage and Lighting. All signage shall be according to the sign regulations set forth in Title 20
"Signs and Exterior Lighting" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code. All exterior lighting
shall be according to Division 19.05.0400.
(Ord. 010, Series 2002, Part 9)
19- 111
DIVISION 19.03.0900 MODIFICATIONS
SECTION 19.03.0901 HEIGHT
The district height limitations stipulated elsewhere in this Ordinance may be exceeded, but such modification shall
be in accord with the following:
A. Architectural Projections. Architectural projections such as spires, steeples, belfries, parapet walls,
cupolas, domes, flues, and chimneys are exempt from the height limitations of this Ordinance.
B. Special Structures. Special structures such as elevator penthouses, gas tanks, grain elevators, observation
towers, and scenery lofts, manufacturing equipment and necessary appurtenances, cooling towers, fire
towers, substations, and smoke stacks are exempt from the height limitations of this Ordinance.
C. Essential Services, Utilities, Water Towers, and Electric Power and Communication Transmission
Lines. Essential services, utilities, water towers, and electric power and communication transmission lines
are exempt from the height limitations of this Ordinance.
D. Communication Structures.
1. Communications structures, such as radio and television antennas and/or antenna structures in the
R-RE, R-E, R-1, R-S, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, MFR-1, MFR-2 and residential PUD Districts shall
not exceed fifty (50) feet in height.
2. Communications structures, such as radio and television antennas and/or antenna structures in the
CBD, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, O, BP, M-1, PID, I, PR, A-1, A-2, A-3 and nonresidential PUD Districts
shall not exceed one-hundred and fifty (150) feet in height and shall be regulated as a conditional
use under the provisions of Division 19.03.0700 of this Ordinance.
E. Agricultural Structures. Agricultural structures, such as barns, silos, windmills, shall not exceed in
height twice their distance from the nearest lot line.
F. Public or Semipublic Facilities. Public and semipublic facilities, such as schools, churches, hospitals,
monuments, sanatoriums, libraries, and governmental offices and stations, may be erected to a height of
sixty (60) feet, provided all required yards are increased not less than one (1) foot for each foot the
structure exceeds the district's maximum height requirement.
G. Modification of Other Ordinances and Regulations Not Permitted Under this Division. Modifications
permitted under this Division of this Ordinance do not modify any requirements of federal, state, or local
building codes relating to the elements addressed in this Division of this Ordinance.
SECTION 19.03.0902 YARDS
The yard requirements stipulated elsewhere in this Ordinance may be modified as shown in Table 19.03.0902,
Section 19.02.0202(E), and as follows:
19- 112
Table 19.03.0902
PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS IN REQUIRED YARDS
PROJECTION, OBSTRUCTION, OR ACCESSORY
USE
YARD TYPE
FRONT
YARD
REAR
YARD
SIDE
YARD
CORNER
SIDE YARD
Air-conditioning equipment shelters N P P P
Arbors and trellises P P P P
Awnings and canopies projecting into 10% or less of
yard depth (for windows only) P P P P
Balconies, open P P P P
Basketball Goal (limited to one pole-mounted or garagemounted
in residential zoning districts only) P P P P
Bay windows P P P P
Chimneys P P P P
Decks, open P P P P
Dish antennas P P P P
Dog runs, enclosed N P N N
Eaves, overhanging [not to exceed two (2) feet] P P P P
Fences P P P P
Flagpoles P P P P
Garages or carports P P P P
Gardens, vegetable N P P P
Greenhouses N P P N
Gutters P P P P
Hedge P P P P
Landscape bufferyards P P P P
Laundry drying equipment N P N N
Lawn furniture P P P P
Light standards, ornamental P P P P
Loading, off-street, open N P P N
Parking, off-street, open P P P P
Patios, open without roof N P P P
Porches/breezeways with roof, sides open N P P P
Sheds and storage buildings N P P N
Signs P P P P
Skateboard ramps N P N N
Stairways, open without roof P P P P
Steps, open without roof P P P P
Television or radio towers or antennas N P P N
Tennis courts, private N P N N
19- 113
Table 19.03.0902
PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS IN REQUIRED YARDS
PROJECTION, OBSTRUCTION, OR ACCESSORY
USE
YARD TYPE
FRONT
YARD
REAR
YARD
SIDE
YARD
CORNER
SIDE YARD
Trash dumpsters and/or garbage receptacles
(also subject to the other provisions of this Ordinance)
N P P P
Trees, shrubs, and flowers P P P P
Volleyball courts, private
(in residential districts only) N P N N
Walls P P P P
Other accessory uses (as may be permitted elsewhere in
this Ordinance) N P N N
P=Permitted
N=Not Permitted
A. Uncovered Stairs, Landings, and Fire Escapes. Uncovered stairs, decks, landings, and fire escapes may
project into any yard, but not further than six (6) feet and shall not be closer than three (3) feet to any lot
line.
B. Architectural Projections. Architectural projections, such as chimneys, flues, sills, eaves, belt courses,
and ornaments, may project into any required yard; but such projections shall not exceed two (2) feet.
C. Essential Services, Utilities, and Electric Power and Communication Transmission Lines. Essential
services, utilities, and electric power and communication transmission lines are exempt from the yard and
distance requirements of this Ordinance.
D. Landscape Bufferyards, Landscaping, Vegetation, and Areas of Natural Resource Features
Mitigation Exempt from Yard and Setback Requirements. Landscape bufferyards, landscaping,
vegetation, and natural resource features mitigation areas are exempt from the yard and setback
requirements of this Ordinance. Landscape plantings such as shrubs shall not be permitted in the street
right-of-way unless approved by the Plan Commission.
E. Front and/or Corner Lot Side Yard Setbacks for Additional Right-of-Way Dedication. For existing
lots of record only within existing Subdivisions or Certified Survey Maps, when additional public street
right-of-way dedication is required by the Village or other governmental unit, the front and/or corner side
yard setback requirements of this Ordinance may be reduced by the same distance as that required for
public street right-of-way dedication. However, such front and/or corner lot side yard setbacks shall not be
reduced to less than twenty (20) feet.
F. Building on Pre-existing Lots in the R-1 and R-4 Districts. In the R-1 and R-4 Districts, on lots which
were either recorded or included within a valid preliminary plat before April 17, 2000, new buildings and
additional to existing buildings may extend into required yards as permitted in Section 19.02.0202(E) of
this ordinance. (Ord. 033, Series 2000, Part 2).
SECTION 19.03.0903 ADDITIONS AND AVERAGE STREET YARDS
Additions in the street yard of existing structures shall not project beyond the average of the existing street yards on
the abutting lots or parcels. In addition, proposed street yard additions or modifications to residential buildings that
were lawfully constructed before April 17, 2000, may be built up to a distance equal to the existing front yard
setback of the residential building, even if the front yard setback of said addition or modification is less than the
minimum front yard setback otherwise required in the applicable zoning district. (Ord. 010, Series 2002, Part 10)
19- 114
SECTION 19.03.0904 CORNER LOTS
Structures shall provide a street yard as required by this Ordinance on the street that the structure faces. A second
street yard shall be provided on the side of the structure abutting a second public or private street. The setbacks on
each street shall be as specified in this Ordinance.
SECTION 19.03.0905 DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS
Lots abutting two (2) opposite streets shall provide the front yard setback required by the district in which the lot is
located from each street upon which the lot abuts.
SECTION 19.03.0906 FLOODWAY LANDS ELIGIBLE FOR MEETING AREA REQUIREMENTS
Where a lot is located partially within the FW, FF, and GFP Districts (see Title 21 "Floodplain Zoning" of the
Village of Grafton Municipal Code) and a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the lot is located within any other one
(1) adjoining zoning district, that portion of the lot in the FW, FF, and GFP Districts may be used to meet the lot
area requirements of the adjoining zoning district. In no case, however, shall the FW, FF, and GFP Districts be used
to increase the maximum permitted net floor area ratio (NFAR) or maximum net density (ND) of any parcel of land
or lot that exceeds those levels as determined by the site intensity calculations and capacity calculations of Division
19.03.0500 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 19.03.0907 DEED RESTRICTED AND PRESERVED NATURAL RESOURCE
PROTECTION AND OPEN SPACE LANDS ELIGIBLE FOR MEETING AREA
REQUIREMENTS
Where a lot is located partially within a deed restricted and preserved natural resource protection area or open space
area (see Divisions 19.03.0500 and 19.04.0100) that portion of the lot in such an area may be used to meet the lot
area requirements of the zoning district. In no case, however, shall such eligibility be used to increase the maximum
permitted net floor area ratio (NFAR) or maximum net density (ND) of any parcel of land or lot that exceeds those
levels as determined by the site intensity calculations and capacity calculations of Division 19.03.0500 of this
Ordinance.
SECTION 19.03.0908 NOISE
Sirens, whistles, and bells maintained and used solely to serve a public purpose are exempt from the sound level
standards of this Ordinance. (Also see Section 19.03.1107(B).)
DIVISION 19.03.1000 NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND USES
SECTION 19.03.1001 EXISTING NONCONFORMING USES
The lawful nonconforming use of a structure, land, or water existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of
this Ordinance may be continued although the use does not conform with the provisions of this Ordinance if:
A. Portion of the Land or Water in Actual Use May Be Continued. Only that portion of the land or water
in actual use may be so continued. The nonconforming use may not be extended, enlarged, substituted, or
moved, except when required to do so by law or order or to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance.
B. Substitution of New Equipment. Substitution of new equipment may be permitted by the Zoning Board
of Appeals if such equipment will reduce the incompatibility of the nonconforming use or structure with
the neighboring uses.
C. Conforming Conditional Uses. See Sections 19.03.0602 and 19.03.0603 of this Ordinance for uses
existing at the effective date of this Ordinance, which would be classified as Conditional Uses under the
provisions of this Ordinance for each zoning district.
19- 115
SECTION 19.03.1002 EXISTING NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
The lawful nonconforming use of a structure existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of this Ordinance
may be continued although the structure's size or location does not conform with the established building setback
line along streets or the yard, height, parking, loading, access, floor area ratio, and lot area provisions of this
Ordinance if:
A. Total Lifetime Structural Repairs or Alterations. Total lifetime structural repairs or alterations to a
nonconforming structure shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the municipality's equalized assessed value
of the structure at the time of its becoming a nonconforming structure unless it is permanently changed to
conform to the use provisions of this Ordinance.
B. Substitution of New Equipment. Substitution of new equipment may be permitted by the Zoning Board
of Appeals if such equipment will reduce the incompatibility of the nonconforming use or structure with
the neighboring uses.
C. Repairs and Alterations. Repairs and alterations permitted under the provisions of this Ordinance to
nonconforming buildings and structures in floodlands shall include floodproofing to those portions of the
building or structure involved in such repairs or alterations. Certification of floodproofing shall be made to
the Zoning Administrator and shall consist of a plan or document certified by a registered professional
engineer that the flood-proofing measures are consistent with the flood velocities, forces, depths, and other
factors associated with the 100-year recurrence interval flood level for the particular area. (Also see Title
21 "Floodplain Zoning" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code.)
SECTION 19.03.1003 EXISTING SUBSTANDARD LOTS
A. Criteria for Building on Substandard Lots. A lot that does not conform to the dimensional requirements
of this Ordinance, may be used as a single building site if: (Ord. 010, Series 2002, Part 11)
1. The proposed use is permitted in the zoning district. (Ord. 010, Series 2002, Part 11)
2. The lot is a lot of record in the Ozaukee County Register of Deeds Office created before the
effective date of this Ordinance. (Ord. 010, Series 2002, Part 11; Ord. 036, Series 2000, Part 2)
3. Lot width and area are not less than seventy-five (75) percent of the minimum required width and
area within the zoning district. (Ord. 010, Series 2002, Part 11)
4. All building setback and yard requirements will be met. (Ord. 010, Series 2002, Part 11)
B. Setback and Yard Requirements. A Building Permit for the improvement of a lot with lesser dimensions
and requisites than those stated in Paragraph A. of this Section shall be issued only after a variance is
granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals. (Ord. 010, Series 2002, Part 11)
C. Contiguous Substandard Lots. When two (2) or more contiguous parcels of land, any of which lacks
adequate area or dimension to qualify for a permitted use under the requirements of the zoning district in
which they are located (i.e., is a substandard lot), are held under one (1) ownership, the parcels involved
shall be considered one (1) zoning lot for purposes of this Ordinance, except in the A-1, A-2, and A-3
districts and in cases where the owner of the parcels is also the developer of the subdivision in which the
parcels are located. As one (1) zoning lot, they may provide only (1) individual building site. Except in
single and two-family zoning districts, all such parcels shall be combined into one (1) legal lot through the
use of a Certified Survey Map. (Ord. 010, Series 2002, Part 11; Ord. 036, Series 2000, Part 2).
SECTION 19.03.1004 CONTINUANCE OF USE
A. Legal Nonconforming Use. Any lawfully established use of a building, structure, or land that does not
conform to the use regulations for the district in which it is located at the time of the adoption of this
Ordinance shall be deemed to be a legal nonconforming use and may be continued, except as otherwise
provided herein.
19- 116
B. Continuation of Legal Nonconforming Uses. Any legal nonconforming buildings, structures, or land
may be continued in use provided there are no physical changes other than necessary maintenance and
repair, except as otherwise permitted herein. However, the use must be active and actual and not
occasional and sporadic.
C. Buildings and Uses for which a Zoning Permit, Conditional Use Permit, or Building Permit Has Been
Granted. Any building or use for which a Zoning Permit, Conditional Use Permit, or Building Permit has
been lawfully granted may be completed according to the approved plans, provided construction is started
within six (6) months and the exterior of the building or use is completed within eighteen (18) months of
the effective date of this Ordinance. Such building or use shall thereafter be deemed a lawfully established
building or use.
SECTION 19.03.1005 DISCONTINUANCE OF USE
A. Building, Structure, or Land Occupied by a Nonconforming Use Changed to or Replaced by a
Conforming Use. Whenever any part of a building, structure, or land occupied by a nonconforming use is
changed to or replaced by a conforming use, such premises shall not thereafter be used or occupied by a
nonconforming use, though the building may have been originally designed and constructed for the prior
nonconforming use.
B. Discontinuance of Nonconforming Use. Whenever a nonconforming use or part thereof has been
discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive months, or whenever there is evidence of a clear intent by the
owner to abandon a nonconforming use, such use shall not, after being discontinued or abandoned, be
reestablished, and the use of the premises thereafter shall be in conformity with the regulations of the
zoning district in which the use is located.
C. Discontinuance of Nonconforming Use Where No Enclosed Building Is Involved. Where no enclosed
building is involved, discontinuance of a nonconforming use for twelve (12) months shall constitute
abandonment, and shall not thereafter be used in a nonconforming manner.
D. Nonconforming Uses to be Discontinued. A nonconforming use not authorized by the provisions of the
Village of Grafton Zoning Ordinance in effect at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance shall be
discontinued.
SECTION 19.03.1006 REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS
A. Normal Maintenance Permitted. Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing a
nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary nonstructural repairs and incidental alterations that do
not extend or intensify the nonconforming use.
B. No Structural Alteration or Structural Repair. No structural alteration or structural repair shall be made
in a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use, except in the following situations:
1. When the alteration is required by law.
2. When the alteration will actually result in elimination of the nonconforming use.
3. When a building is in a residential zoning district containing residential nonconforming uses, said
building may be altered in any way to improve livability, provided no structural alterations are
made which would increase the number of dwelling units or the bulk of the building.
SECTION 19.03.1007 DAMAGE AND DESTRUCTION
A. Damaged or Destroyed Building or Other Structure Containing a Nonconforming Use. If a building
or other structure containing a nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of
fifty (50) percent or more of its equalized assessed value at that time, the building or other structure can be
rebuilt or used thereafter only for a conforming use and according to the provisions of the zoning district in
19- 117
which it is located. In the event the damage or destruction is less than fifty (50) percent of its equalized
assessed value, the building may then be restored to its original condition and the occupancy or use may be
continued.
B. Reconstruction of Buildings and Structures Located on Floodlands. See Title 21 "Floodplain Zoning"
of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code as amended.
SECTION 19.03.1008 ADDITIONS AND ENLARGEMENTS
A. Nonconforming Building Shall Not Be Extended. A nonconforming building shall not be extended
unless the entire building is thereafter devoted to a conforming use and said extension meets all applicable
Ordinance requirements, and is made to conform to all the regulations of the zoning district in which it is
located.
B. Buildings Partially Occupied by a Nonconforming Use. No building partially occupied by a
nonconforming use shall be altered in a way that permits the enlargement or expansion of the space
occupied by such nonconforming use.
C. Limitations on the Expansion of a Nonconforming Use. No nonconforming use may be extended in a
way that occupies any required usable space, or any land beyond the boundaries of the zoning lot as it
existed on the effective date of this Ordinance, or to displace any conforming use in the same building or
on the same parcel of land.
D. Building or Structure Nonconforming with Respect to Yards, Floor Area Ratio, or Any Other
Element of Bulk. A building or structure that is nonconforming with respect to yards, floor area ratio (in
all nonresidential zoning districts), or any other element of bulk shall not be altered or expanded in any
manner that would increase the degree or extent of its nonconformity with respect to the bulk regulations
for the district in which it is located.
E. Additions and Enlargements on Floodlands. See Title 21 "Floodplain Zoning" of the Village of Grafton
Municipal Code as amended
F. Additions and Enlargements in Shoreland Wetlands. See Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the
Village of Grafton Municipal Code as amended.
SECTION 19.03.1009 CHANGES AND SUBSTITUTIONS
A. Nonconforming Use Changed to Conforming Use or Substandard Structure Altered to Comply with
this Ordinance. Once a nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use or a substandard
structure has been altered to comply with this Ordinance, it shall not revert to a nonconforming use or
substandard structure.
B. Substitution of More Restrictive Nonconforming Use for Existing Nonconforming Use. Once the
Zoning Board of Appeals has permitted the substitution of a more restrictive nonconforming use for an
existing nonconforming use, the prior existing use shall lose its status as a legal nonconforming use and the
substituted use shall become subject to all the conditions required by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
SECTION 19.03.1010 EXEMPTED BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND USES
Whenever a lawfully existing building or other structure otherwise conforms to the use regulations of the zoning
district in which it is located, but is nonconforming only in the particular manner hereinafter specified, the building
and use thereof shall be exempt from the requirements of Section 19.03.1006.
A. Dwelling Structure Nonconforming Only as to the Number of Dwelling Units Contained. In any
residential zoning district where a dwelling structure is nonconforming only as to the number of dwelling
units it contains, provided no such building shall be altered in any way to increase the number of dwelling
units therein.
19- 118
B. Business or Industrial District Where the Use is Less Distant from a Residential Zoning District than
Specified. In any business or industrial district, where the use is less distant from a residential zoning
district than that specified in the regulations for the district in which it is located.
C. Other. In any zoning district where an established building, structure, or use is nonconforming with
respect to the standards prescribed herein for any of the following:
1. Floor area ratio including both net floor area ratio (NFAR) and gross floor area ratio (GFAR).
2. Yards--front, corner, side, rear, or transitional.
3. Off-street parking and loading.
4. Lot area.
5. Building height.
6. Gross floor area.
7. Landscaping, landscape bufferyards, landscape surface ratio (LSR), and open space ratio (OSR).
SECTION 19.03.1011 FLOODLAND NONCONFORMING USES
See Title 21 "Floodplain Zoning" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code as amended.
SECTION 19.03.1012 SHORELAND AND WETLAND NONCONFORMING USES
See Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code as amended.
DIVISION 19.03.1100 HAZARD PREVENTION PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
SECTION 19.03.1101 COMPLIANCE IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS
Any use established hereafter in any zoning district shall be so operated as to comply with the hazard prevention
performance standards set forth in this Division as well as all other applicable Village of Grafton, State, and federal
regulations unless otherwise specified.
SECTION 19.03.1102 AIR POLLUTION, CONTAMINANTS, AND SMOKE
A. Smoke and Particulate Matter. The provisions of Paragraphs 1 and 2 below shall not apply in the case of
an equipment breakdown that makes compliance not reasonably possible, and shall not apply to home
fireplaces, to home barbecues, campfires on legal campgrounds, and to burning incidental to agricultural
operations for clearing land. These provisions shall apply to waste disposal.
1. Measurement of Smoke Emissions. Smoke emissions shall be measured by using the
Ringlemann Chart, as adopted and published by the United States Department of the Interior,
Bureau of Mines Information Circular 8333, May 1967, on which are illustrated graduated shades
of gray for use in estimating the light-obscuring capacity of smoke. All uses shall conform with
the following standard. The density of smoke shall be measured at the point of emission, except
when the point of emission cannot be readily observed, it may be measured at an observable point
on the plume nearest the point of emission.
2. Established Requirements Not to be Exceeded. No person or activity shall emit any fly ash,
dust, fumes, vapors, mists, or gases in such quantities to substantially contribute to exceeding the
established requirements of the Village of Grafton, Ozaukee County, State of Wisconsin, or
Federal air pollution standards set forth by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. In case of
conflict, the most restrictive requirements shall govern.
19- 119
3. Maximum Amount of Particulate Matter on a Single Site. Emission of particulate matter from
all sources shall be included in the maximum amount permitted for a single site as prescribed by
the requirements of the agencies and regulations cited in Paragraph 2 above.
4. Wind-Borne Particulate Matter. Emission of particulate matter from materials or products
subject to becoming wind-borne from such sources as storage areas, yards, roads, and so forth,
within lot boundaries, shall be kept to a minimum by landscaping, paving, wetting, or other means
not violating any other applicable laws or regulations to render the surface wind-resistant.
5. Control of Particulate Emissions and Dust. No operation or activity shall emit into the ambient
air from any direct or portable source any matter that will affect particulate emissions in excess of
the limitations established in Chapter NR 415, Wisconsin Administrative Code. Fugitive dust and
other types of emissions and air pollution from sources such as storage areas, outdoor operation
yards and roads or parking lots within any lot shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate paving,
spraying/watering, application of suitable chemicals, landscaping or other acceptable and
environmentally safe methods in accord with Chapter NR 415.04, Wisconsin Administrative
Code.
6. Maximum Smoke Units. No stack shall emit more than ten (10) smoke units during any one (1)
hour, nor shall smoke of a density greater than Ringelmann No. 2 be emitted, if during a single
one (1) hour period in each twenty-four (24) hour day, each stack may emit up to twenty (20)
smoke units when blowing soot or cleaning fires, and during such cleaning of fires, smoke of a
density of Ringelmann No. 3 may be emitted, but for not more than four (4) minutes each period
except a plume consisting entirely of condensed steam.
B. Toxic and Noxious Matter. All uses shall conform with the following standards.
1. Ambient Air Quality Standards. The ambient air quality standards of the State of Wisconsin
and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or any other federal agency having jurisdiction
shall limit the release of airborne toxic and noxious materials. In case of conflict, the most
restrictive requirements shall govern. In no case, shall the limitations established under the
requirements of Chapter NR 445 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code be exceeded.
2. Toxic Materials Not Included in Ambient Air Quality Standards. When toxic materials are
not included in the ambient air quality standards of the State of Wisconsin, the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, or any other federal agency, the release of such materials shall
not exceed one one-fortieth (1/40) of the threshold limit value across site boundary lines of those
toxic materials currently listed in the "Threshold Limit Values" adopted by the American
Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists. Unless otherwise stated, the measurement of
all toxic and noxious matter shall be at ground level or habitable elevation, and shall be the
average of a twenty-four (24) hour sampling period. The Village of Grafton may request that an
applicant submit a statement from the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources that the
proposed levels of toxic matter to be released will not result in any hazard to human life or health
or to wildlife.
3. Discharge Across Property Boundaries Prohibited. No use on any property shall discharge
across the boundaries of said property toxic or noxious matter in such concentrations as to be
detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare, or cause injury or damage
to other property or business.
SECTION 19.03.1103 FIRE AND EXPLOSIVE HAZARDS
Fire and explosive hazards shall be controlled as set forth in this Section. All activities involving the manufacturing,
utilization, processing or storage of inflammable and explosive materials shall be provided with adequate safety
devices against the hazards of fire and explosion and with adequate fire fighting and fire suppression equipment and
devices that are standard in the industry. All such activities shall be in compliance with Wisconsin State Statutes,
applicable Wisconsin Administrative Codes and Municipal Codes of the Village of Grafton (also see Title 7 "Fire
Prevention and Protection" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code. When such activities are not specifically
19- 120
governed by law, the most current standards of N.F.P.A. (National Fire Code Standards) shall apply.
A. Storage, Use, or Manufacture of Materials Ranging from Free to Active Burning May be Permitted
With Conditions. The storage, use, or manufacture of materials ranging from free to active burning--as
determined by the Zoning Administrator--is permitted in the M-1, PID, or industrial PUD Districts under
the following conditions:
1. Location. All storage, use, or manufacture of such materials or products shall be within
completely enclosed buildings or structures having noncombustible exterior walls.
2. Setbacks and Sprinkler Protection. All such buildings or structures shall be set back at least
forty (40) feet from property boundaries unless greater standards are required by the specific
zoning district in which said materials are located, or, in lieu thereof, shall be protected throughout
by an automatic sprinkler system complying with standards for installation prescribed by the
National Fire Protection Association.
3. Noncombustible to Moderate Burning Materials. The storage, use, or manufacture of materials
ranging from noncombustible to moderate burning--as determined by the Zoning Administrator--is
permitted.
4. No Storage Allowed Within 100-Year Recurrence Interval Floodplain. Any permitted
structural storage facilities for chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids and
gases, or other toxic materials that could be hazardous to public health or safety, shall be located at
elevations a minimum of four (4) feet above the 100-year recurrence interval flood elevation.
SECTION 19.03.1104 GLARE
A. Measurement of Glare. Glare illumination levels shall be measured with a photoelectric photometer
having a spectral response similar to that of the human eye, using the standard spectral luminous efficiency
curve adopted by the International Commission on Illumination. Illumination levels shall be measured in
footcandles with a direct-reading, portable light meter. The meter shall have a color and cosine-corrected
sensor with multiple scales and shall read within an accuracy of plus or minus five (5) percent. It shall
have been tested and calibrated within one (1) year of the date of use.
B. Glare Standards. All uses shall conform to the following minimum standards:
1. Maximum Illumination Increase. Any operation or activity producing glare shall be conducted
so that direct or indirect illumination from the source of light shall not cause an illumination
increase greater than 0.2 footcandles as measured at a location beyond the site boundary line as
measured during the day or at night.
2. Flickering and Intrinsically Bright Sources of Illumination. Flickering and intrinsically bright
sources of illumination, even if meeting the standard set forth in Paragraph 1 above, shall be
controlled by luminaire shielding or aiming the light source away from roads and nearby sites.
Exposed sources of light shall be shielded so as not to exceed the outdoor lighting standards set
forth elsewhere in this Ordinance.
3. Reflective Materials That Cause Glare Prohibited. Reflective roofs, sidings, and building
surfaces including reflective glass shall not be permitted except solar heating devices.
SECTION 19.03.1105 HEAT AND HUMIDITY
The following standards shall apply to heat and humidity.
A. Location. Any activity producing intense heat shall be conducted within an enclosed building as not to
raise the temperature of the air beyond the site boundary line.
B. Increases in Humidity in the Form of Steam or Moist Air from Cooling Towers or Equipment.
19- 121
Increases in humidity in the form of steam or moist air from cooling towers or equipment shall be
controlled so that they do not create an ice hazard. Cooling towers shall be controlled by either reheating
the plume or using a closed system.
SECTION 19.03.1106 WATER QUALITY PROTECTION
A. General Water Quality Standards. No activity shall locate, store, discharge, or permit the discharge of
any treated, untreated, or inadequately treated liquid, gaseous, or solid materials of such nature, quantity,
obnoxiousness, toxicity, or temperature that might run off, seep, percolate, or wash into surface or
subsurface waters to contaminate, pollute, or harm such waters or cause nuisances such as objectionable
shore deposits, floating or submerged debris, oil or scum, color, odor, taste, or unsightliness or be harmful
to human, animal, plant, or aquatic life.
B. Minimum State Requirements to be Met. No activity shall withdraw or discharge any liquid or solid
materials to exceed, or contribute toward the exceeding of, the minimum standards set forth in Paragraph
A. above, and those other standards and the application of those standards set forth in Chapter NR-102 of
the Wisconsin Administrative Code as amended.
SECTION 19.03.1107 NOISE
Noise regulation shall comply with the provisions of the standards set forth in Chapter 8.28 of the Village of Grafton
Municipal Code as amended.
SECTION 19.03.1108 ODOR
This Section is applicable to all zoning districts and uses except agricultural uses and activities conducted within the
A-1, A-2, and A-3 Districts as defined herein. No operation or activity shall emit any substance or combination of
substances in such quantities that create an objectionable odor as defined in Chapter NR 429, Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
SECTION 19.03.1109 RADIOACTIVITY
All uses shall conform to the following specified standards concerning radioactivity.
A. Maximum Concentrations of Radioactivity Permitted. The maximum permissible concentrations of
radioactivity that can be released shall be subject to the regulations of the State of Wisconsin, the U.S.
Atomic Energy Commission, and any other federal agency having jurisdiction. In the case of conflict, the
most restrictive requirements shall govern.
B. Storage of Radioactive Materials. Radioactive materials shall be stored in fireproof containers made of
steel and concrete, but shall not be stored in containers made of lead or other low melting metals or alloys
unless completely encased in steel.
C. Medical Sources of Radiation Residues. Medical sources of radiation residues, such as X-ray machines,
gamma and neutron sources, and pharmaceutical isotopes used for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes,
shall be permitted when located within a hospital, clinic, medical or dental office, or medical research
facility. Other uses of radioactive materials shall be limited to measuring in X-ray and similar apparatus,
and concerning the processing and preservation of food.
SECTION 19.03.1110 CHEMICAL, ASBESTOS, AND OTHER HAZARDOUS MATERIAL STORAGE
The following standards shall apply to chemical, asbestos, or other hazardous materials or wastes use and/or storage:
A. Location. Any activity involving chemical, asbestos, or other hazardous materials or wastes use or storage
shall be conducted within an enclosed building.
B. Transfer Off Parcel by Natural Causes or Forces Prohibited. No chemical, asbestos, or other
hazardous materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a parcel in any zoning district in such form or
19- 122
manner that they may be transferred off the parcel by natural causes or forces.
C. Outdoor Storage Prohibited. In all zoning districts no chemical, asbestos, or other hazardous materials or
wastes that might cause fumes, dust, or which are a fire hazard or which may be edible by or otherwise
attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors.
D. Compliance with All Fire and Building Codes for Hazardous Materials Use and Storage. In all
zoning districts uses involving the storage of chemicals, asbestos, or other hazardous materials or wastes
shall be designed to comply with all fire and building codes for the hazardous materials use and storage,
and adequate precautions using the best available technology shall be taken to protect against negative offsite
impacts of a hazardous materials release.
E. Hazardous Materials Impact Analysis Required. In all zoning districts where chemical, asbestos, or
other hazardous materials or wastes are used or stored, a hazardous materials impact analysis shall be
required to determine potential off-site impacts and required mitigation precautions. Said hazardous
materials impact analysis shall be submitted to the Plan Commission for its review and consideration.
SECTION 19.03.1111 DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE
In addition to the performance standards specified herein, the emission of smoke or particulate matter; any operation
producing intensive glare outdoors; any operation producing intense heat or humidity outdoors; the emission of
odorous matter; the emission of vibrations; the storage of chemical, asbestos, or other hazardous materials in such
manner, concentrations, or quantity as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare
is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. (Also see Chapters 8.28, 8.32, and 8.36 of the Village of Grafton
Municipal Code for further regulation of nuisances.)
19-
4-1
PART 4: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION
DIVISION 19.04.0100 NATURAL RESOURCES
SECTION 19.04.0101 NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION STANDARDS
A. Compliance. All new development (including building construction, other site improvements and/or site
preparation), additions to existing development (including building construction, other site improvements
and/or site preparation), along with all new Certified Survey Maps, Subdivision Plats, or Condominiums, in
all zoning districts created in the Village of Grafton, shall comply with the resource protection standards set
forth in Table 19.04.0100. (Ord. 010, Series 2002, Part 12)
B. Natural Resources to be Protected Under this Division to Remain Undisturbed and in Natural State.
All the natural resources required to be protected under this Division shall remain undisturbed and in a
natural state except those natural resources where mitigation is permitted and where that mitigation is in
strict accord with those requirements set forth in this Division of this Ordinance.
C. Clear Cutting and Destruction of Existing Natural Resources. Removal of existing natural resources
from a property before any development approvals from the Village are sought shall not be allowed unless
the property owner obtains a Zoning Permit and meets the standards of this Ordinance for natural resource
preservation. All clear cutting and destruction of natural resource features shall:
1. Be deemed a change of use requiring a Zoning Permit and all such changes of use shall be in
compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
2. Be required to meet the protection levels described in this Ordinance.
3. Where such clear cutting and/or destruction violations occur, be required to meet the mitigation
standards set forth under the provisions of Section 19.04.0103 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 19.04.0102 NATURAL RESOURCE FEATURES DETERMINATION
A. Steep Slopes. Steep slopes, as defined in Division 19.09.0100 of this Ordinance, are to be determined by
using the following sources and/or methods in the order indicated below. If the first source is considered
inaccurate or inappropriate, as determined by the Plan Commission, the succeeding source shall be used:
1. A topographic survey prepared by and certified by a Wisconsin registered land surveyor at a
contour interval of not less than two (2) feet.
2. Large scale 1"=200' Ozaukee County topographic maps.
3. U.S.G.S. 7.5-minute topographic quadrangle maps.
The area of steep slopes (in square feet or acres) shall be measured and graphically delineated on a
topographic drawing and on the "Natural Resource Protection Plan." Such steep slope drawing shall
graphically indicate those steep slope areas, by slope type, of the property pursuant to the "steep slope"
definition set forth in Division 19.09.0100 of this Ordinance.
19-
4-2
Table 19.04.0100
NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION STANDARDS
NATURAL
RESOURCE
FEATURE
ZONING DISTRICT TYPE
Residential (c) Nonresidential (d) Protection
Standard
Mitigation
Permitted
Protection
Standard
Mitigation
Permitted
Protection
Standard
Mitigation
Permitted
Steep Slopes (i):
20 to <=30%
>30%
65%
90%
No
No
75%
85%
No
No
70%
80%
No
No
Woodlands &
Forests (a,e, i):
Mature
Young
70%
50%
Yes
Yes
70%
50%
Yes
Yes
60%
50%
(f)
Yes
Lakes & Ponds 100% No 100% No 100% No
Streams 100% No 100% Yes 100% Yes
Shore Buffers (a) 100%(a) No 100%(a) No 100%(a) No
Floodplains (b)
100% Yes 100% Yes 100% Yes
Wetlands &
Shoreland
Wetlands (a)
100% (h)
Yes
100% (h)
Yes
100% (h)
Yes
(Table Amended per Ord. 010, Series 2002, Part 13; Ord. 021, Series 2001, Part 1)
(a) Shore buffers shall be as regulated by Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code
as amended and/or the Ozaukee County Zoning Ordinance as amended and as applicable within the Villge. As
permitted under Title 22 and Section 59.692(7), Wisconsin Statutes, the Plan Commission may permit development
within shore buffers where such lands were included within the Village municipal limits before May 8, 1982. (Ord.
021, Series 2001, Part 1)
(b) As regulated by Title 21 titled "Floodplain Zoning" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code as amended and/or the
Ozaukee County Zoning Ordinance as amended and as applicable including applicable appeal procedures as set forth in
each ordinance.
(c) Including residential PUD Districts (or residential portions thereof).
(d) Including nonresidential PUD Districts (or nonresidential portions thereof).
(e) Any proposed changes to woodland and forest resources shall be considered as a change of use and shall require the
issuance of a Zoning Permit from the Zoning Administrator in order to assure that required protection levels are met
under the standards set forth under this Zoning Ordinance.
(f) Whether mitigation is permitted shall be determined by the Plan Commission on a case-by-case basis.
(g) Wetlands and shoreland wetlands shall be as regulated by Title 22 “Shoreland-Wetland Zoning” of the Village of
Grafton Municipal Code as amended, the Ozaukee County Zoning Ordinance as amended and applicable within the
Village, and/or all other wetlands as defined in Division 19.09.0100. (Ord. 021, Series 2001, Part 1)
(h) If not otherwise restricted by state or federal regulations, the Plan Commission may allow the filling or alteration of up
to 1 acre of wetland without mitigation if such filling or alteration is essential for public safety purposes as defined
under Section 281.36(7) Wisconsin Statutes. (Ord. 021, Series 2001, Part 1)
(i) Protection standards for steep slopes and woodlands shall be enforced over the total combined occurrences of such
features on lands held in contiguous single ownership, rather than over each of any two or more individual occurrences
of steep slopes or woodlands on such lands. Contiguous single ownership shall be defined as lands that both share a
common boundary and are singly owned by one individual, jointly owned by a married couple including that
individual, owned by a partnership or corporation in which that individual was a member, or any combination. Lands
shall be considered to share a common boundary even if they are divided by a public road or navigable waterway, or if
they connect at only one point. (Ord. 010, Series 2002, Part 13)
19-
4-3
B. Woodlands and Forests. The definition of woodlands and forests (mature and young), as applied to this
Division, appears in Division 19.09.0100 of this Ordinance. The determination of woodland and forest
boundaries shall be based on the following sources:
1. The most recent 1" = 400' aerial photographs prepared by the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional
Planning Commission (SEWRPC) and available from either SEWRPC or from Ozaukee County
(most recent date only); and
2. A field survey of trees compiled by a registered land surveyor and identified by a landscape
architect, forester, arborist, or botanist with a professional degree in one of those fields of
endeavor.
Each woodland and forest area shall include the tree trunk and the area located within the dripline or tree
canopy. The area of woodlands and forests (mature and young), in square feet or acres, shall be measured
and graphically delineated on the "Natural Resource Protection Plan." Such woodland and forest area
drawing shall indicate all woodland and forest areas of the property meeting the minimum size criteria
established by the definitions of woodlands (mature and young) in Division 19.09.0100. In cases where the
drip line or canopy areas overlap, the areas of overlap shall only be counted once. In cases where drip line
or canopy areas overlap property lines, the property line(s) are to be used as the boundary for the woodland
or forest area, with only that portion of the dripline area located on the subject property counted toward the
woodland or forest area. The location, size, and summary of species types of all healthy trees having a
diameter at breast height (DBH) of ten (10) inches or greater that are located in woodland and forest areas
within twenty-five (25) feet of any proposed improvement and/or in woodland and forest areas to be
demolished due to the placement of improvements or grading are to be graphically shown on the "Natural
Resource Protection Plan" or submitted as a separate drawing. For the remaining undisturbed areas of the
development, Certified Survey Map, Subdivision Plat, or Condominium only the outline of woodland and
forest areas indicating whether they are mature or young woodlands is required. The “Natural Resource
Protection Plan” shall include an estimate of the percentage of all health trees within each woodland or
forest area that have a DBH of three (3) inches or greater and ten (10) inches or greater. (Ord. 008, Series
2001, Part 13)
C. Lakes and Ponds. Lakes and ponds, as defined in Division 19.09.0100 of this Ordinance, are to be
determined by using the definitions of "Lake" and "Pond" as set forth in Division 19.09.0100 of this
Ordinance and the sources in the order indicated below. If the first source is considered inaccurate or
inappropriate, as determined by the Plan Commission, the succeeding source shall be used:
1. A topographic survey prepared by and certified by a Wisconsin registered land surveyor at a
contour interval of not less than two (2) feet.
2. Large scale 1"=200' Ozaukee County topographic maps.
3. U.S.G.S. 7.5-minute topographic quadrangle maps.
The area of lakes and ponds (in square feet or acres) shall be measured and graphically delineated on the
"Natural Resource Protection Plan."
D. Streams. Streams, as defined in Division 19.09.0100 of this Ordinance, are to be determined by using the
definitions of "Channel" and "Stream" (see Division 19.09.0100 of this Ordinance) and the sources in the
order indicated below. If the first source is considered inaccurate or inappropriate, as determined by the
Plan Commission, the succeeding source shall be used:
1. A topographic survey prepared by and certified by a Wisconsin registered land surveyor at a
contour interval of not less than two (2) feet.
2. Large scale 1"=200' Ozaukee County topographic maps.
19-
4-4
3. U.S.G.S. 7.5-minute topographic quadrangle maps.
The area of streams (in square feet and acres) shall be measured and graphically delineated on the "Natural
Resource Protection Plan."
E. Shore Buffers. Shore buffers, as defined in Division 19.09.0100 of this Ordinance, are to be determined
as the land within seventy-five (75) feet of the ordinary high water mark of all navigable waters and
parallel to that ordinary highwater mark, where required. Navigable waters are to be determined by using
the definition of "Navigable Water" set forth in Division 19.09.0100 of this Ordinance and the sources in
the order indicated below. If the first source is considered inaccurate or inappropriate, as determined by the
Plan Commission, the succeeding source shall be used:
1. A topographic survey prepared by and certified by a Wisconsin registered land surveyor at a
contour interval of not less than two (2) feet.
2. Large scale 1"=200' Ozaukee County topographic maps.
3. U.S.G.S. 7.5-minute topographic quadrangle maps.
The area of shore buffers (in square feet and acres) shall be measured and graphically delineated on the
"Natural Resource Protection Plan,” except where shore buffers are both waived by the Plan Commission
and not required under State Statutes.
(Ord. 021, Series 2001, Part 2)
F. Floodplain/Floodways/Floodlands. The definition of floodplain, floodway, and floodlands appears in
Division 19.09.0100 of this Ordinance. The one hundred (100) year recurrence interval floodplain and
floodways shall be determined as depicted on the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA)
"Firm: Flood Insurance Rate Map(s)" with the effective date of March 18, 1991 as amended. Where a
conflict exists between the floodland limits as shown on the Federal Emergency Management Agency's
(FEMA) "Firm: Flood Insurance Rate Map(s)" and actual field conditions, the elevations from the 100-year
recurrence interval flood profiles contained in the published Flood Insurance Study--Ozaukee County,
Wisconsin and Incorporated Areas prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
dated March 18, 1991 shall be used.
G. Wetlands (including Shoreland Wetlands). Wetlands and shoreland wetlands are defined in Division
19.09.0100 of this Ordinance. Wetland areas shall be determined by reference to the following sources in
the order shown below. If the first source is considered inaccurate or inappropriate as determined by the
Plan Commission, the succeeding source shall be used:
1. Wetland inventory maps prepared for the Village of Grafton as part of the "Wisconsin Wetland
Inventory" prepared by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources as amended.
2. Field survey and mapping of plant material by a botanist with a professional degree in either
botany or biology.
The area of wetlands and/or shoreland wetlands (in square feet and acres) shall be measured and
graphically delineated on the "Natural Resource Protection Plan."
H. Natural Resources Measurement. All land area within a proposed development, Certified Survey Map,
Subdivision Plat, or Condominium consisting of the natural resource features defined in this Ordinance
shall be accurately measured. The total square feet and acreage of each natural resource feature shall be
multiplied by its respective "Natural Resource Protection Standard" as set forth in Table 19.04.0100
"Natural Resource Protection Standards" of this Ordinance to determine the amount of each natural
resource feature to be protected by a conservation easement. The methodology, termed "Site Intensity and
Capacity Calculations," to be used for such calculations is set forth in Division 19.03.0500 of this
19-
4-5
Ordinance. If two (2) or more natural resource features are present on the same area of land, only the most
restrictive natural resource protection standard shall be used. [For example, if floodlands and woodlands
and forests occupy the same space on a site, the natural resource protection standard would be 100%
(100% is the resource protection standard for a floodland) for this area representing the higher of the two
standards.] Those areas to be demolished due to improvements or site grading or disturbed through the
application of permitted mitigation techniques shall also be measured and so noted but shall not be counted
as a natural resource area to be preserved.
SECTION 19.04.0103 NATURAL RESOURCE FEATURES MITIGATION
A. Intent of Mitigation. The Village of Grafton recognizes that, under certain circumstances, property
owners, Subdividers, or Condominium Developers may wish to develop in portions of those protected
natural resource feature areas shown as eligible for mitigation as indicated in Table 19.04.0100. In
Paragraph B of this Section the conditions for mitigation and mitigation standards are set forth for the
various natural resource features for which mitigation is allowed under the provisions of Table 19.04.0100.
The intent of this Section is not to permit greater destruction of natural resource features than is permitted
under the requirements of this Ordinance for typical property or development. This Section sets specific
standards for use when the extent of the natural resources on a site and the use of the regulations would
create a major hardship for said natural resource feature protection. Thus, mitigation is intended to be used
instead of a variance request when severe hardships would result from the strict enforcement of the natural
resource protection standards and requirements set forth in this Ordinance. Any off-site mitigation shall
take place within the incorporated Village of Grafton.
B. Mitigation Standards. The following methods, requirements, standards and/or criteria shall be followed
for the mitigation of those natural resource features that may be mitigated under the requirements set forth
under Table 19.04.0103:
1. Woodlands and Forests. Woodlands and forest areas may be mitigated under the following
requirements applicable to the mitigation of woodland and forest areas, except that the Plan
Commission may approve different sizes and types of plantings in mitigation areas where site
conditions or context warrant (Ord. 002, Series 2003, Part 1; Ord. 008, Series 2001, Part 14):
A. Mitigation shall include the planting of two (2) acres of new woodland/forest for every
one (1) acre of disturbed woodland/forest for which mitigation is required.
B. Mitigation shall include the replacement of woodlands/forests disturbed. Such mitigation
shall consist of the planting of new woodland/forest areas, as specified in Paragraph (A)
above, using the following numbers of plants per acre of mitigated area:
15 canopy trees, minimum 3.5-inch caliper*
12 canopy trees, minimum 2-inch caliper
250 canopy trees, minimum 4-foot high whips
50 understory trees, minimum 5-foot high whips
25 shrubs, minimum 12-inches high
*Note: Each 3.5-inch caliper canopy tree may be substituted with two
(2) 1.5-inch caliper canopy trees.
All mitigation shall be in addition to landscaping required under Division
19.05.0300 of this Ordinance.
19-
4-6
2. Additional Requirements (Ord. 002, Series 2003 (Part 1)
A. The species of plants to be used in the mitigation of woodlands/forests shall be similar to
those destroyed and a minimum mix of six (6) species are to be planted. Acceptable
species for woodland and forest mitigation are as indicated in Table 19.04.0103 [Note:
These species represent what is found in a typical stand of Wisconsin southern mesic
forest.] No more than eighty (80) percent of the total number of trees planted for
mitigation purposes, however, shall be of any single species.
B. The land upon which the mitigation is to take place shall be protected with a deed
restriction and conservation easement as a permanent natural resource features
conservation easement.
C. No tree cutting or removal, after the adoption of this Ordinance, shall reduce the
woodland/forest natural resource features protection requirements of this Ordinance.
19-
4-7
Table 19.04.0103
TREE SPECIES FOR WOODLAND AND FOREST MITIGATION
Species
Common Name
Species
Scientific Name
Sugar Maple Acer saccharum
Bitternut Hickory Carya cordiformis
Hackberry (Sugarberry) Celtis occidentalis
Butternut Juglans cinerea
Black Walnut Juglans nigra
Eastern Hophornbeam Ostrya virginiana
Black Cherry Prunus serotina
White Oak Quercus alba
Red Oak Quercus borealis
American Basswood Tilia americana
American Elm Ulmus americana
Slippery Elm Ulmus rubra
2. Lakes and Ponds. Lakes and ponds may be mitigated as may be permitted under the
requirements of applicable state and federal legislation, rules, and permit requirements. (Ord. 021,
Series 2001, Part 3)
Where permitted under the requirements of applicable state or federal legislation or rules, the
required lakes and ponds natural resource protection standard may be reduced and/or mitigated
only if such reduction and/or mitigation is part of a Village Engineer approved stormwater
drainage system that meets, at a minimum, all of the following criteria:
a. The time of concentration of stormwater flows remains unchanged or is lengthened.
b. Stormwater storage capacity is unchanged or increased.
c. Additional water is not backed up onto adjoining properties.
(Ord. 021, Series 2001, Part 3)
3. Floodplains, Floodways, and Floodlands. Floodplains, floodways, and floodlands may be
mitigated as may be permitted under the requirements of applicable state and federal legislation,
rules, and permit requirements. (Ord. 021, Series 2001, Part 4)
4. Wetlands and Shoreland Wetlands . . Wetland mitigation may be allowed as permitted
under the requirements of Section 281.37, Wisconsin Statutes, and administrative rules
promulgated by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (WDNR) under that
Section. If such statute or rules do not provide sufficient guidance on required
mitigation, the Village shall require the preparation and submittal of a wetland
mitigation plan by a professional wetland mitigation specialist, and the petitioner shall
be responsible for all costs necessary for the Village to conduct a professional review of
the mitigation plan. In addition, a permit from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
19-
4-8
pursuant to the requirements of Section 404 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1344)
and/or the WDNR shall be submitted to the Village of Grafton certifying that filling
has been approved and permitted by the Corps and/or WDNR. Alternatively, the
petitioner must obtain and provide to the Village written correspondence from said
agencies that a state or federal permit is not required, as a condition of Village review.
(Ord. 021, Series 2001, Part 5)
C. Off-Site Mitigation. Off-site mitigation may be permitted by the Plan Commission if such off-site
mitigation occurs within the same watershed as the natural resource feature, or property, being mitigated
and follows the methods, requirements, standards, and/or criteria set forth under Paragraph B. of Section
19.04.0103 of this Ordinance. All permitted off-site mitigation shall occur within the corporate limits of the
Village of Grafton.
19- 5 - 2
PART 5: DESIGN STANDARDS
DIVISION 19.05.0100 GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION 19.05.0101 ACCESS TO PUBLIC STREETS
This Section sets forth vehicular access requirements for proposed site plans for developments which abut arterial, collector,
and minor streets. This Ordinance recognizes that public streets are a public investment that requires control mechanisms to
assure both public safety and functional capacity. Proposed development for residential and nonresidential uses shall meet
the following requirements:
A. Access Standards for All Residential and Nonresidential Uses. All proposed site plans proposed for residential
and/or nonresidential uses in residential and/or nonresidential zoning districts shall meet the following standards:
1. Controlled Access to Public Streets. Lot and parcel vehicular access points shall be permitted only at
locations according to this Ordinance and other Village of Grafton adopted plans and ordinances. The Plan
Commission may limit vehicular access to any adjoining arterial, collector, or minor street.
2. Distance Between Vehicular Access Points. Within the MFR-1, MFR-2, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, O, BP, M-
1, PID, I, PR, and PUD Districts, the spacing of vehicular access points from arterial streets and highways
to lots and parcels created after the effective date of this Ordinance shall be determined as a function of
arterial street and highway operating speeds. The minimum spacing between vehicular access points along
such streets or highways, to the extent deemed practicable by the Plan Commission, shall be determined
according to Table 19.05.0101(A). These spacings are based upon average vehicle acceleration and
deceleration rates and are considered necessary to maintain safe traffic operation.
Table 19.05.0101(A)
ARTERIAL STREET AND HIGHWAY OPERATING SPEED AND MINIMUM
SPACING BETWEEN DIRECT VEHICULAR ACCESS POINTS
Street/Highway Speed
Limit (miles per hour)
Minimum Driveway Spacing
Measured at the Street
Right-of-Way Line (feet)
25 105
30 125
35 150
40 185
45 230
50 275
Source: Institute of Transportation Engineers. Traffic Engineering Handbook (4th Edition), Englewood Cliff, N.J.:
Prentice Hall, 1992, p. 379 and the American Planning Association. Planning Advisory Service (PAS) Memo,
July 1983.
3. Limitation of Access to Interstate, United States, State Trunk Highways, and County Trunk
Highways. No new direct vehicular access shall be allowed to interstate, United States, and state or county
trunk highway public rights-of-way unless approved by the authority having jurisdiction and the Village
Plan Commission.
19- 5 - 3
4. Temporary Access.
a. Village Streets. On Village streets, the Village Board may grant temporary access to properties
and require their closure when access through adjoining properties is acquired upon
recommendation by the Plan Commission. Such access shall be temporary, revocable, and subject
to any conditions required and shall be issued for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months.
b. County Streets and Highways. Temporary access to Ozaukee County street and highway rightsof-
way are reviewed and may be approved by the Ozaukee County Highway Department. It is the
applicant's responsibility to obtain all necessary approvals from the Ozaukee County Highway
Department for all such temporary access points proposed before site plan approval by the Village.
c. State Highways. Temporary accesses to State highway rights-of-way are reviewed and may be
approved by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation. It is the applicant's responsibility to
obtain all necessary approvals from the Wisconsin Department of Transportation for all such
temporary access points proposed before site plan approval by the Village.
5. Area Circulation Plan May Be Required. The Plan Commission may require the preparation of an area
circulation plan for the proposed development covering several properties in an area surrounding a
proposed site plan. The delineation of the area for the preparation of an area circulation plan shall be
determined by the Plan Commission upon recommendation of the Village Engineer or Village Planner.
Such a plan may require the sharing of access locations or temporary access. All landowners, except those
with a previously approved site plan, shall be required to conform to such an area circulation plan once it is
adopted by the Plan Commission as a component, or element, of the Village of Grafton Comprehensive
Plan. The Plan Commission may require that such an area circulation plan be prepared based upon the
conduct of a traffic impact analysis conducted by a licensed professional engineer with expertise in traffic
engineering. The Village Engineer and Village Planner shall review all such studies and assist the Plan
Commission.
6. Vehicular Non-access Reservations Required. The Plan Commission may require deed restrictions to be
placed on a lot or parcel for which a site plan is proposed to limit vehicular access to abutting arterial,
collector, or minor streets and highways. A landscaped bufferyard of an adequate bufferyard intensity
level, as determined by the Plan Commission or by Division 19.05.0300 of this Ordinance, shall be
provided in vehicular non-access reservations along the property line abutting a public street right-of-way.
In such situations, vehicular access to such lots may be provided by an abutting minor or collector street at
designated access driveways. Such vehicular nonaccess reservations shall be graphically so noted on site
plans, as a formal deed restriction, subdivision plat, or by certified survey map formally filed with the
Ozaukee County Register of Deeds before their approval by the Village.
7. Arterial Street and Highway Access and Street Intersections. No new direct public or private access
shall be permitted to an arterial street or highway within two hundred and fifty (250) feet of the intersection
of the right-of-way lines of another arterial street or highway unless shown on the Village adopted
Comprehensive Plan or component thereof.
8. Minor Streets and Vehicular Access Point Alignments. Minor streets and vehicular access points along
both sides of a collector and/or arterial street shall be aligned to assist in reducing the number of driveways
needed and to improve safety conditions related to access to the street system.
9. Sight Distance and Driveway Placement. Direct vehicular access placement on abutting collector and
arterial streets and highways shall be such that an exiting vehicle has a minimum unobstructed sight
distance according to Table 19.05.0101(B) based upon the operating design speed of the abutting collector
or arterial street or highway.
19- 5 - 4
Table 19.05.0101(B)
HIGHWAY DESIGN SPEED AND MINIMUM REQUIRED SIGHT DISTANCE
FOR DIRECT VEHICULAR ACCESS POINT PLACEMENT
Highway Design Speed
(miles per hour)
Minimum Sight Distance
(feet)
30 200
35 225
40 275
45 325
50 350
Source: American Planning Association. Planning Advisory Service (PAS)
Memo, July 1983.
B. Access Standards for Nonresidential and Multiple-Family Residential Uses. All proposed site plans
proposed for nonresidential and multiple-family residential uses in nonresidential and/or multiple-family residential zoning
districts shall meet the following standards:
1. Maximum Number of Vehicular Access Points Per Lot. Generally, along arterial streets and highways
(including lots that abut the frontage roads of said rights-of-way), where the abutting street frontage is less
than three hundred and fifty (350) feet, a maximum of one (1) vehicular access point shall be permitted to a
particular lot from each of any one (1) or two (2) abutting arterial streets and highways. One (1) additional
driveway entrance along a single continuous lot with frontage greater than three hundred fifty (350) feet
may be permitted by the Plan Commission. When a shared vehicular access point is used by two (2) or
more abutting lots, said shared vehicular access point shall be considered as one (1) single vehicular access
point for each lot or parcel served. These standards are subject to meeting the other standards of this
Division.
2. Provision of Shared Vehicular Access Points Between Lots. Vehicular access points planned to be
located along property lines, or closer than six (6) feet from a property line, shall be shared vehicular access
points with the abutting lot or parcel. The vehicular access point centerline may be the property line
between two (2) lots or parcels of land or may be a mutually agreed upon land access easement. Shared
vehicular access points within single and two family districts may be permitted with Plan Commission
approval. (Ord. 031, Series 2000, Part 1)
SECTION 19.05.0102 EASEMENTS
A. Natural Resource Features Protection/Mitigation, Conservation, Landscape Bufferyard, and Utility
Easements Required. The Plan Commission shall require natural resource features protection/mitigation,
conservation, landscape bufferyard, and/or utility easements of widths deemed adequate for the intended purpose on
each side of all rear lot lines and on side lot lines or across lots where necessary or advisable for natural resource
feature protection, landscape bufferyards (see Division 19.05.0300 of this Ordinance), electric power and
communication lines, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, and gas, water, and other utility lines.
B. Site Traversed by Watercourse, Drainage way Channel, or Stream Where a site is traversed by a watercourse,
drainage way channel, or stream, an adequate drainage way or easement shall be provided as may be required by the
Village Engineer. The location, width, alignment, and improvement of such drainage way or easement shall be
subject to the approval of the Plan Commission, and parallel streets or parkways may be required in connection
therewith. Where necessary, stormwater drainage shall be maintained by landscaped open channels of adequate size
and grade to hydraulically accommodate 100-year recurrence interval storm flows. These design details are subject
19- 5 - 5
to review and approval by the Village Engineer.
C. Minimum Width Required for All Utility Easements. All utility easements shall be a minimum of twelve (12)
feet in width when recommended by the Village Engineer.
SECTION 19.05.0103 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN
[See Chapter 23.01 of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code.]
SECTION 19.05.0104 BUILDING, PARKING LOT, CIRCULATION DRIVE, AND LOADING AREA
SETBACK REQUIREMENTS ALONG ARTERIAL STREETS AND HIGHWAYS
Except in the R-RE, R-E, R-1, R-S, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, MFR-1, MFR-2, CBD, and I Districts and except in any PUD
District located in the area subject to the Grafton Downtown Master Plan as adopted by the Village Plan Commission on
February 23, 1999, the following Table 19.05.0104 sets forth the minimum required building, parking lot, circulation drive,
and loading area setbacks for lots or parcels that abut the indicated arterial streets and highways.
Table 19.05.0104
REQUIRED INCREASED BUILDING, PARKING LOT, CIRCULATION DRIVE, AND
LOADING AREA SETBACKS ALONG ARTERIAL STREETS AND HIGHWAYS
Types of Arterial Street or Highway
by Jurisdiction
Minimum Required Setback from Ultimate Arterial Street or
Highway Right-of-Way Line (a,b)
U.S. Highways 50
State Trunk Highways 50
County Trunk Highways 40
Locally Designated Arterial Streets and Highways 40
(a) Based upon the distance from the ultimate right-of-way width established by the adopted County jurisdictional highway plan and/or the
adopted Village of Grafton Official Map as amended.
(b) Setbacks indicated in this Table apply to buildings, parking lots, circulation drives, and loading areas.
19- 5 - 6
DIVISION 19.05.0200 TRAFFIC, OFF-STREET PARKING AND
LOADING, AND HIGHWAY ACCESS
SECTION 19.05.0201 TRAFFIC VISIBILITY
In order to provide adequate vision clearance, no obstructions are permitted between the heights of two and one-half (2.5)
feet and ten (10) feet above the plane through the mean curb grades within the triangular space formed by any two (2)
existing or proposed intersecting street right-of-way or alley right-of-way lines and a line joining points on such lines, located
a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from their intersection. In the case of arterial streets, the corner cut-off distances establishing
the triangular vision clearance space shall be increased to a minimum of fifty (50) feet on the arterial street.
SECTION 19.05.0202 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
In all districts no vacant land shall be occupied or used and no building shall be erected, enlarged, extended, or increased, or
used including, but not limited to, use by a new use or changed use, until and in connection with every use, there shall be
provided off-street parking stalls for all vehicles according to the following:
A. Adequate Access. Adequate access to a public street shall be provided for each parking space. Driveways shall be
at least twelve (12) feet wide for one- and two-family dwellings, and twenty-four (24) feet wide for all other uses,
except that driveways in the CBD District and PUD Districts within the rea subject to the Grafton Downtown Master
Plan may be reduced to twenty (20) feet in width. Each required off-street parking space shall open directly onto an
aisle or driveway that is wide enough to provide safe and efficient means of vehicular access to the parking space.
(Ord. 010, Series 2002, Part 14)
B. Minimum Parking Space Size. Except as allowed below in the CBD District and PUD Districts within the area
subject to the Grafton Downtown Master Plan, the size of each parking space shall be not less than one hundred and
eighty (180) square feet in area nor less than nine (9) feet in width, exclusive of the space required for ingress and
egress. In the CBD District and PUD Districts within the area subject to the Grafton Downtown Master Plan, the
size of not more than twenty (20) percent of all parking spaced in a parking lot may be as small as one hundred and
thirty (130) square feet in area and eight (8) feet in width, exclusive of the space required for ingress and egress and
provided that such spaces are signed for “compact cars only”. See Paragraph (I)(2) below for the minimum
dimensions for off-street parking spaces provided for use by persons with disabilities. (Ord. 010, Series 2002, Part
15)
C. Minimum Required Parking Lot Setbacks and Screening/Landscaping.
1. General. Any building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be provided with off-street parking
spaces within the property line limits of the property being served, or within the limits of a common
parking area serving one (1) or more buildings. Except where shared access or parking is permitted by the
Plan Commission, off-street parking spaces and internal circulation drives shall in no case be closer than:
a. Four (4) feet to any property line including the base setback line in single family and two family
residential districts and in Planned Unit Developments for single and two-family housing.
b. Three (3) feet to any property line in all zoning districts within the area subject to the Grafton
Downtown master Plan, created after April 18, 2000, provided that a fully opaque decorative fence, wall or
all season landscape screening is also planned in that strip. (Ord. 022, Series 2004, Part 1-part)
c. Zero (0) feet to any property line on any residential lot existing before April 17, 2000. However,
existing driveways on lots created before that date shall not violate the setback or encroachment any further
than already existing if the existing drive is closer than four (4) feet to the lot line. (Ord. 022, Series 2004,
Part 1-part).
d. Six (6) feet to any property line (including the base setback line) in the MFR-1, MFR-2 and all
multiple-family residential Planned Unit Development and non-residential zoning districts not within the
area subject to the Grafton Downtown Master Plan, including the setbacks required in Table 19.05.0104
and in all individual zoning district development standard tables in Division 19.03.0300. (Ord. 010, Series
19- 5 - 7
2002, Part 16; Ord. 031, Series, 2000, Part 2).
2. Minimum Screening and Landscaping Requirements to be Met When Off-Street Parking Areas Abut
the R-RE, R-E, R-1, R-S, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, MFR-1, MFR-2, and Residential PUD Districts.
All off-street parking areas, except in the R-RE, R-E, R-1, R-S, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, MFR-1, MFR-2,
and residential PUD Districts, shall be screened and maintained at the base setback from any abutting RRE,
R-E, R-1, R-S, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, MFR-1, MFR-2, and residential PUD Districts pursuant to the
bufferyard and landscape requirements set forth in Division 19.05.0300 of this Ordinance. All screening
and plant materials shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height at the time of installation.
3. Minimum Off-Street Parking Setback When the R-RE, R-E, R-1, R-S, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, MFR-
1, MFR-2, and Residential PUD Districts Abut. In the R-RE, R-E, R-1, R-S, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6,
MFR-1, MFR-2, and residential PUD Districts, no parking stall or driveway shall be closer than four (4)
feet to a side or rear lot line of abutting R-RE, R-E, R-1, R-S, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, MFR-1, MFR-2,
and residential PUD Districts except where shared access or parking is permitted by the Plan Commission.
(Ord. 031, Series 2000, Part 3).
4. Minimum Distance of Truck Parking from Any Residential Zoning District. No truck parking shall be
allowed within one hundred and fifty (150) feet of any residential zoning district.
D. Off-Street Parking Area Surfacing. All open, off-street loading and parking spaces shall be improved with a
pavement of either asphalt or concrete and storm water drainage facilities as approved by the Village Engineer. This
Paragraph shall not apply to single-family residential districts or to single-family detached dwellings in the R-4, R-5,
R-6, MFR-1, MFR-2, and residential PUD Districts.
E. Concrete Curb Required.
1. Concrete Curb Required for Off-Street Parking Areas.
a. Concrete curb meeting Village specifications shall be required for all off-street parking areas
serving more than five (5) vehicles in all nonresidential zoning districts (including nonresidential
PUD Districts). This requirement shall also apply to the expansion of any existing off-street
parking lot where the number of off-street parking spaces is increased by twenty (20) spaces or
more.
b. Concrete curb meeting Village specifications shall be required for all multiple-family residential
developments within the first twenty-five (25) feet only of all development entry drives as
measured from the public street right-of-way line.
2. Minimum Distance of Required Concrete Curbing from Property Lines. Required concrete curb and
gutter for off-street parking areas shall be installed a minimum of six (6) feet from a property line (as
measured from the back of the curb) to prevent the parked vehicles from extending over any lot lines.
F. Off-Street Parking Stalls. Off-street parking stalls shall be marked by painted lines or other approved material and
shall be maintained to be legible at all times.
G. Parking of Trucks and Equipment. No truck or other vehicular equipment of a commercial or industrial nature
shall be parked regularly on a lot or parcel in any zoning district except as hereinafter specifically provided or as
follows:
1. Agricultural equipment in an A-1, A-2, or A-3 District; or
2. One (1) panel or pickup truck not to exceed three quarter (0.75) ton, in any residential districts.
19- 5 - 8
H. Landscaping. All public off-street parking areas that serve five (5) vehicles or more and are created or redesigned
and rebuilt following the adoption of this Ordinance shall be provided with accessory landscape areas meeting all
applicable requirements of Division 19.05.0300 of this Ordinance.
I. Parking Spaces for Use by Persons with Disabilities. All open, off-street parking areas shall provide parking
spaces for persons with disabilities meeting all applicable "Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Guidelines for
Buildings and Facilities" as documented in the Federal Register, Vol. 56, No. 144, July 26, 1991 as amended.
Unless conflicting with the above specified "Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Guidelines for Buildings and
Facilities" requirements as amended, the following standards are applicable:
1. Minimum Required Number of Accessible Off-Street Parking Spaces for Use by Persons with
Disabilities. The following Table 19.05.0202(I)(1) shall apply:
Table 19.05.0202(I)(1)
MINIMUM REQUIRED NUMBER OF ACCESSIBLE OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES
Total Number of Off-Street Parking
Spaces in Parking Lot or Area
Minimum Required Number of Accessible
Off-Street Parking Spaces
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2 percent of total
1,001 and over 20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000
The minimum required number of accessible off-street parking spaces for use by persons with disabilities
shall be considered as a part of the total off-street parking spaces required.
2. Minimum Dimensions for Off-Street Parking Spaces Provided for Use by Persons with Disabilities.
The minimum dimensions for all parking spaces provided for use by persons with disabilities shall be
thirteen (13) feet wide by twenty feet (20) feet long for automobiles and sixteen (16) feet wide by twenty
(20) feet long for vans.
3. Distance to Facility Entrances for the Location of Off-Street Parking for Persons with Disabilities.
Off-street parking spaces provided for persons with disabilities shall be as close as possible to an entrance
that allows such persons to enter and leave the parking area without assistance.
4. Signage of Off-Street Parking Spaces Serving Persons with Disabilities. All parking spaces provided
for disabled persons shall be marked by a sign that includes the international symbol for barrier-free
environments and a statement informing the public that the parking space is reserved for use by disabled
persons. Such signs shall comply with the requirements of the aforementioned "Americans with Disabilities
19- 5 - 9
Act (ADA) Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities" as amended and with Sections 346.50, 346.503, and
346.505 of the Wisconsin Statutes as amended.
SECTION 19.05.0203 OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE AND ON-SITE QUEUING REQUIREMENTS FOR
USE TYPES
A. Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces and On-Site Queuing Required for Uses. The minimum
number of off-street parking spaces accessory to designated uses (except for nonresidential uses located in the CBD
District and for a specific use that has a special ordinance with requirements for off-street parking in which event the
special ordinance shall apply; such as for a PUD District or as a condition of the granting of a Conditional Use
Permit) shall be provided as set forth in Table 19.05.0203. Table 19.05.0203 shall be applicable to all residential
uses in the CBD District. Calculations resulting in fractional numbers of off-street parking and/or queuing spaces
required shall be rounded to the next higher whole number.
Table 19.05.0203
OFF-STREET PARKING & ON-SITE QUEUING REQUIREMENTS
FOR USE TYPES
Use
Minimum
Required
Parking
Spaces
per 1,000
Square Feet
of
Floor Area
Minimum
Required
On-Site
Queuing
Space
to be
Provided
(number
of
vehicles)
Other Required Standard(s)
for Off-Street Parking Spaces
Agricultural Uses:
Agriculture None
Required
-- --
Nurseries 2 -- Plus 1 space per 4,000 sq. ft. of outdoor display area, plus 1 for
each company vehicle plus 1 for each employee
Residential Uses:
Single-Family Detached
Dwelling Structure
-- -- 2 spaces per D.U.
Two-Family Dwelling
Structure
-- -- 2 spaces per D.U.
19-5 - 1 0
Table 19.05.0203
OFF-STREET PARKING & ON-SITE QUEUING REQUIREMENTS
FOR USE TYPES
Use
Minimum
Required
Parking
Spaces
per 1,000
Square Feet
of
Floor Area
Minimum
Required
On-Site
Queuing
Space
to be
Provided
(number
of
vehicles)
Other Required Standard(s)
for Off-Street Parking Spaces
Mobile Home -- -- 2 spaces per D.U.
Mobile Home Park -- -- 2 spaces per D.U., plus 0.5 space per D.U. for guest parking
Efficiency Apartment,
Townhouse, or
Condominium
-- -- 1.5 spaces per D.U., plus 0.5 space per D.U. for guest parking
One Bedroom Apartment,
Townhouse, or
Condominium
--- -- 1.5 spaces per D.U., plus 0.5 space per D.U. for guest parking
Two Bedroom Apartment,
Townhouse, or
Condominium
-- -- 2 spaces per D.U., plus 0.5 space per D.U. for guest parking
Three or More Bedroom
Apartment, Townhouse, or
Condominium
-- -- 2.5 spaces per D.U., plus 0.5 space per D.U. for guest parking
Group Homes or
Institutional Residential
-- -- 1 space per bedroom
Outdoor Recreational Uses:
Camps, Day or Youth -- -- 1 space per employee
19-5 - 1 1
Table 19.05.0203
OFF-STREET PARKING & ON-SITE QUEUING REQUIREMENTS
FOR USE TYPES
Use
Minimum
Required
Parking
Spaces
per 1,000
Square Feet
of
Floor Area
Minimum
Required
On-Site
Queuing
Space
to be
Provided
(number
of
vehicles)
Other Required Standard(s)
for Off-Street Parking Spaces
Campgrounds -- -- 1 space per travel trailer space
Golf Course -- -- 3 spaces per hole, plus any required for other uses which are a part
of the facility
Golf Driving Range or Rifle
Range
-- -- 1 space per 10 linear ft. of driving or firing line plus 1 space per
employee
Outdoor Arenas -- -- 1 space per 3 seats, or 1 space per 30 sq. ft. of floor area used for
seating, or 1 space per 5 ft. of bench length, whichever is
appropriate
Playing Fields -- -- 1 space per 4,000 sq. ft. of outdoor playfield area, plus 1 space per
acre of passive recreation area
Resorts -- -- 1 space per 3 patrons
Riding Arenas, Equestrian
Centers, or Public Stables
-- -- 1 space per 4 equestrian stalls, plus 1 per 2,000 sq. ft. of riding
area, plus 1 per employee
Riding Stables -- -- 1 space per employee, plus 1 space per 4 equestrian stalls
Skating Rink -- -- 6 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of rink area, plus additional parking
spaces as may be required by buildings or areas used for other
purposes
19-5 - 1 2
Table 19.05.0203
OFF-STREET PARKING & ON-SITE QUEUING REQUIREMENTS
FOR USE TYPES
Use
Minimum
Required
Parking
Spaces
per 1,000
Square Feet
of
Floor Area
Minimum
Required
On-Site
Queuing
Space
to be
Provided
(number
of
vehicles)
Other Required Standard(s)
for Off-Street Parking Spaces
Swimming Pool -- -- 1 space per 100 sq. ft. of pool area, plus 1 per employee, plus
additional parking spaces as may be required by buildings or areas
used for other purposes
Tennis Courts -- -- 2 spaces per court
All Others -- -- 1 space per 10,000 sq. ft.
Indoor Recreational Uses:
Bowling Alleys -- -- 6 spaces per lane, 1 space per employee, 2 spaces per pool/billiard
table, plus additional parking spaces as may be required by
buildings or areas used for other purposes
Dance Halls
-- 6 1 space per each 3 patrons based on the maximum number of
persons that can be accommodated at the same time in accordance
with design capacity and Village fire regulations, and 1 space per
each 0.5 employee
Health Club or Spa -- -- 1 space per exercise station, 4 spaces per sauna or similar facility,
4 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of other activity area, plus 1 space per
employee
Indoor Arenas or Stadiums -- -- 1 space per 3 seats, or 1 space per 30 sq. ft. of floor area used for
seating, or 1 space per 5 ft. of bench length, whichever is
appropriate
Library 3.5 -- --
19-5 - 1 3
Table 19.05.0203
OFF-STREET PARKING & ON-SITE QUEUING REQUIREMENTS
FOR USE TYPES
Use
Minimum
Required
Parking
Spaces
per 1,000
Square Feet
of
Floor Area
Minimum
Required
On-Site
Queuing
Space
to be
Provided
(number
of
vehicles)
Other Required Standard(s)
for Off-Street Parking Spaces
Museum 3.5 -- --
Recreation Center 5 6 Plus 1 space for each 0.5 employee
Swimming Pool (Public) -- -- 1 space per 100 sq. ft. of pool area, plus 1 space per employee
Tennis, Racquetball, or
Handball
-- -- 4 spaces per court, plus 1 space per employee
Theaters, Assembly Rooms,
Gymnasiums,
Grandstands, Meeting Halls,
Convention Halls, or
Exhibition Halls
-- -- 0.33 space per seat if seats are fixed, or 0.33 space per 20 lineal
inches of seating, or 1 space per 30 sq. ft. of floor area, whichever
is greater. When such facilities for public assembly are accessory
to a school, and when approved by the Plan Commission, the
required number of parking spaces may be reduced by the number
of spaces provided as required herein, for the applicable type of
school (see requirements for Elementary, Junior High, and Senior
High Schools set forth below).
Other Indoor Recreational
Uses
-- -- 1 space per 4 patrons
Institutional Uses: Indoor
Church or Synagogue -- 6 0.25 space per seat if seats are fixed, or 0.25 space per 20 lineal
inches of seating, or 1 space per 30 sq. ft. of floor area used for
seating in the main sanctuary, whichever is greater
19-5 - 1 4
Table 19.05.0203
OFF-STREET PARKING & ON-SITE QUEUING REQUIREMENTS
FOR USE TYPES
Use
Minimum
Required
Parking
Spaces
per 1,000
Square Feet
of
Floor Area
Minimum
Required
On-Site
Queuing
Space
to be
Provided
(number
of
vehicles)
Other Required Standard(s)
for Off-Street Parking Spaces
Clubs, Lodges, or
Associations
-- 5 1 space per 50 sq. ft. of gross building floor area
Hospital -- 8 1 space per employee plus 2 spaces per bed
Nursing Homes -- 6 1 space per employee plus 1 space per 3 beds
Schools: Elementary or
Junior High
(Public or Private)
-- 10 1 space per employee, plus 1 space per 3 seats or 1 space per 30
sq. ft. of floor area used for seating or 1 space per 5 ft. of bench
length in the auditorium, gymnasium, or other similar place of
assembly, whichever is greater
Schools: Senior High
(Public or Private)
-- 12 1 space per employee, plus 1 space per 7 students at ultimate
school capacity or 1 space per 3 seats or 1 space per 30 sq. ft. of
floor area used for seating, or 1 space per 5 ft. of bench length in
the auditorium, gymnasium, or other similar place of assembly,
whichever is greater
Colleges, Junior Colleges, or
Universities
(Public or Private)
-- -- 0.5 space per classroom seat, or the maximum number of students
that can be accommodated in accordance with design capacity,
whichever is greater
Trade School, Music,
School, Dance School, or
Business School
-- -- 1 space per student based upon the maximum number of students
that can be accommodated within the design capacity of the
facility
19-5 - 1 5
Table 19.05.0203
OFF-STREET PARKING & ON-SITE QUEUING REQUIREMENTS
FOR USE TYPES
Use
Minimum
Required
Parking
Spaces
per 1,000
Square Feet
of
Floor Area
Minimum
Required
On-Site
Queuing
Space
to be
Provided
(number
of
vehicles)
Other Required Standard(s)
for Off-Street Parking Spaces
Rooming or Boarding
Houses including Apartment
Hotels
-- -- 1.5 spaces per lodging room, suite of rooms to accommodate 1
lodger, or dwelling unit
Public Service or Utilities -- -- 1 space per employee plus 1 space per stored vehicle
Day Care Home
(In Residential Structure)
-- -- As required per type of D.U. plus 1 space for picking up and
dropping off children
Day Care Center or Nursery
School
-- 6 1 space per employee, plus 1 space per 10 children
Commercial Uses: Office
General, including
Government Offices
3.3 -- --
Medical 10 6 Plus 1 space per each practitioner and/or employee
Commercial Uses: Retail
Convenience Market 8 -- --
Department Stores 4 -- --
Drugstores 5 -- --
19-5 - 1 6
Table 19.05.0203
OFF-STREET PARKING & ON-SITE QUEUING REQUIREMENTS
FOR USE TYPES
Use
Minimum
Required
Parking
Spaces
per 1,000
Square Feet
of
Floor Area
Minimum
Required
On-Site
Queuing
Space
to be
Provided
(number
of
vehicles)
Other Required Standard(s)
for Off-Street Parking Spaces
Grocery or Foodstores 5 -- --
Furniture Stores,
Carpet Stores, Appliance
Stores
1.5 -- --
Hardware, Paint or Home
Improvement
3.5 -- --
Liquor Store 5 -- --
Shopping Centers (3 stores
or more)
5 -- --
Other Miscellaneous
Freestanding
Retail Stores
5 -- --
Commercial Uses: Heavy Retail/Service
Auto Sales 2 -- Or 2 spaces per salesman, whichever is greater; plus 1 space per
1,500 sq. ft. of outdoor vehicle display space inclusive of drives to
outdoor vehicle display spaces
Building Materials 3 -- Plus 1 space per 1,500 sq. ft. of outdoor sales/display areas
inclusive of drives to outdoor sales/display areas
19-5 - 1 7
Table 19.05.0203
OFF-STREET PARKING & ON-SITE QUEUING REQUIREMENTS
FOR USE TYPES
Use
Minimum
Required
Parking
Spaces
per 1,000
Square Feet
of
Floor Area
Minimum
Required
On-Site
Queuing
Space
to be
Provided
(number
of
vehicles)
Other Required Standard(s)
for Off-Street Parking Spaces
Vehicle Repair Shop
(without the Dispensing of
Gasoline)
-- -- 4 spaces per service bay
Commercial Uses: Light Auto Service
Automobile Laundries or
Car Washes
-- 10 per
wash bay
for
automatic
wash and
6 per wash
bay for
manual
wash bay
Plus 1 space per employee and 1 space per bay
General Auto Service
Station
(with the Dispensing of
Gasoline)
1.5 without
convenience
market;
8 with
convenience
market
-- Or 4 spaces per service bay, whichever is greater
Commercial Uses: Services
Beauty Parlors, Salons, or
Barber Shops
-- -- 3 spaces per chair, plus 1 space per employee
19-5 - 1 8
Table 19.05.0203
OFF-STREET PARKING & ON-SITE QUEUING REQUIREMENTS
FOR USE TYPES
Use
Minimum
Required
Parking
Spaces
per 1,000
Square Feet
of
Floor Area
Minimum
Required
On-Site
Queuing
Space
to be
Provided
(number
of
vehicles)
Other Required Standard(s)
for Off-Street Parking Spaces
Commercial Laundry or Dry
Cleaner
-- -- 1 space per employee, 1 space per company vehicle, plus 1 space
per 170 sq. ft. of customer service area
Financial
(with Drive Thru Service
Lanes)
5 6 per drive
thru
service
lane
Plus 1 space for each employee
Financial
(without Drive Thru Service
Lanes)
5 -- --
Funeral Homes, Funeral
Parlors, or Undertaking
Establishments
-- 12 1 space per 30 sq. ft. of floor area of assembly rooms, plus 1 space
per employee, plus 1 space for each vehicle owned by the
establishment
Gunsmith 2 -- --
Laundromat -- -- 1 space per washer or dryer, plus 1 space per employee
Repair Shops 2 -- Plus 1 space per employee, plus 1 space for each company vehicle
Taxidermist 2 -- --
Commercial Uses: Bars or Restaurants
19-5 - 1 9
Table 19.05.0203
OFF-STREET PARKING & ON-SITE QUEUING REQUIREMENTS
FOR USE TYPES
Use
Minimum
Required
Parking
Spaces
per 1,000
Square Feet
of
Floor Area
Minimum
Required
On-Site
Queuing
Space
to be
Provided
(number
of
vehicles)
Other Required Standard(s)
for Off-Street Parking Spaces
Bars or Taverns 10 -- Or 1 space per 2 seats or stools, plus 1 space per employee,
whichever is greater
General Restaurant
(without Drive-in/Drive-thru
Facility)
20 -- --
Restaurant
(with Drive-in/Drive-thru
Facility)
20 7 per
service
lane
--
Commercial Uses: Commercial Lodging
Convention Center
(with Lodging)
-- -- 1 space per guest room (in suite, each bedroom shall constitute a
separate guest room), plus 1 space per 30 sq. ft. of assembly room,
plus 1 space per 500 sq. ft. of accessory commercial space
Hotels and Motels
(Non-Convention Center
Lodging)
-- -- 1 space per guest room (in suite, each bedroom shall constitute a
separate guest room), plus 1 space for each 3 employees, plus 1
space per 500 sq. ft. of accessory commercial space
Dude or Guest Ranch -- -- 1 space per rental unit
Bed or Breakfast -- -- 2.5 spaces per D.U. and 1 space per rental room
19-5 - 2 0
Table 19.05.0203
OFF-STREET PARKING & ON-SITE QUEUING REQUIREMENTS
FOR USE TYPES
Use
Minimum
Required
Parking
Spaces
per 1,000
Square Feet
of
Floor Area
Minimum
Required
On-Site
Queuing
Space
to be
Provided
(number
of
vehicles)
Other Required Standard(s)
for Off-Street Parking Spaces
Agricultural Support or
Services
5 -- --
Home Uses:
Home Occupations or Home
Businesses
-- -- As required per type of D.U. plus 1 space for any allowed
business vehicle
Day Care Home
(In Residential Structure)
-- -- As required per type of D.U. plus 1 space for picking up and
dropping off children
Industrial Uses:
Bakeries (Nonretail) 0.25 -- Plus 1 space per employee, plus 1 space per company vehicle
Light Industrial Uses:
Light Industry 2 -- --
Contractor Shop 1 -- Plus 1 space per company vehicle
Warehouse 0.5 -- or 1 space per employee, whichever is greater, plus 1 space for
each company vehicle stored on the premises
Mini-warehouses -- -- 1 space per employee, plus 1 space per 10 storage units
19-5 - 2 1
Table 19.05.0203
OFF-STREET PARKING & ON-SITE QUEUING REQUIREMENTS
FOR USE TYPES
Use
Minimum
Required
Parking
Spaces
per 1,000
Square Feet
of
Floor Area
Minimum
Required
On-Site
Queuing
Space
to be
Provided
(number
of
vehicles)
Other Required Standard(s)
for Off-Street Parking Spaces
Industrial Uses: Heavy Industry
Heavy Industry 2.5 -- or 1 space per employee, plus 1 space per company vehicle, plus 1
space per 5,000 sq. ft. of visitor parking, whichever is greater
Trucking (no loading or
warehousing)
1.5 -- or 1 space per employee, plus 1 space per company vehicle, plus 1
space per 5,000 sq. ft. of visitor parking, whichever is greater
Industrial Uses: Extraction or Disposal
Extraction or Disposal -- -- 1 space per employee
Junkyards -- -- 1 space per employee
Special Land Uses:
Commercial Communication
Towers
-- -- 1 space per employee
Landing Strips, Heliports, or
Airports
-- -- 7 spaces per daily airplane movement (i.e., one way airplane trip)
Temporary Uses:
Christmas Tree Sales -- -- Plus 1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. outdoor sales and display area, plus
1 per employee
19-5 - 2 2
Table 19.05.0203
OFF-STREET PARKING & ON-SITE QUEUING REQUIREMENTS
FOR USE TYPES
Use
Minimum
Required
Parking
Spaces
per 1,000
Square Feet
of
Floor Area
Minimum
Required
On-Site
Queuing
Space
to be
Provided
(number
of
vehicles)
Other Required Standard(s)
for Off-Street Parking Spaces
Contractor's Construction
Site Office
10 -- --
Public Interest Events -- -- 1 space per 3 attenders
Special Event -- -- 1 space per 3 attenders
Real Estate Sales Office 3.3 -- --
Farm Stand 5 -- Plus 1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of outdoor sales and display area,
plus 1 space per employee
Concrete or Asphalt Batch
Plant
-- -- 1 space per employee, plus 1 space for each truck stored on-site
Off-Street Parking Requirements for Uses Not Listed:
See Section 19.05.0203(B) of this Ordinance
19-5 - 2 3
B. Uses Not Listed in Table 19.05.0203 and Other Uses. Parking spaces for Permitted Uses not listed in Table
19.05.0203 shall be provided according to requirements designated by the Plan Commission upon recommendation of
the Zoning Administrator. For conditional uses, parking spaces for conditional uses not listed in Table 19.05.0203
shall be provided according to requirements designated by the Plan Commission upon recommendation of the Zoning
Administrator and as may be required by the Village Board. The provisions for a use deemed similar by the Plan
Commission may be applied upon recommendation of the Zoning Administrator.
C. Employee Parking. Parking spaces required on an employee basis as set forth in Table 19.05.0203 shall be based on
the average number of employees on duty or residing, or both, on the premises at any one time.
D. Off-Street Parking Requirements for Mixed or Combined Uses Located within the Same Building or On the
Same Lot or Parcel. Combinations of any of the uses set forth in Table 19.05.0203 shall provide the total number of
off-street parking stalls and/or queuing space required for each individual use.
E. Potential Reductions of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces and the Provision of Reserve Off-Street Parking
Area.
1. The Plan Commission may decrease the required number of off-street parking spaces by up to twenty-five
(25) percent of the requirement based upon one or more of the following criteria:
a. Technical documentation furnished by the applicant which indicates, to the satisfaction of the Plan
Commission, that actual off-street parking demand for that particular use is less than the required
standard set forth in Table 19.05.0203 of this Ordinance.
b. Bicycle parking facilities will be provided through racks, lockers, or equivalent structures located
convenient to the proposed use.
c. A public transportation route is located within five hundred (500) feet of the property.
2. In the event the number of required off-street parking spaces is reduced as allowed under this Section, the
Plan Commission may also require that sufficient area on the property be held in reserve for the potential
future development of off-street parking to meet the requirements of Table 19.05.0203. If required by the
Zoning Administrator or Plan Commission, such reserve off-street parking area shall be shown and noted on
the site plan, maintained as open space, and developed with off-street parking spaces when the Village
determines that such off-street parking is necessary due to parking demand on the property which exceeds
original expectations, of the loss of bicycle of public transit access or facilities. The property owner or
applicant shall provide the Village with a financial surety in a form acceptable to the Village Attorney and in
an amount of one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the cost to construct the additional off-street parking
spaces prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
SECTION 19.05.0204 OFF-STREET PARKING LOT DESIGN
A. Minimum Width of Off-Street Parking Rows and Aisles. The design of all off-street parking regulated by this
Ordinance shall be in conformance with the requirements set forth in Table 19.05.0204.
19-5 - 2 4
Table 19.05.0204
MINIMUM WIDTH OF OFF-STREET PARKING ROWS AND AISLES
Type of Row Parallel Spaces
45 Degree Angle
Spaces
60 Degree Angle
Spaces
90 Degree Angle
Spaces
Single Row & Aisle 20 ft.
(one-way aisle)
30 ft. (a)
(one-way aisle)
32 ft. (a)
(one-way aisle)
44 ft. (a)
(two-way aisle
Double Row & Aisle 28 ft.
(one-way aisle)
48 ft. (b)
(one-way aisle)
52 ft (b)
(one-way aisle).
64 ft. (b)
(two-way aisle)
(a) Required width may be reduced by two(2) feet where concrete curb and gutter section provided.
(b) Required width may be reduced by four (4) feet where concrete curb and gutter section provided.
(Ord. 008, Series 2001, Part 15)
B. Required Curbs, Barriers, and Overhangs. See Section 19.05.0310(C).
SECTION 19.05.0205 OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Off-street loading spaces accessory to designated uses shall be provided as follows:
A. Location. All required loading spaces shall be on the same lot as the use served. No permitted or required loading
space shall be within forty (40) feet of the nearest point of intersection of any two (2) streets. No loading space shall
be in a required side yard abutting a residential zoning district, a residential portion of a PUD District, or a required
front yard. Except where shared loading access is permitted by the Plan Commission, off-street loading spaces and
internal circulation drivers shall in no case be closer than six (6) feet to any property line. (Ord. 031, Series 2000,
Part 4).
B. Access. Each required off-street loading space shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a
street or alley in a way that will least interfere with traffic movement. Loading spaces on lots located adjacent to
public ways shall be so situated as to enable the vehicles to back into the loading dock from areas other than public
ways. The blocking of loading spaces by other loading spaces, permanent or moveable structures of any type,
including trash receptacles or compactors, shall be prohibited.
C. Surfacing. All open off-street loading spaces shall be improved with pavement and storm water drainage facilities
according to such standards set forth in Section 19.05.0202 of this Ordinance.
D. Computation. Where the total floor area of the use being served is less than two thousand (2,000) square feet, the
required off-street loading spaces may be used to satisfy the requirements for any off-street parking spaces.
Employee parking maneuver areas may also be used for access to loading docks and as truck standing areas.
E. Repair and Service. No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted with loading facilities
provided in any residential or nonresidential zoning districts.
F. Maneuvering Space Required to Service Outdoor Loading Areas. Adequate off-street truck maneuvering area
shall be provided on-site and not within any public street right-of-way or other public lands.
19-5 - 2 5
G. Interference With Fire Exit or Emergency Access Prohibited. Off-street loading facilities shall be designed so as
not to interfere with any fire exits or emergency access facilities to either a building or site. All facilities shall
comply with the Wisconsin Fire Code and The Wisconsin Enrolled Commercial Building code as amended. (Ord.
025, Series 2002, Part 1).
H. Off-Street Loading in the CBD District. Off-Street loading in the CBD District is not required. However, when
off-street loading areas are provided they shall meet the minimum requirements of this Division
SECTION 19.05.0206 OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE DESIGN
A. Minimum Required Off-Street Loading Spaces Accessory to Nonresidential Uses in Business and Public and
Semi-Public Districts. The minimum number of required off-street loading spaces accessory to nonresidential uses
in the C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, I, and PR Districts shall be one (1) loading space for buildings containing ten thousand
(10,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area, plus one (1) additional loading space for
each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof. The minimum
required size of such loading space shall be ten (10) feet in width and twenty five (25) feet in length, exclusive of
aisle and maneuvering space, and it shall have a vertical clearance of not less than fifteen (15) feet.
B. Minimum Dimensional Standards for Off-Street Loading Spaces Accessory to Nonresidential Uses in
Industrial Districts. The minimum size of off-street loading spaces accessory to uses in the BP, M-1, and PID
Districts shall be according to Table 19.05.0206. Loading spaces on lots on public ways shall be so situated as to
enable the vehicles to back into the loading dock from areas other than the public way.
Table 19.05.0206
MINIMUM DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES
ACCESSORY TO NONRESIDENTIAL USES IN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
AND RELATED MINIMUM DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Gross Floor Area of
Building/Use Served
Minimum Size of
Required Off-Street
Loading Spaces
Minimum Vertical
Clearance Required for
Each Off-Street Loading
Space
5,000 to 10,000 sq.ft. 10 ft. x 35 ft. 15 ft.
10,000 to 25,000 sq.ft. 12 ft. x 40 ft. 15 ft.
25,000 to 40,000 sq.ft. 12 ft. x 50 ft. 15 ft.
40,000 to 100,000 sq.ft. 12 ft. x 60 ft. 15 ft.
SECTION 19.05.0207 DRIVEWAYS
All driveways installed, altered, changed, replaced, or extended after the effective date of this Ordinance shall meet the
following requirements and also those set forth in Section 19.05.0101 of this Ordinance.
A. Islands. Except where shared vehicle access is permitted by the Plan Commission in all single-family and twofamily
residential districts, islands between driveway openings shall be provided with a minimum of twelve (12) feet
between all driveways and six (6) feet from all lot lines. (Ord. 031, Series 2000, Part 5).
B. Openings. In all single-family and two-family residential districts, openings for vehicular ingress and egress shall
not exceed twenty- four (24) feet at the street right-of-way line and thirty (30) feet at the roadway. In all
nonresidential districts, minimum openings for vehicular ingress and egress shall be determined by the Plan
Commission during Site Plan Review.
19-5 - 2 6
C. Vehicular Entrances and Exits. Vehicular entrances and exits to drive-in theaters; banks; restaurants; motels;
funeral homes; vehicular sales, service, washing and repair stations; garages; and public parking lots shall be not less
than two hundred (200) feet from any pedestrian entrance or exit to a school, college, university, church, hospital,
park, playground, library, public emergency shelter, or other place of public assembly.
D. Fire Apparatus Access. Where required, fire apparatus access lane width shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet.
Such lanes or public street access shall extend to within 150 feet of any portion of the exterior wall of the first story,
except as may otherwise be provided under the Wisconsin Enrolled Commercial Building Code as amended. The
inside turning radius of a fire lane shall be 28 feet, except as otherwise required by the Fire Chief. (Ordinance No.
025, Series 2002, Part 2)
SECTION 19.05.0208 HIGHWAY ACCESS
No direct private access shall be permitted to the existing or proposed rights-of-way of expressways nor to any controlled
access arterial street without permission of the highway agency that has access control jurisdiction. Additional access
requirements are set forth in greater detail in Section 19.05.0101 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 19.05.0209 MINIMUM PERMITTED THROAT LENGTH
The minimum permitted throat length for vehicles accessing property used for multiple-family dwellings or for nonresidential
purposes shall be established by the Plan Commission during site plan review, but in no case (except in the CBD District) shall
be less than twenty-five (25) feet for properties used for multiple-family dwellings and nonresidential properties with a total
building gross floor area of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet or less, fifty (50) feet for nonresidential properties with a total
building gross floor area of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet to two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet, and seventyfive
(75) feet for nonresidential properties with a total building gross floor area of two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet
or more.” The Plan Commission may waive or modify these requirements for parking lot expansion or reconfiguration
projects where the configuration of pre-existing parking lots, access drives, or circulation drives make the requirements
impractical. (Ord. 008, Series 2001, Part 16).
SECTION 19.05.0210 AREA CIRCULATION PLAN REQUIRED
To minimize the number of vehicular access points on arterial and collector streets when development occurs in an area, the
Village may require an area circulation plan be prepared pursuant to the requirements set forth in Section 19.05.0101(A)(5) of
this Ordinance.
DIVISION 19.05.0300 LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER DEVELOPMENT
REGULATIONS
SECTION 19.05.0301 LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
A. GENERAL PROVISIONS
1. Purpose. This Section is established to create uniform landscape, screening and tree preservation
standards for development of property in the Village of Grafton and the review of plans in order to ensure
that the Village remains attractive, safe and comfortable. This Ordinance shall govern all developments
except detached single-family and attached two-family residentially used and zoned structures. Every
development shall provide sufficient landscaping so that neighboring properties are shielded from the
negative visual influence of development, and the appearance and desirability of development contributes
to the overall attractiveness and economic health of the Village of Grafton.
2. Plan Requirements. The following shall establish the standards for the preparation and submission of
required plans for landscape, screening and tree preservation:
19-5 - 2 7
a. Landscape Plan Required. A landscape plan following the standards set forth in this Section shall be
required for all projects requiring Site Plan Review. The Landscape Plan shall be prepared by a
landscape architect, certified nursery professional or master gardener. Landscaping on any
existing or proposed street right-of-way shall comply with the requirements as set forth by the Village
of Grafton Public Works Director pursuant to street construction standards. Landscape Plans shall be
reviewed and approved as a part of the Site Plan Review procedures contained in Section 19.06.0100.
b. Content of Landscape Plan. All landscape plans shall include or have attached thereto the following
information:
(i) North arrow, scale, date of plan and any subsequent revisions.
(ii) The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, parking lots and
driveways, roadways and rights-of-way, sidewalks, bicycle paths, signs, refuse disposal areas,
fences, free standing electrical equipment, light fixtures, other surface utility structures, and other
free standing structural features, recreational facilities, setbacks and easements. The landscape
plan shall be drawn at a scale not smaller than 1 inch = 100 feet.
(iii) The location, quantity, size at planting, and both scientific and common names of all proposed
plant materials.
(iv) Existing and proposed contours, including the location of all proposed berming, at a one foot
contour interval. Also included shall be the location, extent and general elevations of all detention
and retention areas and drainage ways.
(v) Specification of the type and boundaries of all proposed ground cover, including both scientific
and common names of all proposed plant materials.
(vi) The designation, location, type, and size of all existing trees 4 inches and larger in trunk diameter
measured one foot above natural grade. Any trees to be removed should be clearly identified.
Trees which will be used to meet landscape requirements shall also be indicated. If required for
reasons of clarity, this information may be placed on an additional illustration.
Where existing trees are grouped in a dense cluster, an overall tree mass may be used without a
specific delineation of individual trees. If this technique is used, protected trees used to meet site
landscape requirements must be tagged on-site and identified on the plan in tabular form.
(vii) Details of all fences and walls proposed to be constructed on the site.
(viii) Elevations, cross-sections and other site or construction details determined to be necessary by the
Director of Planning and Development.
(ix) The following notes shall be included on the face of all plans:
(1) The landscape installer must receive approval from the Director of Planning and
Development for any substitutions or alterations to the plan.
(2) It is the responsibility of the landscape installer to have underground utilities located by
Diggers Hotline prior to installation.
(x) Name and contact information of the property owner.
(xi) Name and contact information of the person/company who prepared the plan.
3. Timing of Landscape Improvements. All required landscaping shall be installed prior to the issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy. The best times for planting in this area are early spring and early fall. Plants
planted in the summer run the risk of dehydration.
If weather conditions or other circumstances beyond the developer's control prevent installation of all or
portions of the landscape materials the procedures outlined for Certificate for Occupancy in Section
19.07.0104 must be followed.
19-5 - 2 8
4. Guarantee. All plantings shall be guaranteed by the property owner or business to be in a healthy and
flourishing condition at all times.
B. LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
The following shall establish standards for the landscape improvements required to be installed as part of the
development of new buildings, structures and uses of land governed by this Section:
1. Types of Landscaped Areas. This article regulates landscaping of five distinct areas of a parcel as follows:
a. Interior Parkway
b. Perimeter Landscape Area
c. Foundation Area
d. Parking Lots
2. Landscaped Criteria.
a. Interior Parkway Landscaping. An interior parkway shall be provided in all zoning districts identified
in the following table:
Zoning District
Minimum. Interior
Parkway Depth
MFR-1 and MFR-2 Multi-Family
Residential Districts
15’
Central Business (CBD) District
(on-site parking not required for
commercial businesses)
10’
C-1 Neighborhood Business
District
15’
C-2 Community Business District 20’
C-3 Commercial Service Business
District
20’
C-4 Freeway Interchange Business
District
25’
BP Business Park District 25’
O Office District 25’
M-1 Industrial District 20’
19-5 - 2 9
PID Planned Industrial District TBD
PUD Planned Unit
Development
TBD
I Institutional District 30’
Zoning District
Minimum. Interior
Parkway Depth
PR Parks and Recreation
District
20’
Except for access drives, interior parkways shall be landscaped as follows:
Where parking is provided in the street yard, 1 tree per 40 feet of street frontage shall be provided. At
least 50 percent of the required trees shall be large deciduous or evergreen trees as identified in the
Recommended Trees, Shrubs, Evergreen, and Ground Cover List subsection. Variety of species may
vary depending on design intent.
In addition, shrub planting shall screen the parking area from the roadway. This shrub planting shall
be a minimum of 3 feet in height and be located within the interior parkway. A maximum of 25
percent of the parking lot frontage may be left unscreened to permit design flexibility. The remainder
of the interior parkway shall be planted with ground cover, flowers, or grass.
(i) Where no parking spaces will be located in the front yard, 1 tree per 50 feet of street frontage
shall be provided in the front yard. At least 50 percent of the required trees shall be large
deciduous or evergreen trees as identified in the Recommended Trees, Shrubs, Evergreen, and
Ground Cover List. Tree type may vary depending on design intent. The remainder of the interior
parkway shall be planted with shrubs, ground cover, flowers, or grass.
19-5 - 3 0
(ii) For corner lots, interior parkways shall be provided along both streets.
b. Perimeter Landscape Area.
(i) The perimeter area shall be equal to the required zoning district side and rear yard setbacks for
the property as outlined in Development Standards Tables for each zoning district.
(ii) Within the perimeter areas, berming, trees, and shrubs shall be provided to create a visual
separation between properties. Appropriate berm height will depend on the width of the landscape
area, with no berm having a slope greater than 3:1. A minimum of 40 percent of the length of the
perimeter shall be planted with shrubs that will reach a height of at least 4 feet. Trees shall be
provided in a quantity equal to one tree per 75 feet of perimeter length. Tree spacing shall be
determined by tree species and design considerations. Up to 50 percent of the required trees in
this screening alternative may be small deciduous trees.
c. Bufferyard Screening. The appropriateness of proposed bufferyard landscaping will depend upon the
relationship between the proposed use of the property, the use on adjacent properties, and the master
plan for the development of the area. Also, bufferyards will not be required for properties located in
the downtown pursuant to the Village of Grafton Downtown Master. Three types of bufferyard
screening have been defined. The particular type of screening that will be required shall depend upon
the relationship of the proposed land use and the adjacent land uses. Minimum landscape
requirements shall be as follows:
(i) Screening Between Adjacent Residential and Non-Residential Uses. These landscape
requirements are designed to provide a substantial buffer between residential and non-residential
uses. Where a residential use abuts a non-residential use, one of the following three buffering
alternatives shall be required. The property owner may select the buffering alternative which best
meets the configuration of the site and the proposed development. All fences, walls and hedges
shall comply with all Village of Grafton codes.
(1) Alternative A: The buffering area shall be a minimum of 8 feet in width for this alternative.
An opaque brick or other approved decorative masonry wall 6 feet high shall be constructed
along the entire perimeter, excluding area within the required front yard setback. The wall
may be continued within the front yard provided the height is reduced to 4 feet. Large
19-5 - 3 1
deciduous trees in a quantity equal to one tree per 60 feet of perimeter length shall be
provided. Tree spacing shall be determined by tree species and design considerations, and are
not required to be evenly spaced. Shrubs shall be planted within the buffer area at a minimum
rate of 10 per 100 feet, massed appropriately in clusters.
(2) Alternative B: A minimum 12 foot average buffer area shall be required for this alternative. A
fence of wood or other approved material 6 feet high and at least 75 percent opaque shall be
constructed along the entire perimeter, excluding area within the required front yard setback.
The fence may be continued within the front yard provided the height is reduced to 4 feet.
Shrubs shall be planted within the buffer area at a minimum rate of 15 per 100 feet, massed
appropriately in clusters. Large deciduous trees shall be provided in a quantity equal to 1 tree
per 60 feet of perimeter length. Tree location shall be determined by tree species and design
considerations.
(3) Alternative C: A minimum 25 foot buffer area shall be required for this alternative. A berm at
least 3 feet in height with a maximum 3:1 slope shall be constructed along the entire
perimeter. Breaks in the berm may be provided as appropriate to accommodate drainage. The
berm shall be planted with shrubs 4 feet or greater in height to provide screening along at
least 75 percent of the perimeter length. Trees shall be provided in a quantity equal to one
tree per 60 feet of perimeter length. Tree spacing shall be determined by tree species and
19-5 - 3 2
design considerations. Up to 25 percent of the required trees in this screening alternative may
be small deciduous trees.
(ii) Screening of Parking Areas. The following landscape requirements are designed to screen
parking areas from adjacent non-residential uses or multi-family residential uses. Where a nonresidential
or multi-family residential use parking lot will be located adjacent to a residential use,
the landscaping shall comply with the screening regulations outlined in Subsection (i) above. A
parking lot will be placed along a perimeter such that parked cars will face the abutting nonresidential
property. Shrubs and trees shall be appropriately placed to maximize the screening of
automobiles. Shrubs shall be provided along at least 80 percent of the length of the parking area.
Shrubs shall be a minimum of 3 feet in height at maturity when screening a parking lot. Trees
shall be provided in a quantity equal to one large deciduous tree per 60 feet of parking lot length.
Tree spacing shall be determined by tree species and design considerations. Up to 25 percent of
the required trees in this screening alternative may be small deciduous trees.
19-5 - 3 3
(iii)Screening Between Single- and Multi-Family Residential Uses (not including parking areas). This
landscape screening is generally required between single- and multi-family residential areas.
Berming, trees, and shrubs shall be provided to create a visual separation between properties.
Appropriate berm height will depend on the width of the landscape area, with no berm having a
slope greater than 3:1. A minimum of 60 percent of the length of the perimeter shall be planted
with shrubs that will reach a height of at least 6 feet. Trees shall be provided in a quantity equal to
one tree per 60 feet of perimeter length. Tree spacing shall be determined by tree species and
design considerations. Up to 25 percent of the required trees in this screening alternative may be
small deciduous trees.
d. Foundation Area Landscaping.
(i) Purpose. Planting should emphasize softening large expanses of building walls, accenting
building entrances and architectural features, and screening mechanical equipment. Where
extended roofs or canopies are used to provide a covered walkway adjacent to a building,
foundation plantings are not required. Landscaping is required to separate vehicular areas from
buildings.
(ii) Location. Foundation landscaping areas shall be located along or adjacent to each applicable
front, side or rear of a building, provided, however, where a portion of the front, side or rear of a
building is devoted to pedestrian ingress/egress, vehicular ingress/egress, loading or drop-off
zones, foundation landscaping areas may be aggregated into one or more locations along or
abutting such front, side or rear of a building.
(iii) Relationship to Buildings. Foundation landscaping areas shall be located adjacent to the building;
or begin within 12 feet of the building (in the case of a walkway which runs adjacent to the
building).
(iv) Area. Foundation landscaping areas shall have a total area in square feet of not less than 2 feet
times the length of the wall (2 feet x length of wall = area in square feet for foundation
landscaping) to which the foundation landscaping is oriented.
(v) Plantings. Foundation landscaping areas shall be landscaped with grass, trees, or shrubs/hedge
plants, or in combination with other suitable ground cover materials and maintained.
19-5 - 3 4
(vi) Minimum Dimension. Foundation landscaping areas shall maintain a minimum depth in the
smallest dimension of 6 feet, provided, however, the Director of Planning and Development may
approve up to 25 percent of a foundation landscaping area to be included in above-ground
planters having a minimum dimension of 3 feet.
e. Parking Lot Landscaping. Landscaping shall be required within all parking lots to meet the following
standards:
(i) There shall be a minimum 9 foot wide curbed planting island at both ends of every parking row.
The depth of the planting island shall be equal to the depth of the parking stalls.
19-5 - 3 5
(ii) All trees within a landscape island shall be pruned to have branching starting no less than 6 feet
above the pavement.
(iii)To break up long expanses of parking rows, landscape islands are required. One of the following
alternatives shall be used to divide rows of parking spaces.
(1) Alternative A. A continuous curbed landscape island between rows may be provided in lieu
of full stall planting islands between parking bays. Where such a continuous island is
provided, it shall be a minimum of 9 feet in width and shall contain a minimum of one tree
per 10 lineal parking spaces.
19-5 - 3 6
(2) Alternative B. One landscape island shall be constructed for every 10 parking stalls. A curbed
island at least 9 feet-wide and as deep as the parking stalls shall be provided to divide the bay
length. There shall be a minimum of one large deciduous tree per island.
In addition to required trees, an appropriate planting of shrubs, ground cover plants, flowers,
sodded lawn and natural mulch only shall be provided within all landscape islands. To insure
vehicular visibility, shrubs shall not exceed a mature height of 30 inches above pavement on
landscape islands at the end of parking rows.
3. Landscape Design Requirements. Functional activities within and adjoining the development site must be
considered in the design of landscape improvements, including consideration of the following:
a. Service Area Screening. All service areas shall be screened from view through the use of evergreen
plant materials, a fence, or masonry screen wall compatible with the proposed building design.
(i) Trash dumpsters and other waste receptacles or equipment shall be screened with a fence or 3
sided brick or other approved masonry walls at least 6 feet in height, with a solid, attractive single
or double access gate on one side only.
(ii) All utility equipment (air conditioners, transformers, etc.) shall be provided with appropriate
planting screens. All dish antennas greater than 36 inches in diameter shall be adequately
screened from adjoining properties by an opaque wall, fence, hedge or berm.
(iii) All loading areas shall be fully screened so as not to be visible from adjoining rights-of-way and
property zoned for any residential use.
(iv) All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products within 500 feet of a residential
district shall be effectively screened and enclosed by a solid wall or fence 8 feet in height. If
materials to be stored outdoors are in excess of 8 feet in height, then landscape screening shall be
provided in addition to the fence or wall installed along the outside perimeter of the fence or wall,
equal or exceeding the height of the materials to be stored outdoors.
b. Traffic Visibility. Landscaping must be designed and installed pursuant to Section 19.05.0201 on the
Village of Grafton Zoning Code.
c. Berming shall not exceed a maximum slope of 3:1 except in parking islands, where the maximum
slope shall not exceed 2:1.
d. Mulch materials shall be shredded bark or other organic material best suited for the Village of
Grafton. Gravel and stone mulches are not permitted, unless specifically approved in writing by the
Director of Planning and Development.
e. All fences proposed to be used to meet landscape requirements shall be comply with all municipal
codes.
C. LANDSCAPE PLAN AND DESIGN REVIEW
The following guidelines shall be considered in reviewing the design and implementation of landscape plans
in conjunction with review of site plans and special use permits.
1. Standards for Plant Materials. Materials planted in any development shall comply with the following
requirements:
a. The quality and size of plant material selected shall comply with the latest edition of the "American
Standard of Nursery Stock" published by the American Association of Nurserymen unless otherwise
indicated.
b. No artificial plants of any type shall be used to meet the requirements of this Ordinance in any
landscape area within the parcel.
c. Minimum sizes for plant materials at time of installation for all landscape areas shall be as follows:
19-5 - 3 7
(i) Deciduous trees shall be a minimum trunk size of 2½ inch caliper when installed. Evergreen trees
shall be a minimum 6 feet in height when installed.
(ii) Deciduous shrubs (other than dwarf varieties) shall be a minimum of 30 inches in height at time
of installation if used as a perimeter screen planting, and 24 inches in height for all other
installations. Dwarf varieties and plants normally measured by spread shall be a minimum of 18
inches in height/spread.
(iii) Ground cover shall be so planted and spaced that complete coverage can be obtained within two
years after date of installation. Only ground cover plants, flowers, sodded lawn and natural mulch
will be considered appropriate ground cover.
(iv) Flower beds and the use of native grasses is encouraged and shall be mass planted in acceptable
areas to create color, texture and interest.
d. Property owners shall be responsible for maintaining all landscaping shown on the approved
landscape plan throughout the life of the development. All dead plants shall be replaced with plants
which meet original requirements. No changes shall be permitted without the approval of the Director
of Planning and Development or his/her designee.
2. Guide for Landscape Planting. The plant materials recommended in Subsection (3) below have minimal
maintenance requirements. However, all landscape material must receive a certain degree of care,
especially during and immediately after planting. To protect an investment in new landscaping, proper
horticultural techniques should be followed. The following recommendations are provided as a guide for
planting based on current horticultural practice.
a. The best times for planting are early spring and early fall. Plants planted in the summer run the risk of
dehydration.
b. Plant trees and shrubs at least 3-feet from the back of curb along head-in parking spaces to prevent
damage from car overhangs. Mulch, lawn or planted ground cover shall be further help avoid damage.
c. Dig tree pits at least one foot wider than the root ball.
d. Especially in areas where construction activity has compacted the soil, the bottom of the pit should be
scarified or loosened with a pick ax or shovel.
e. After a pit is dug, observe subsurface drainage conditions. Where poor drainage exists, special
provisions should be made to ensure proper drainage around the tree.
f. Backfill should include a proper mix of soil, peat moss, and nutrients. All roots must be completely
covered. Backfill should be thoroughly watered as it is placed around the roots.
g. Plants should remain plumb and level. Newly planted trees may be supported with stakes and ties to
hold it firmly in place. Remove stakes and ties after one year.
h. Spread at least two inches of mulch over plant beds in order to retain moisture and keep down weeds.
A 3 inch deep saucer should be provided to form a basin around the trunk of the tree. This saucer
helps catch and retain moisture.
i. The lower trunks of new trees may be wrapped with burlap or paper to prevent evaporation and sun
scald. The wrapping should remain on the tree for at least one year.
3. Lists of Recommended Trees, Shrubs, Evergreen, and Ground Cover. The following lists indicate
plantings which will meet the landscape requirements of this Ordinance. The lists are by no means
comprehensive and are intended merely to suggest the types of flora which would be appropriate for these
purposes. Plants were selected for inclusion on these lists according to four principal criteria: (i) general
suitability for the climate and soil conditions of this area, (ii) ease of maintenance, (iii) tolerance of
Village conditions, and (iv) availability from area nurseries. All plantings shall be approved by the
Director of Planning and Development.
19-5 - 3 8
Trees
Botanical Name Common Name Height / Spread
*Acer freemanii Freeman Maple H 40-80 S 25-50
Acer nigrum Black Maple H 50-75 S 50
*Acer platanoide Norway Maple H 40-50 S 35-40
*Acer rubrum Red Maple H 40-60 S 30-50
*Acer saccharium Sugar Maple H 50-75 S 50
*Acer Tataricum Tartarian Maple H 15-20 S 15-20
*Amelanchier Serviceberry H 25-30 S 25-30
Betula alleghaniensis Yellow Birch H 50-75 S 35-50
Betula nigra River Birch H 50-75 S 35-50
Betula papyrifera Paper Birch H 50 S 35
Betula populolia Whitespire Birch H 20-40 S 10-20
Carpinus caroliniana Musclewood H 25-30 S 25-30
Celtis occidentalis Hackberry H 60-75 S 40-60
Cercis Canadensis Eastern Redbud H 20-30 S 25-35
Cladrastis kentukea American Yellowwood H 30-50 S 40-55
Cornus alternifolia Pagoda Dogwood H 10-15 S15-20
*Crataegus Hawthorn H 20-30 S 20-30
Ginkgo biloba Ginkgo H 40-80 S 30-40
*Gleditsia tricanthos Honeylocust H 30-60 S 30-45
Gymnocladus dioica Kentucky Coffeetree H 50-60 S 50-60
*Magnolia Magnolia H 20-30 S 15-35
*Malus Crabapple H 15-30 S 15-30
Ostrya virginiana Ironwood H 30 S 20
Prunus maacki Amur Chokecherry H 20-30 S 20-30
Pyrus calleryana Callery Pear H 30-50 S 20-35
Quercus bicolor Swamp White Oak H 50-60 S 50-60
Quercus bicolor x
macrocarpa
Swamp White x Bur Oak H 75 S 70
Quercus macrocarpa Bur Oak H 70-90 S 60-80
Quercus muehlenbergii Chinkapin Oak H 45-80 S 50-80
Quercus robur English Oak H 40-60 S 40-60
Quercus alba White Oak H 50-80 S 40-70
Syringa reticulate Japanese Tree Lilac H 20 S 15
*Tilia Linden H 50-70 S 35-50
*Ulmus Elm Hybrid H 50-70 S 45-60
Shrubs
Botanical Name Common Name Height / Spread
*Amelanchier Serviceberry
*Aronia Chokeberry
*Berberis Barberry
*Buddleia Butterfly Bush
*Cornus Dogwood
*Corylus Hazelnut
*Cotinus Smokebush
*Cotoneaster Cotoneaster
*Euonymus alatus Burning Bush
19-5 - 3 9
*Forsythia Forsythia
*Hydrangea Hydrangea
*Hypericum St. Johnswort
*Philadelphus Mockorange
*Physocarpus Ninebark
*Potentilla Potentilla
*Rhus Sumac
*Ribes Alpine Current
*Rosa Rose
*Salix Willow
*Sambucus Elderberry
*Spirea Spirea
*Syringa Lilac
*Viburnum Viburnum
*Weigelia Weigelia
*Yucca Yucca
Evergreens
Botanical Name Common Name Height / Spread
Abies concolor Concolor Fir H 30-50 S 15-30
Abies balsamea Balsam Fir H 45-75 S 20-25
Abies fraseri Fraser Fir H 30-40 S 20-25
*Picea Spruce H 40-60 S 15-40
*Pinus Pine H 50-80 S 20-40
*Thuja Arborvitae H 10-60 S 6-30
Tsuga canadensis Canadain Hemlock H 40-70 S 25-35
Larix decidua Common Larch H 70-75 S 25-30
Larix laricina Tamarack H 40-80 S 15-30
Evergreen Shrubs
Botanical Name Common Name Height / Spread
*Juniperus Juniper
*Taxus Yew
Microbiota Russian Cypress
*Thuja Arborvitae (Globe & Compact)
Evergreen Broad Leaf
Botanical Name Common Name Height / Spread
*Azalea Azalea
*Buxus Boxwood
*Euonymus Euonymus
Ilex crenata Holly
Ilex verticillata Winterberry
*Rhododendron Rhododendron
* Indicates many cultivars in each
specie
19-5 - 4 0
SECTION 19.05.0314 MITIGATION OF MINIMUM REQUIRED LANDSCAPE SURFACE RATIO (LSR) IN
NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
The Village of Grafton recognizes that the use of the landscape surface ratio (LSR) standards for the provision of adequately
landscaped open space in nonresidential areas as set forth in this Ordinance may not always lead to good design and, under
some circumstances, may be difficult to achieve. This Section addresses landscape mitigation measures that may be allowed
by the Plan Commission.
A. Mitigation of Required Bufferyards and Off-Street Parking Landscaping Not Permitted. The mitigation of the
dimensional requirements, structural requirements, and/or landscape plant unit and/or material requirements of
required peripheral or street bufferyards shall not be allowed. Landscape surface ratio (LSR) mitigation shall only be
allowed for required on-site landscaping as required in Table 19.05.0311(C).
B. Maximum Allowable Reduction of the Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) Through Mitigation Measures. The
maximum allowable reduction of the landscape surface ratio (LSR) through mitigation measures shall not fall below
those landscape surface ratios (LSRs) set forth in Table 19.05.0314. In no case shall reductions in landscape
surface ratios (LSRs) supersede the natural resource protection standards set forth in Division 19.04.0100 or allow
for increases in either the maximum gross floor area ratio (GFAR) or net floor area ratio (NFAR) set forth in the
various zoning district requirements of this Ordinance.
Table 19.05.0314
MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE MITIGATION OF
LANDSCAPE SURFACE RATIO (LSR) REQUIREMENTS
IN NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
Nonresidential Zoning
District
Required
Landscape
Surface Ratio
(LSR)
Alternative
Landscape Surface
Ratio (LSR) with
Mitigation
Minimum Number of Plant
Units (see Table 19.05.0302)
Required to be Planted On-
Site
Under LSR Mitigation
Requirements
CBD Central Business None None None
C-1 Neighborhood Business 0.45 0.35 7 per acre
C-2 Community Business 0.25 0.20 7 per acre
C-3 Commercial Service
Business
0.25 0.20 7 per acre
C-4 Freeway Interchange
Business
0.35 0.30 7.5 per acre
O Office 0.30 0.25 9 per acre
BP Business Park 0.45 0.40 9 per acre
M-1 Industrial 0.25 0.20 5 per acre
PID Planned Industrial 0.30 0.25 7 per acre
I Institutional 0.40 0.30 7.5 per acre
PR Park and Recreation 0.50 0.45 5 per acre
19-5 - 4 1
DIVISION 19.05.0400 LIGHTING STANDARDS
SECTION 19.05.0401 EXTERIOR LIGHTING STANDARDS
Exterior lighting shall meet one (1) of the following standards. In addition, when lighting is measured at a property line which
is the dividing line between two zoning districts, the lighting levels measured at the property line shall not exceed the
maximum allowable illumination of the more restrictive of the two abutting zoning districts.
A. Requirements for the Use of No Cut-Off Type Luminaires. When a light source or luminaire has a no cut-off type
luminaire (see Figure 19.05.0401(A)), the maximum permitted illumination and the maximum permitted luminaire
height shall be as set forth in Table 19.05.0401(A).
Table 19.05.0401(A)
REQUIREMENTS FOR THE USE OF NO CUT-OFF TYPE LUMINAIRES (a)
Zoning District
Maximum Permitted
Illumination (a)
(footcandles)
Maximum Permitted
Luminaire Height (feet)
R-RE, R-E, R-1, R-S, R-2, R-3,
R-4, R-5, and R-6 Districts
0.20 10
MFR-1, MRF-2, and
Residential PUD Districts
0.30 15
C-1 District 0.30 20
PR and I Districts As determined by the Plan
Commission during Site
Plan Review on a case-bycase-
by-case basis.
As determined by the Plan
Commission during Site Plan
Review on a case-by-case-bycase
basis.
All Other Districts 0.30 (b) 25 (b)
Village Required Street Lights
in All Districts
Per Village of Grafton
Requirements and
Specifications (Section
19.05.0404 of this
Ordinance)
Per Village of Grafton
Requirements and Specifications
(Section 19.05.0404 of this
Ordinance)
(a) These standards do not address illumination levels or fixture height that may be
required by the Village of Grafton for the adequate lighting of public street
rights-of-way. These represent maximum illumination levels on private
property.
(b) See Section 19.05.0403 for lighting standards for outdoor recreational facilities
in the PR District and I District.
See Figure 19.05.0401 (A) at the end of Part 5.
19-5 - 4 2
B. Requirements for Total Cut-Off Type Luminaires (with Angle Greater than 90 Degrees). When a luminaire has
total cutoff of light at an angle greater than ninety (90) degrees (see Figure 19.05.0401(B)), the maximum illumination and the
maximum permitted luminaire height shall be as set forth in Table 19.05.0401(B).
Table 19.05.0401(B)
REQUIREMENTS FOR THE USE OF CUT-OFF TYPE LUMINAIRES
WITH ANGLE GREATER THAN 90 DEGREES (a)
Zoning District
Maximum Permitted
Illumination (a)
(footcandles)
Maximum Permitted
Luminaire Height (feet)
R-RE, R-E, R-1, R-S, R-2, R-3,
R-4, R-5, and R-6 Districts
0.5 12
MFR-1, MRF-2, and
Residential PUD Districts
0.8 20
C-1 District 1.0 25
PR and I Districts As determined by the Plan
Commission during Site
Plan Review on a case-bycase-
by-case basis.
As determined by the Plan
Commission during Site Plan
Review on a case-by-case-bycase
basis.
All Other Districts 2.0 (b) 30 (b)
Village Required Street Lights
in All Districts
Per Village of Grafton
Requirements and
Specifications (Section
19.05.0404 of this
Ordinance)
Per Village of Grafton
Requirements and Specifications
(Section 19.05.0404 of this
Ordinance)
(a) These standards do not address illumination levels or fixture height that may be
required by the Village of Grafton for the adequate lighting of public street
rights-of-way. These represent maximum illumination levels on private
property.
(b) See Section 19.05.0403 for lighting standards for outdoor recreational facilities
in the PR District and the I District.
C. Requirements for Total Cut-Off Type Luminaires (with Angle Less than 90 Degrees). When a luminaire has
total cut-off of light at an angle less than ninety (90) degrees and is located so that the bare light bulb, lamp, or light
source is completely shielded from the direct view of an observer five (5) feet above the ground at the point where the
cut-off angle intersects the ground (see Figure 19.05.0401(C)), then the maximum permitted illumination and the
maximum permitted height of the luminaire shall be as set forth in Table 19.05.0401(C).
See Figure 19.05.0401 (B) at the end of Part 5.
19-5 - 4 3
Table 19.05.0401(C)
REQUIREMENTS FOR THE USE OF CUT-OFF TYPE LUMINAIRES
WITH ANGLE LESS THAN 90 DEGREES (a)
Zoning District
Maximum Permitted
Illumination (a)
(footcandles)
Maximum Permitted
Luminaire Height (feet)
R-RE, R-E, R-1, R-S, R-2, R-
3, R-4, R-5, and R-6 Districts
0.8 15
MFR-1, MRF-2, and
Residential PUD Districts
1.0 20
C-1 District 2.0 25
PR and I Districts As determined by the Plan
Commission during Site Plan
Review on a case-by-case-bycase
basis.
As determined by the Plan
Commission during Site Plan
Review on a case-by-case-bycase
basis.
All Other Districts 4.0 (b) 40 (b)
Village Required Street Lights
in All Districts
Per Village of Grafton
Requirements and
Specifications
(Section 19.05.0404 of this
Ordinance)
Per Village of Grafton
Requirements and Specifications
(Section 19.05.0404 of this
Ordinance)
(a) These standards do not address illumination levels or fixture height that may be
required by the Village of Grafton for the adequate lighting of public street
rights-of-way. These represent maximum illumination levels on private
property.
(b) See Section 19.05.0403 for lighting standards for outdoor recreational facilities
in the PR District and I District.
See Figure 19.05.0401 (C) at the end of Part 5.
19-5 - 4 4
SECTION 19.05.0402 EXTERIOR LIGHTING PLAN REQUIRED
A. General. Except in the R-RE, R-E, R-1, R-S, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, A-1, A-2, and A-3 Districts, at the time any
exterior light is installed or substantially modified, whenever a Site Plan Review application is made, and whenever a Zoning
Permit application is made, an exterior lighting plan shall be submitted to the Village of Grafton to determine whether the
requirements of this Section have been met and that adjoining property will not be adversely impacted by
the proposed lighting. In addition, the maximum average lighting levels within paved areas are: 4.0 footcandles for shopping
centers and fast-food restaurants, 2.5 footcandles for all other uses in commercial and industrial zoning districts, and
1.0 footcandle levels for all uses in residential zoning districts.
B. Lighting Plan Elements. A Lighting Plan submitted pursuant to this Ordinance shall have, at a minimum, the
following elements:
1. A catalog page, cut sheet, or photograph of the luminaire including the mounting method.
2. A photometric data test report of the proposed luminaire graphically showing the lighting distribution at all
angles vertically and horizontally around the luminaire.
3. A plot plan, drawn to a recognized engineering or architectural scale, indicating the location of the
luminaire(s) proposed, mounting, and/or installation height in feet, the overall illumination levels (in
footcandles) and uniformities on the site, and the illumination levels (in footcandles) at the property
boundary lines. This may be accomplished by means of an isolux curve or computer printout projecting the
illumination levels.
4. A graphic depiction of the luminaire lamp (or bulb) concealment and light cut-off angles.
5. In addition to the full-size drawings required above, one (1) copy of each such drawing submitted shall also
be submitted in 11" x 17" black and white reduction.
SECTION 19.05.0403 EXTERIOR LIGHTING FOR SPECIFIED OUTDOOR RECREATIONAL USES
Ball diamonds, playing fields, golf driving ranges, tennis courts, and similar outdoor recreational facilities have unique
requirements for nighttime visibility and generally have limited hours of operation. These uses may be exempted from the
exterior lighting standards of the Division if the applicant can satisfy the Plan Commission, upon Site Plan Review, that the
following requirements are met:
A. Site Plan. The Site Plan must meet all other requirements of this Division and Ordinance.
B. Exterior Light Sources. Any exterior light sources shall not exceed the maximum permitted post height of seventy
(70) feet.
C. Shielded Luminaires. If the luminaire is shielded in either its orientation or by a landscaped bufferyard to prevent
light and glare spillover to adjacent residential property(s) or residential zoning districts, then the luminaire may
exceed a total cut-off angle of ninety (90) degrees. The maximum permitted illumination at the interior bufferyard
line of all required bufferyards shall not exceed two (2) footcandles.
D. Lighting Plan Required. A "Lighting Plan" meeting the requirements of Section 19.05.0402 of this Division shall
be submitted to the Plan Commission for review and approval.
19-5 - 4 5
SECTION 19.05.0404 STREET LIGHTING
Street lighting shall conform to the standards set forth by the State of Wisconsin for State Trunk Highways, Ozaukee County
for County Trunk Highways, and the Village of Grafton for Village streets and highways.
SECTION 19.05.0405 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS
Despite any other provision of this Section to the contrary, the following provisions shall also be applicable.
A. Flickering and Flashing Lights. No flickering or flashing lights shall be permitted excluding seasonal lighting
between November 1 and January 31.
B. Light Sources and/or Luminaires Not to be Located Within Required Bufferyards. Light sources or luminaires
shall not be located within required bufferyard areas except on pedestrian walkways.
C. Requirements of Other Applicable Codes and Ordinances to be Met. The provisions of this Division are
designed to supplement other applicable ordinances and codes and not as a substitute. All outdoor electrically
powered illuminating devices shall be installed in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance, applicable
building codes and ordinances, electrical codes and ordinances, and all other codes and ordinances as applicable and
under appropriate permit and inspection. Illuminating devices shall not interfere with the provision of fire apparatus
access, as provided under the Wisconsin Enrolled Commercial Building Code, as amended. (Ord. 025, Series 2002,
Part 5).
SECTION 19.05.0406 LIGHT MEASUREMENT
A. Metering Equipment. Lighting levels shall be measured in footcandles with a direct-reading, portable light meter.
The meter shall be read within an accuracy of plus or minus five (5) percent.
B. Method of Measurement. The meter sensor shall be mounted not more than six (6) inches above ground level in a
horizontal position at the interior line of the bufferyard or at the property line, as required herein. Readings shall be
taken only after the cell has been exposed long enough to provide a constant reading. To eliminate the effects of
moonlight and other ambient light, measurements shall be made after dark with the light source in question on, then
with the same sources off. The average of the two (2) readings shall be compared with the maximum permitted
illumination allowed under this Division.



19-6-1
PART 6: REQUIRED PLANS
DIVISION 19.06.0100 SITE PLAN
SECTION 19.06.0101 GENERAL
A. To promote compatible development and stability of property values, and to prevent impairment or
depreciation of property values, no person shall erect any structure or hard surfaced area without first obtaining the
approval of the Plan Commission of detailed Site Plan(s) as set forth in this Section. The following types of projects
are deemed exempt from the requirements of Site Plan review:
1. All single-family and two-family dwellings and their accessory structures, except in PUD
Districts.
2. Accessory structures and hare-surfaced areas occupying less than one hundred fifty (150) square
feet in area where, in the determination of the Zoning Administrator, such accessory structures and areas are
consistent with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance and with any previously approved Site Plan cover the lot.
(Ord. 010, Series 2002, Part 18)
B. Any of the following adjustments to one or more exterior signs for a developed or approved project shall be
considered a Major Adjustment to a previously approved site plan under Section 19.06.0104(E)(2), thereby requiring
site plan approval. If a proposed adjustment to one or more signs for a previously developed or approved project is
not among the following types of adjustments, the adjustment shall not be considered a Major Adjustment.
1. Addition of the proposed sign would increase the total number of signs for the associated use,
building or property above the total number specifically identified and approved by the Plan Commission in its
previous site plan or related approval, if the total number of signs was specified in the previous approval.
2. The area of the proposed sign would be at least ten (10) percent greater than the area of the sign
that was specifically identified and approved by the Plan Commission in its previous site plan or related approval for
the associated use, building or sign, if the area of the sign was specified in the previous approval.
3. The height of the proposed ground sign would be at least ten (10) percent taller than the height of
the sign that was specifically identified and approved by the Plan Commission in its previous site plan or related
approval for the use, building or sign, if the height of the sign was specified in the previous approval.
4. The location of the proposed sign would be at least ten (10) feet from the location of the sign that
was specifically identified and approved by the Plan Commission in its previous site plan or related approval for the
associated use, building or sign, if the location of the sign was specified in the previous approval.
C. In its review of site plans, the Plan Commission shall review the site, natural resource features of the site,
site intensity of use, building location, density of dwelling units, floor area, impervious surface area, existing and
proposed structures, architectural plans, neighboring uses, potential impacts upon neighboring uses, use of
landscaping and open space, off-street parking and loading areas, driveway locations, loading and unloading for
commercial and industrial uses, highway access, traffic generation and circulation, drainage, sewerage and water
systems, and the proposed operation.
(Ord. 008, Series 2001, Part 20)
SECTION 19.06.0102 PRINCIPLES AND STANDARDS OF REVIEW
The Plan Commission will approve said Site Plan(s) only after determining that:
A. Conformity of Use to Zoning District. The proposed use(s) conform(s) to the uses permitted as either a
"Permitted Use" or "Conditional Use" (whichever is applicable) in the zoning district.
19-6-2
B. Dimensional Requirements. The dimensional arrangement of buildings and structures conform to the
required area, yard, setback, and height restrictions of the Ordinance.
C. Site Intensity and Site Capacity Calculations to be Reviewed. The requirements of Division 19.03.0500
of this Ordinance shall be met. In this respect, the necessary worksheets for determining the maximum site
intensity, or development capacity, of the site shall be submitted to the Plan Commission for review and
approval.
D. Use and Design Provisions. The proposed use conforms to all use and design provisions and requirements
(if any) as found in this Ordinance for the specified uses.
E. Relation to Existing and Proposed Streets and Highways. There is a proper relationship between the
existing and proposed streets and highways within the vicinity of the project to assure the safety and
convenience of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. For arterial streets and highways not under the jurisdiction
of the Village of Grafton, that the applicable highway authority (County, State, or Federal) has been
contacted and the needed permits have been obtained and submitted to the Village for review.
F. Impacts on Surrounding Uses. The proposed on-site buildings, structures, and entry ways are situated
and designed to minimize adverse effects upon owners and occupants of adjacent and surrounding
properties by providing for adequate design of ingress/egress and interior/exterior traffic flow, stormwater
drainage, erosion, grading, lighting, and parking, as specified by this Ordinance or any other codes or laws.
G. Natural Resource Features Protection. Natural features of the landscape are retained to enhance the
development on the site, or where they furnish a barrier or buffer between the project and adjoining
properties used for dissimilar purposes, or where they assist in preserving the general safety, health,
welfare, and appearance of the neighborhood. The requirements set forth in Divisions 19.04.0100,
19.06.0200, and 19.09.0100 are to be met. Where required, a "Natural Resource Protection Plan" meeting
the requirements set forth in Division 19.06.0200 has also been submitted for Plan Commission review and
approval.
H. Required Landscaping and Landscape Bufferyards. Adverse effects of the proposed development and
activities upon adjoining residents or owners are minimized by design and installation of landscape
bufferyards to provide for appropriate screening, fencing, or landscaping as required in Division
19.05.0300 of this Ordinance. Where required, a "Landscape Plan" meeting the requirements set forth in
Division 19.06.0300 has also been submitted for Plan Commission review and approval.
I. Provision of Emergency Vehicle Accessibility. Land, buildings, and structures are readily accessible to
emergency vehicles and the handicapped.
J. Building Location. No building shall be permitted to be sited in a way that would unnecessarily destroy or
substantially damage the beauty of the area, particularly insofar as it would adversely affect values incident
to ownership of land in the area; or which would unnecessarily affect the beauty and general enjoyment of
existing structures on adjoining properties.
K. Location and Design of Loading Facilities. No loading facility shall be permitted to be designed or sited
in a way that would unnecessarily destroy or substantially damage the beauty of the area, particularly
insofar as it would adversely affect values incident to ownership of land in the area; or which would
unnecessarily affect the beauty and general enjoyment of the existing structures on adjoining properties.
L. Consistency with the Intent of the Village of Grafton Zoning Ordinance. The Site Plan is consistent
with the intent and purposes of the Village of Grafton Zoning Ordinance that are to promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare; to encourage the use of lands according to their character and
adaptability; to avoid the overcrowding of population; to lessen congestion on the public roads and streets;
to reduce hazards to life and property; to facilitate the implementation of the Village of Grafton
Comprehensive Plan or component thereof; and those other purposes and intents of this Ordinance set forth
in Division 19.01.0100 of this Ordinance.
19-6-3
M. Consistency with the Intent of the Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan. The Site Plan is consistent
with the public goals, objectives, principles, standards, policies, and design criteria set forth in the Villageadopted
Comprehensive Plan or component thereof.
N. Plan Commission Reserves the Right to Determine a Site "Unsuitable for Planned Use." Pursuant to
the requirements of Section 19.02.0103(B)(3) of this Ordinance, the Plan Commission reserves the right to
declare land or structures unsuitable for planned use during the site plan review process.
SECTION 19.06.0103 APPLICATIONS FOR SITE PLAN REVIEW
The Site Plan(s) and related plans and data shall be submitted to the Village Clerk (or other Village Board
authorized agent) who shall transmit all Site Plan Review Applications and their accompanying Site Plan(s) and
related plans and data to the Plan Commission for their review and approval. Twenty (20) full size copies of said
Site Plan shall be submitted with twenty (20) copies of the Site Plan Review Application. In addition to the full-size
drawings required above, one (1) copy of each such drawing submitted shall also be submitted as an 11" x 17"
black and white reduction. Site Plan(s) submitted with Site Plan Review Applications shall include the following:
A. Scale and Name of Project. Site Plan drawn to a recognized engineering scale with the name of project
noted.
B. Owner's and/or Developer's Name and Address. Owner's and/or developer's name and address noted on
the Site Plan.
C. Architect and/or Engineer's Name and Address. Architect and/or engineer's name and address noted on
the Site Plan.
D. Date. Date of Site Plan submittal with all dates of revision noted on the Site Plan.
E. Scale and Site Size. The scale of drawing and the size of the site (in square feet or acres) noted on the Site
Plan.
F. Existing and Proposed Topography. Existing and proposed topography shown at a contour interval of
not more than two (2) feet at National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (mean sea level) noted on the Site
Plan. A site grading plan may also be required by the Village Engineer, Zoning Administrator, and/or Plan
Commission.
G. Soils Data. The characteristics and types of soils related to contemplated specific uses noted on the Site
Plan if required by the Plan Commission. Soil borings may be required by the Village Engineer, Zoning
Administrator, and/or Plan Commission meeting those requirements set forth under Section
19.02.0103(B)(3)(b) of this Ordinance.
H. Off-Street Parking Spaces, Loading, Ingress and Egress, and Driveway Locations of Adjoining
Properties. The total number of off-street parking spaces, loading areas, drives, curb cuts, and vehicular
ingress and egress locations to the site noted on the Site Plan. If the proposed development abuts an
existing or planned collector or arterial street or highway, as identified on the Village of Grafton
Comprehensive Plan or component thereof, all driveway locations of all adjoining properties within two
hundred (200) feet of the site shall be graphically indicated and dimensioned (with distances and widths
noted) on the Site Plan. (Also see Section 19.050101(A)(5) of this Ordinance.)
I. Type, Size, and Location of All Structures and Signs. The type, size, and location of all structures and
signs with all building and sign dimensions noted on the Site Plan.
J. Building Height. Height of all building(s), including both principal and accessory, expressed in both feet
and stories noted on the Site Plan.
19-6-4
K. Existing and Proposed Street Names. Existing and proposed street names (if applicable) noted on the
Site Plan as assigned by the Village Street Naming Committee.
L. Existing and Proposed Public Street Rights-of-Way or Reservations. Existing and proposed public
street rights-of-way or reservations and widths with existing or proposed centerline elevations, pavement
type, fire lanes, walks, curbs, gutters, culverts, etc. noted on the Site Plan.
M. Building and Yard Setbacks. All building and yard setback lines shall be graphically noted on the Site
Plan.
N. North Arrow. A north arrow noted on the Site Plan.
O. Proposed Sanitary Sewers, Storm Sewers, and Water Mains. Existing and general location of proposed
sanitary sewers, storm sewers (including direction of flow), water mains, and fire hydrants noted on the Site
Plan. All locations for the proposed connections to such utilities shall be noted on the Site Plan
P. Proposed Stormwater Management Facilities. Location of any proposed stormwater management
facilities, including detention/retention area(s) shall be indicated and stormwater calculations that justify
the stormwater detention/retention area(s) shall be submitted. Said submission shall meet the requirements
of the Village's stormwater management ordinance (Chapter 23.01 of the Village of Grafton Municipal
Code).
Q. "Natural Resource Protection Plan" Required. Location of natural resource features present on the site,
as defined in Divisions 19.04.0100 and 19.09.0100 of this Ordinance. A "Natural Resource Protection
Plan" meeting the requirements of Division 19.06.0200 of this Ordinance shall be submitted with the Site
Plan Review Application for Plan Commission review and approval. The "Natural Resource Protection
Plan" should include any areas of the site where natural resources are to be mitigated and how and where
the mitigation is to take place with natural resource protection easements indicated. Copies of any letters of
review or permits granted by applicable Federal or State regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over said
natural resources shall also be submitted.
R. "Landscape Plan" Required. Where landscaping as required in Division 19.06.0300 of this Ordinance is
to be installed on the site, a "Landscape Plan" meeting the requirements set forth in Division 19.06.0300 of
this Ordinance shall be submitted with the Site Plan Review Application for Plan Commission review and
approval.
S. Density. Provide tabulation of dwelling unit types, land area, and information on the density of residential
uses and the number of dwelling units by type noted on the Site Plan.
T. Nonresidential Uses. Provide information on the type and amount of ancillary and nonresidential uses in
the development noted on the Site Plan.
U. General Location and Purpose of Each Building. The general location and purpose of each building
proposed for the property shall be graphically noted on the Site Plan.
V. Site Intensity and Capacity Calculations to be Submitted. The "Site Intensity and Capacity
Calculation" worksheets required under Division 19.03.0500 for determining the maximum site intensity,
or development capacity, of the site. For residential uses, the maximum number of dwelling units
permitted on the site shall be determined based upon the zoning district's maximum density (gross and net),
the natural resources present on the site and the level of their preservation, minimum open space ratio, and
the residential development option selected. For nonresidential uses, the maximum floor area permitted on
the site shall be determined based upon the zoning district's allowable maximum floor area ratio (gross and
net), the natural resources present on the site and their level of preservation, the minimum landscape
surface ratio, and building height in feet and stories.
19-6-5
W. Pedestrian Sidewalks and Walkways. The location of pedestrian sidewalks and walkways noted on the
Site Plan.
X. Development Staging/Phasing. A graphic outline of any development staging or phasing which is
planned noted on the Site Plan.
Y. Architectural Plans, Elevations, and Perspective Drawings and Sketches. Architectural plans,
elevations, and perspective drawings and sketches illustrating the design, character, materials, and
dimensions of proposed structures. Before the Plan Commission action, architectural plans shall be first be
reviewed and receive a recommendation from the Architectural Review Board under the provision of
Division 19.06.0400. (Ord. 041, Series 2000, Part 1).
Z. "Lighting Plan" Required. A "Lighting Plan" which meets the lighting regulations set forth in Division
19.05.0400 of this Ordinance. Said Lighting Plan shall indicate the location, type, and illumination level
(in footcandles) of all outdoor lighting proposed to illuminate the site.
AA. Easements. The location of all existing and proposed easements on the site including natural resource
protection and mitigation area easements, landscape easements, access easements, utility easements, and all
other easements noted on the Site Plan.
BB. Highway Access. Copies of any letters of review or permits granted by applicable federal, State, or
County regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over highway access, if applicable.
CC. Project Summary. A written project summary including operational information, building schedule, and
estimate of project value and including all site improvement costs.
DD. Additional Data May be Required by the Village. Additional data as may be required by the Plan
Commission, Zoning Administrator, Village Planner, or Village Engineer to review the Site Plan. Such
other data may include the preparation and submittal of detailed traffic impact analyses studies performed
by a transportation engineer or fiscal impact analyses studies.
EE. PUD Planned Unit Development Site Plan Requirements. PUD District Site Plans shall meet those Site
Plan requirements set forth in Paragraphs A. through DD. of this Section. In addition to those other Site
Plan requirements specified elsewhere in this Section, PUD Districts shall show all buildings and their use,
open space, common open space, recreation facilities, service areas, and other facilities to indicate the
character of the proposed development. The submission for proposed developments in PUD Districts shall
also include information and drawings depicting the following:
1. Utilities on and Adjacent to the Property. The location, size, and invert elevation of sanitary,
and storm sewers; location and size of water mains; location of gas lines, fire hydrants, electric
and telephone lines, cable television lines, and street lights; direction and distance to and size of
nearest water mains and sewers adjacent to the property showing invert elevations of sewers.
2. Zoning on and Adjacent to the Property. The zoning on the property and the zoning of those
properties adjacent to the property.
3. Proposed Public Improvements. The location, alignment, and width of any proposed public
improvements including highways or other major improvements planned by public authorities for
future construction on or near the tract.
4. Open Space. All parcels of land intended for use as open space shall be indicated.
5. A Written Description of the Character of the Proposed Planned Unit Development to be
Submitted with Site Plan. A written description of the character of the PUD District
development and the manner in which it has been planned to take advantage of the PUD District
regulations and achieve design excellence. The written description shall also list the open space
19-6-6
ratio (OSR), gross density (GD), net density (ND), lot sizes, landscape surface ratio (LSR), gross
and net floor area ratios (GFAR and NFAR), building heights, dwelling unit sizes, and dwelling
units per building in the proposed PUD District development, and shall indicate how these relate
to standards within the nearest comparable residential, business, or industrial zoning district. Any
variations from such standards shall be specifically requested by the petitioner and approved by
the Plan Commission.
6. Schedule. A development schedule shall be submitted indicating the following:
a. Project Phasing Plan Required. A project phasing, or staging, plan is required
indicating when various areas, open space, densities, uses, and public facilities are
planned to be developed with each phase or stage. The overall design of each stage shall
be shown on the plan and through supporting graphic material.
b. Project Phase Dates and Timing of Development. The approximate dates for the
beginning and completion of each development phase, or stage, shall be indicated.
c. Land Use Schedule Required. If different land use types are to be included in the PUD
District development, the schedule must include the mix or uses to be built in each stage.
7. Covenants and Deed Restrictions Required. Written documentation of the proposed
agreements, provisions, declarations, deed restrictions, or covenants that will govern the use,
maintenance, and continued protection of the PUD District development and any of its common
open space.
8. Preliminary Facility Plans Required. Preliminary plans for the following facilities are required
to be submitted as part of the Site Plan submission:
a. Roads, including classification, width of rights-of-way, width of pavement, and typical
construction details.
b. Sanitary sewers (if applicable).
c. Storm drainage.
d. Water supply system.
e. Lighting plan.
9. Special Studies May be Required. Fiscal, traffic, or environmental impact studies may be
required when deemed appropriate by the Plan Commission or the Village Board.
10. Engineering Requirements and Specifications. Engineering requirements and specifications are
to be in conformance with the standards set forth in Title 18 titled "Subdivisions" of the Village of
Grafton Municipal Code and other accepted engineering standards as determined by the Village
Engineer.
11. Village Subdivision Ordinance "Preliminary Plat" or Certified Survey Map Requirements
to be Met. Where the PUD District development involves the division of land, the Site Plan for
PUD District development shall meet all of the requirements of a "Preliminary Plat" for
subdivision or certified survey map requirements (as applicable) as set forth in Title 18 titled
"Subdivisions" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code as amended.
19-6-7
SECTION 19.06.0104 SITE PLAN REVIEW AND FINDINGS
A. Site Plan Review and Approval. Except as may otherwise be required for the review of Site Plans
submitted as part of a PUD District related application, the Plan Commission shall review the referred plans
within sixty (60) days following the date of their submittal or following the date of Architectural Review
Board action on required Architectural Plans, whichever comes later. The Plan Commission shall render a
decision. The Plan Commission shall not approve any Site Plan(s) or other required plans unless it finds
after reviewing the Site Plan Review Application and data that the structure or use, as planned, will not
violate the intents and purposes of this Ordinance. The Plan Commission will approve said plans only after
determining the proposed building or buildings will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to
adjacent property, or substantially increase the danger of fire, or traffic congestion, or otherwise endanger
the public health or safety and provided such proposed development meets the various intent and purpose
statements set forth in Division 19.01.0100 and elsewhere in this Ordinance. The Plan Commission shall
approve any such Site Plan involving the construction of a structure(s) only after review and
recommendation of the Architectural review Board. The development of the site shall be in substantial
conformity with such approved and filed site plan. (Ord. 041, Series 2000, Part 2).
B. Standards for Site Plan Disapproval. The Plan Commission shall not disapprove, or the Plan
Commission shall not recommend disapproval of, a site plan submitted pursuant to this Ordinance except
based on specific findings directed to one (1) or more of the following:
1. Application Improper. The application is incomplete in specified particulars or contains or
reveals violations of this Ordinance or other applicable regulations that the applicant has failed or
refused to supply or correct.
2. Failure of Condition Precedent. The application is submitted in connection with another
application, the approval of which is a condition precedent to the necessity for site plan review,
and the applicant has filed to secure approval of that application.
3. Failure to Meet Principles and Standards of Review. The site plan fails to adequately meet
specified principles and standards required by this Ordinance with respect to the proposed use or
development, including Conditional Use Permit standards where applicable.
4. Interference with Easements or Public Rights-of-Way. The proposed site plan interferes with
easements or public rights-of-way.
5. Interference with Features. The proposed site plan unreasonably destroys, damages,
detrimentally modifies, or interferes with the enjoyment of significant natural resource,
topographical, or other physical features of the site.
6. Adverse Traffic Impacts. The proposed site plan creates undue traffic congestion or hazards in
the public streets, or the circulation elements of the proposed site plan unreasonably create hazards
to safety on or off site or disjointed, inefficient pedestrian or vehicular circulation paths on or off
site.
7. Inadequate Bufferyards or Screening. The bufferyards or screening of the site does not provide
adequate shielding from or for nearby uses.
8. Lacking Amenity. The proposed structures or landscaping is unreasonably lacking amenities in
relation to, or is incompatible with, nearby structures and uses.
9. Lack of Adequate Open Space or Landscape Surface Ratio. For site plans submitted in
connection with an application for a Conditional Use Permit and/or PUD District, the proposed
site plan makes inadequate provision for the creation or preservation of open space or for its
continued maintenance.
19-6-8
10. Stormwater Drainage or Erosion Problems. The proposed site plan creates unreasonable
stormwater drainage or erosion problems or fails to fully and satisfactorily integrate the site into
the overall existing and planned stormwater drainage system serving the Village.
11. Burdens on Utilities. The proposed site plan places unwarranted or unreasonable burdens on
specified utility systems serving the site or area or fails to fully and satisfactorily integrate the
site's utilities into the overall existing and planned utility systems serving the Village.
12. Other Adverse Effects. The proposed site plan otherwise adversely affects the public health,
safety, or general welfare.
C. Effect of Site Plan Approval. Approval of a site plan shall not authorize the establishment or extension of
any use nor the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or moving of any building or
structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing, and processing of applications for any permits
or approvals that may be required by the codes and ordinances of the Village including, but not limited to, a
Zoning Permit, Conditional Use Permit, Building Permit, or Occupancy Permit.
D. Limitations on Site Plan Approval. Except in the case of approved PUD Planned Unit Developments and
subject to an extension of time that may be granted by the Plan Commission in six (6) month increments
(but for no longer than one (1) additional year), no site plan approval shall be valid for a period longer than
one (1) year unless a Building Permit is issued and construction is actually begun within that period and is
thereafter diligently pursued to completion or unless a Zoning Permit, Conditional Use Permit, or
Occupancy Permit is issued and a use commences within that period.
E. Adjustments to Site Plan During Development. Adjustments to the site plan during development shall be
considered as either minor adjustments or major adjustments based upon the following:
1. Minor Adjustments. During the development of the site, the Zoning Administrator may
authorize minor adjustments to a site plan approved by the Plan Commission when such
adjustments appear necessary in light of technical or engineering considerations first discovered
during actual development. Such minor adjustments shall be limited to The following:
a. Altering Locations of Structures. Altering the location of any one (1) structure or
group of structures by not more than ten (10) feet or one-fourth of the distance shown on
the approved site plan between such structure or structures and any other structure or any
vehicular circulation element or any boundary of the site plan, whichever is less.
b. Circulation. Altering the location of any circulation element by not more than ten (10)
feet or one-fourth of the distance shown on the approved site plan between such
circulation elements and any structure, whichever is less.
c. Open Space. Altering the location of any open space by more than twenty (20) feet with
no overall reduction in the open space or landscape surface area provided.
d. Landscaping. Altering the location or type (but not size or number) of landscaping
elements if also approved by the Village Planner.
Such minor adjustments shall be consistent with the intent and purpose of this Ordinance and the
site plan as approved, shall be the minimum necessary to overcome the particular difficulty, and
shall not be approved if they would result in a violation of any standard or requirement of this
Ordinance.
2. Major Adjustments. Any adjustment to a site plan approved by the Plan Commission that is not
specifically authorized by the preceding Paragraph 1 shall be considered a major adjustment and
shall be granted only upon application to and approval, or recommendation to the Village Board
(as applicable), by the Plan Commission.
19-6-9
F. Amendments to the Site Plan Following Completion of Development. After a site is developed
according to an approved site plan, the approved site plan may be amended, varied, or altered in the same
manner and subject to the same limitations set forth in this Ordinance as amended, and as provided for
original approval of site plans. This provision shall apply to all site plans regardless of the date of original
approval. After considering the advice of the Village Planner, for such amendments the Village Clerk my
waive one or more submittal requirements listed under Section 19.06.0103. (Ord. 008, Series 2001, Part
21).
G. Conditions May Be Placed on Site Plan Approval. The Plan Commission or Village Board (as
applicable) may impose such conditions and limitations concerning the principles and standards of site plan
review set forth in this Division, as well as to other matters relating to the purposes and objectives of this
Ordinance upon the premises benefited by a site plan approval as may be necessary or appropriate to
prevent or minimize adverse effects upon other property and improvements in the vicinity of the subject
property or upon public facilities and service; provided, however, that such conditions shall not be used as a
device to grant a site plan approval for a use intended to be temporary in nature. Violations of any such
condition or limitation shall be a violation of this Ordinance and shall constitute grounds for revocation of
the site plan approval. Such conditions and limitations imposed by the Plan Commission or Village Board
(as applicable) shall be clearly and permanently set forth in the applicable minutes of the Plan Commission
or Village Board meeting at which such approval was granted. The Plan Commission or Village Board (as
applicable) may require that such conditions also be permanently marked on the approved site plan.
SECTION 19.06.0105 FINANCIAL SURETIES REQUIRED
The Plan Commission may impose time schedules for the completion of buildings, improved off-street parking and
loading areas, open space use, utilities, landscaping, natural resource features mitigation, and any other site
improvements . The Plan Commission may require appropriate financial sureties in the form of a letter of credit
from a financial institution as deemed necessary to guarantee that improvements including improved off-street
parking and loading areas, open space areas, utilities, landscaping, natural resource features mitigation, and any
other site improvements will be completed on schedule. (Also see Section 19.05.0304(F)(2)). (Ord. 010, Series
2002, Part 19)
SECTION 19.06.0106 SITE PLAN APPEAL
Any person or persons aggrieved by any decisions of the Plan Commission related to Site Plan review may appeal
the decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Such appeal shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator within thirty
(30) days after filing of the Plan Commission's decision with the Zoning Administrator.
19-6-10
DIVISION 19.06.0200 NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION PLAN
SECTION 19.06.0201 NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION PLAN REQUIREMENTS
If natural resource features defined and described in Divisions 19.04.0100 and 19.09.0100 of this Ordinance are
present on the property for which a Site Plan review is requested, twenty (20) full size copies of a "Natural Resource
Protection Plan" drawn to the same scale as the Site Plan submission shall be submitted. In addition to the full-size
drawings required above, one (1) copy of each such drawing submitted shall also be submitted as an 11" x 17"
black and white reduction. The "Natural Resource Protection Plan" shall show the following:
A. Proposed Name. The proposed name of the development.
B. Location. The location of the proposed development.
C. Names, Addresses, and Telephone Numbers of the Owners, Subdividers, Lessee and/or Developer.
The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the owners, subdividers, lessee and/or developer(s) of the
property and of the designer of the plan.
D. Date. Date of the "Natural Resource Plan" submittal and all applicable revision dates.
E. Site Boundary. The boundary line of the site with dimensions and bearings, indicated by a solid line, and
the total land area encompassed by the site.
F. Lot Lines, Right-of-Way Lines, and Easements. The location of all proposed lot lines, right-of-way
lines, and easements.
G. Existing Streets. The location, ownership, widths, and names (if available) of all existing and previously
platted streets, rights-of-way, parks, and other public or open spaces located within or adjacent to the
subject property.
H. Easements and Neighboring Property Boundaries. The location and dimensions of all permanent
easements and the subject property boundary lines adjacent to the site.
I. Location and Extent of Existing Natural Resource Features. The location and extent of any existing
natural resource features defined and described in Divisions and 19.04.0100 and 19.09.0100 and of this
Ordinance. Each individual resource area on the site shall be graphically shown on the "Natural Resource
Protection Plan."
J. Disturbed and Preserved Natural Resource Features. Graphic and numerical illustration shown on the
"Natural Resource Protection Plan" of those existing natural resource features that will be disturbed and
those that will be preserved and showing on the illustration the area (in square feet or acres) of each
existing resource and those areas of resources that are to be preserved. Numerical data may be shown in
tabular form with labeled reference to specific areas designated on the "Natural Resource Protection Plan."
Any areas of the site where natural resources are to be mitigated and how and where the mitigation is to
take place with natural resource protection easements shall be indicated.
K. Method of Natural Resource Preservation. Graphic illustration and notes relating to how those natural
resource features, which are to be preserved, will actually be preserved (conservation easements, deed
restrictions, protective covenants, etc.).
L. Scale, North Arrow, Contours. A drawing legend containing the scale appropriate to the size of the Site
Plan, the date of preparation, north arrow, and designation of existing and proposed contours at a maximum
two (2) foot contour interval.
M. Maximum Sheet Size of "Natural Resource Protection Plan The "Natural Resource Protection Plan"
shall not exceed a maximum sheet size as required for the Site Plan.
19-6-11
N. "Site Intensity and Capacity Calculations" Required. All applicable "Site Intensity and Capacity
Calculations" as required under Division 19.03.0500 of this Ordinance.
DIVISION 19.06.0300 LANDSCAPE PLAN
SECTION 19.06.0301 GENERAL
A "Landscape Plan" shall be prepared and related plans and data shall be submitted to the Village Clerk (or other
Village Board authorized agent) who shall transmit all Landscape Plan Review Applications and their
accompanying Landscape Plan(s) and related plans and data to the Plan Commission for their review and approval.
Twenty (20) full size copies of said Landscape Plan shall be submitted with twenty (20) copies of the Landscape
Plan Review Application. In addition to the full-size drawings required above, one (1) copy of each such drawing
submitted shall also be submitted as an 11" x 17" black and white reduction. Landscape Plan(s) submitted with
Landscape Plan Review Applications shall include and show the following:
A. Proposed Name. The proposed name of the development.
B. Location. The location of the proposed development.
C. Names, Addresses, and Telephone Numbers of the Owners, Subdividers, Lessee and/or Developer.
The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the owners, subdividers, lessee and/or developer(s) of the
property and of the designer of the plan.
D. Date. Date of the "Landscape Plan" submittal and all applicable revision dates.
E. Site Boundary. The boundary line of the site with dimensions and bearings, indicated by a solid line, and
the total land area encompassed by the site.
F. Landscape Bufferyard Easements and Natural Resource Mitigation Areas. All proposed "Landscape
Bufferyard Easements" and/or areas of natural resource mitigation clearly delineated and dimensioned and
graphically shown in relation to all proposed lot lines and lots upon which said "Landscape Bufferyard
Easements" or mitigation areas are located.
G. Location, Extent, Type, and Size of Existing Trees and Natural Resource Features. Location, extent,
type (common name and scientific name for plant materials), and size of all existing trees and natural
resource features in all areas of the proposed development designated as a "Landscape Bufferyard
Easement" and/or mitigation area. If any existing vegetation or other natural resource features are to be
demolished or mitigated, the extent of such demolition or area to be mitigated shall be properly delineated
and so noted on the "Landscape Plan."
H. Location, Extent, Type, and Size of Landscape Materials and Plantings. Location, extent, type
(common name and scientific name for plant materials), and size of proposed landscaping and landscape
plantings in all areas of the proposed development designated as a "Landscape Bufferyard Easement" or for
areas that are to serve as landscaped entrances or other special landscaped features of the development.
I. Landscape Plant Material Specifications. All new landscape plant material shall be grown in a nursery
located in Plant Hardiness Zone 4 (as defined by the U.S. Department of Agriculture) and shall conform to
the applicable requirements as specified in the current edition of American Standard for Nursery Stock as
approved by the American National Standards Institute, Inc. and sponsored by the American Association of
Nurserymen, Inc. Botanical plant names shall be according to the current edition of Standardized Plant
Names prepared by the American Joint Committee on Horticultural Nomenclature.
19-6-12
J. Natural Resource Features Mitigation Plan Required.
If any natural resource feature is to be mitigated, either on-site or off-site, the plan for such mitigation in
adequate detail, as required by the Plan Commission, shall be submitted with the "Landscape Plan."
K. Maintenance. Areas of a development designated as landscape easement areas shall be maintained by the
property owner and kept free of all debris, rubbish, weeds, and tall grass.
L. Limitations on Landscape Plan Approval. Except in the case of approved PUD Planned Unit
Developments and subject to an extension of time that may be granted by the Plan Commission in six (6)
month increments (but for no longer than one (1) additional year), no landscape plan approval shall be valid
for a period longer than one (1) year unless a Building Permit is issued and construction is actually begun
within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion or unless a Zoning Permit, Conditional
Use Permit, or Occupancy Permit is issued and a use commences within that period.
DIVISION 19.06.0400 ARCHITECTURAL PLANS
SECTION 19.06.0401 GENERAL
For promoting compatible development, stability of property values, and to prevent impairment or depreciation of
property values, no person shall erect any structure without first obtaining the approval or recommendation of the
Architectural Plans by the Architectural Review Board as set forth in this Division. Architectural plans are also
subject to the review and final approval of the Plan Commission if the proposed building(s) are also subject to Site
Plan Review. (Ord. 041, Series 2000, Part 3).
SECTION 19.06.0402 PRINCIPLES AND STANDARDS OF REVIEW
In their consideration of applications for architectural review, the Building Inspector, Plan Commission, and
Architectural Review Board shall consider and evaluate the propriety of granting the approval in terms of the effect
of the application on the general purposes for which architectural approval is required. The following principles and
standards for architectural review are used by the Building Inspector, Plan Commission, and Architectural Review
Board (as applicable) in the review, approval or denial of the Architectural Review Application. These are also
intended to be a design aid for builders and owners to use in the preparation of architectural plans. A Building
Permit shall not be issued for any single-family residence, two-family residential structure, multiple-family
residential structure, or nonresidential building which does not meet the requirements of this Section. In addition,
no building or remodeling of a building which is located in the area subject to the Grafton Downtown Master Plan as
adopted by the Village of Grafton Plan Commission on February 23, 1999, shall be permitted unless said building or
proposed remodeling complies with the downtown master plan design guidelines included in that master plan. To
implement this Ordinance, the following architectural review principles and guidelines are established:
A. Residential Development (Single-Family Structures, Two-Family Structures, and Individual Lot
Plans for Such Structures).
1. General. No two (2) single-family dwellings or two-family dwellings of similar front elevation or
facade shall be repeated on any abutting lots or within five (5) lots on either side of the street on
which the dwellings front, including lots which are directly across the street from one another.
Front elevations or facades shall be deemed to be similar when there is no substantial difference in
roof lines; and no substantial change in windows of either size, location or type; and either no
change in the color of materials used (rather than a change in shade), or no substantial change in
the kind of materials except where such buildings are part of a unified development and similar
building designs are approved by a unanimous vote of the Architectural Review Board.
2. Roof Lines.
a. The following differences in the roof lines of single-family dwellings or two-family
dwellings as seen from the front of the dwelling shall be deemed sufficient to render
buildings containing such changes and built on adjacent lots to be dissimilar:
19-6-13
(1) Changing gable roofs to hip roofs.
(2) Providing an intersecting gable roof on the main gable roof, if the height of the
intersecting roof is at least fifty (50) percent of the height of the main roof.
(3) Providing an intersecting hip roof on the main hip roof, if the height of the
intersecting hip roof is at least fifty (50) percent of the height of the main roof.
(4) Subject to review by the Building Inspector, a shed roof when used as a front
porch roof for a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the entire width of the house,
excluding area of the garage.
(5) Subject to review by the Building Inspector, a substantial difference in roof line
shall be deemed to exist if the front soffit is increased significantly and is
combined with columns at least six (6) inches in width or other architectural
features of a similar magnitude which reach the roof line of the highest story.
(6) Rotating gable roofs ninety (90) degrees on the building.
(7) On a tri-level residence or other building type that has three (3) independent
major roof areas, the changing of two (2) out of three (3) roof lines shall be
acceptable as a substantial change. Acknowledging certain design elements may
prevent the changing of all three (3) roof lines, it is desired that the roofs with
the greatest impact in the streetscape be changed.
b. The following changes shall not be deemed sufficient to make adjacent structures
dissimilar:
(1) A gable roof atop a hip roof.
(2) A hip roof atop a gable roof.
(3) Small gable or hip projections above windows.
(4) Window dormers.
(5) Change in soffit overhang or minor variation in eave height.
(6) Skylight and cupola.
3. Windows.
a. The following differences in the size, location or type of windows shall be deemed
sufficient to render buildings containing such changes and built on adjacent lots to be
dissimilar:
(1) Changing from single windows to a multiple window arrangement (ganged
units).
(2) Changing from multiple window arrangement to single windows.
(3) Changing the type of windows (e.g., a casement to double hung).
(4) Providing a bay or bow window in the area of the predominant window.
b. The following change shall not be deemed sufficient to constitute a substantial change in
windows:
19-6-14
(1) The addition or subtraction of muntin bars (dividing lights).
c. Where, because of its size, location or design, one window is the predominant window on
the front elevation or face, if the size, location or type of that window is changed to
render the dwelling dissimilar, then no other window need be changed.
4. Construction Material or Color.
a. The following differences in construction material between adjacent single-family
dwellings or two-family dwellings as seen from the front of the dwellings shall be
deemed sufficient to render buildings containing such changes and built on adjacent lots
to be dissimilar.
(1) Four (4) inch exposure horizontal siding.
(2) Eight (8) inch exposure horizontal siding.
(3) Brick facing.
(4) Stone facing.
(5) Stucco/stucco to board and trim.
(6) When materials are changed, the change must occur throughout the front facade
or elevation for a minimum of one (1) story in height.
b. Color change shall be made by significant changes in adjacent colors. The change must
be one of color rather than merely of the shade.
B. Nonresidential Development and Multiple-Family Structures.
1. Building Scale and Mass. The size and mass of buildings and structures in relation to open
spaces, windows. door openings, porches, balconies, etc. shall be visually compatible with the
buildings, public ways, and places to which they are visually related. The relative proportion of a
building to its neighboring existing buildings, to pedestrians or observers, or to other existing
buildings shall be maintained or enhanced when new buildings are built or when existing
buildings are remodeled or altered.
2. Building Facade and Appurtenance Continuity. Building facades and appurtenances such as
walls, fences, and landscape masses shall, when it is a characteristic of the area, form cohesive
walls of enclosure along a street to ensure visual compatibility with the buildings, public ways,
and places to which such elements are visually related.
3. Building Height, Rooflines, and Roof Shapes. The height of the proposed buildings and
structures shall be visually compatible with adjacent buildings and do not exceed the zoning
district height requirements for both principal and accessory structures. The visual continuity of
roofs and their contributing elements (parapet walls, coping, cornices, etc.) shall be maintained in
building development or redevelopment.
4. Building Design Proportions. The following shall be used as guidelines for evaluating building
design proportions:
a. Proportion of Front Facade. The relationship of the width to the height of the front
elevation shall be visually compatible with buildings, public ways, and places to which it
is visually related.
19-6-15
b. Proportion of Openings. The relationship of the width to height of windows shall be
visually compatible with buildings, public ways, and places to which the building is
visually related.
c. Rhythm of Solids to Voids in Front Facades. The relationship of solids to voids in the
front facade of a building shall be visually compatible with buildings, public ways, and
places to which it is visually related.
d. Rhythm of Spacing and Buildings on Streets. The relationship of building or structure
to the open space between it and adjoining buildings or structures shall be visually
compatible with the buildings, public ways, and places to which it is visually related.
e. Rhythm of Entrance, Porch, and Other Projections. The relationship of entrances and
other projections to sidewalks shall be visually compatible with the buildings, public
ways, and places to which it is visually related.
5. Directional Expression and Emphasis of Building Elevations. A building shall be visually
compatible with the buildings, public ways, and places to which it is visually related in its
directional character, whether this be vertical character, horizontal character, or nondirectional
character.
6. Materials. Material selection for architectural design shall be based upon the prevailing material
already used on existing buildings in the area. No building shall be permitted where any exposed
facade is constructed or faced with a finished material that is aesthetically incompatible with other
building facades in the area or which presents an unattractive appearance to the public and
surrounding properties.
7. Colors. Since the selection of building colors has a significant aesthetic and visual impact upon
the public and neighboring properties, color shall be selected in general harmony with the existing
area or neighborhood buildings.
8. Design Repetition. A building design may not be repeated within four lots of an existing
building. This shall apply to all buildings, whether or not they are constructed by the same builder
except where such buildings are part of a unified development and similar building designs are
approved by a unanimous vote of the Architectural Review Board.
9. Story Distinctions. The first story of the building should be distinguished from the second story
by means of a horizontal lintel, second floor overhang or setback, or similar detail.
10. Elevations of Buildings Facing the Public Streets on a Corner Lot. Buildings on corner lots
shall continue the major front elevation design elements around the corner elevation.
11. Building Elevations Clad with a Singular Exterior Surface Material. Building elevations clad
with a singular exterior surface material shall provide some additional architectural design
element(s) to break up the plane of the wall. This may be done by the addition of window(s),
gable end wall treatments, siding design and accent panels, or other architectural design treatments
consistent with the principal building design.
12. Foundations Below Overhanging Bays. Buildings shall be designed with foundations below all
bays that overhang the building foundation. The Architectural Review Board will allow the
construction of bay windows, projections of floors above the first floor, if they are a minimum of
twelve (12) inches above grade.
13. Enclosure of Metal Furnace Vents. All chimney and fireplace vents shall be enclosed in a chase
constructed of materials similar to those materials used on the building elevations; metal housings
designed by the vent manufacturer to enclose the chimney vents are acceptable.
19-6-16
14. Heating, Ventilating, and Air-Conditioning Equipment (Building Mounted). All buildingmounted
heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning equipment or changes to existing heating,
ventilating, and/or air-conditioning equipment shall be designed so as to be integral with the
building architecture and screened from view from public rights-of-way.
15. Garages and Loading Docks. Garages and loading docks shall be designed as integral elements
to the building and site, and shall not be the dominant visual element from public rights-of-way.
All loading docks shall be completely screened from view from public rights-of-way.
16. Design Standards in Comprehensive Plan. The Architectural Review Board shall refer to the
Village's Comprehensive Plan or components thereof for building design recommendations for
specific neighborhoods, districts, or building types. No building or remodeling of a building
which is located in the area subject to the Grafton Downtown Master Plan, as adopted by the
Village of Grafton Plan Commission on February 23, 1999, shall be permitted unless said building
or proposed remodeling complies with the design guidelines included within that master plan.
This provision shall also apply to the location, installation, relocation, reconstruction, extension ,
enlargement, conversion, or structural alteration of exterior signage in the area subject to said
Master Plan. (Ord. 008, Series 2001, Part 22; Ord. 041, Series 2000, Part 4)
17. Design Standards for Retail and Commercial Service Buildings Over 20,000 Gross Square
Feet in Area. All commercial service buildings over twenty thousand (20,000) gross square feet
in area shall meet the additional design requirements set forth in Section 19.03.0703(P).
SECTION 19.06.0403 APPLICATIONS FOR ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW
Architectural Review Applications including Architectural Plans and related data and materials shall be submitted to
the Building Inspector who shall transmit all Architectural Review Applications and their accompanying data and
materials to the Architectural Review Board for its review and action. Per the requirements of Division 10.06.0100
and Section 19.06.0404 (C)(2), Architectural Plans shall also be submitted to the Village Clerk as one component of
the Site Plan Review Application. (Ord. 041, Series 2000, Part 5).
The following types of projects shall be subject to Architectural Review: all new buildings (with the exception of
small accessory structures, unless the Zoning Administrator requests a determination from the Architectural Review
Board); additions to or alterations of buildings that significantly alter the original design. (for example, second floor
additions to ranch style houses and two-story additions attached to one-story buildings.); major changes in façade or
roof colors of all buildings (except single family and two family residences); and all proposed major and minor
exterior remodeling and renovation projects located in the area subject to the Grafton Downtown Master Plan as
adopted by the Village of Grafton Plan Commission on February 23, 1999, including all new, relocated,
reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted, or structurally altered exterior signage. Architectural Plan(s)
submitted with Architectural Review Applications and Site Plan Review Applications , where required, shall
include the following: (Ord. 008, Series 2001, Part 23; Ord. 041, Series 2000. Part 5).
A. Required Application Submittal Materials. Architectural plans, exterior elevations of the existing and/or
proposed structure, proposed floor grades, and perspective drawings and sketches illustrating the design
and character of all proposed structures. A color building elevation or perspective rendering of the exterior
of the proposed building(s) shall be required for all nonresidential and multiple-family dwelling structures.
Said elevations and perspective drawings shall indicate the location and placement of all auxiliary building
equipment such as heating, ventilating, and/or air-conditioning equipment. These drawings are to be drawn
to a recognized architectural scale with the name of the project noted. Building plans shall be submitted
with all details drawn on each elevation and are to be completely delineated with all material notations
indicated for each elevation. Plans drawn with partial building details indicated will be returned to the
Architectural Review Applicant for redrafting. Redline drawings will only be accepted for minor detail
changes; major changes will require redrafting of the building elevations. Six (6) full size copies of said
Architectural Plans shall be submitted for Architectural Review Board consideration. In addition to the
full-size drawings required above, one (1) copy of each such drawing submitted shall also be submitted as
19-6-17
an 11" x 17" black and white reduction. For projects also requiring Site Plan Review, the number of
required copies for Plan Commission consideration shall be as specified in Section 19.06.0103. The
following data, information, and materials are to be included: (Ord. 041, Series 2000, Part 5)
1. Owner/Developer. Owner's and/or developer's name and address noted.
2. Architect/Engineer. Architect's and/or engineer's name and address noted.
3. Date. Date of submittal of plans.
4. Scale. Scale of drawings noted on each drawing. All drawings prepared for single-family and
two-family dwelling units shall be prepared at a scale of one-quarter (1/4) inch equal one (1) foot.
5. Building Type, Size, and Location. The type, size, and location of all structures with all building
dimensions shown.
6. Height. The height of building(s).
7. Draft Plot Plan Required. With the Architectural Review Board application, a draft plot plan or
survey indicating building location drawn to a recognized engineering scale, with the name of the
project noted and north arrow shown, and the relationship of the building to all existing and
Village approved buildings on the same lot, all adjacent lots, and all lots directly across a public
street. (Ord. 041, Series 2000, Part 5)..
8. Exterior Materials Samples to be Provided. In the case of multiple-family residential buildings
and nonresidential buildings, samples of exterior materials and their colors.
9. Additional Information May be Required. Additional information and data that may be
required by the Building Inspector or Architectural Review Board or Plan Commission (as
applicable) may include, but not be limited to, the following upon request: (Ord. 041, Series 2000,
Part 5)
a. Photographs from the site of adjacent neighboring structures and/or property.
b. Detailed drawings of decorative elements of the building(s) or structure(s).
c. Sectional building or site drawings drawn to a recognized engineering scale. (Ord. 041,
Series 2000, Part 5)
SECTION 19.06.0404 ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW
A. Generally. Applicants may submit conceptual building plans to Village staff, the Architectural Review
Board, and/or the Plan Commission for their initial review before filing a formal Architectural Review
Application. Upon the filing of a complete Architectural Review Application, the Building Inspector shall
forward such application and supporting materials to the Architectural Review Board for its review and
action.
B. Review Process for Projects Not Requiring Site Plan Approval. For all single-family dwellings on lots
(and their associated accessory structures, except in PUD Districts), two-family dwellings on lots (and their
associated accessory structures, except in PUD Districts), and Agricultural Structures (in the A-1, A-2, and
A-3 Districts only),and other projects not requiring site plan approval under Section 19.06.0101, the
following process shall be followed after submittal of a complete application to the Building Inspector: (Or.
008, series 2001, Part 24)
1. Architectural Review Board Action. The Architectural Review Board shall act to approve,
conditionally approve, or deny the Architectural Review Application. Plan Commission review
19-6-18
and approval is not required for such projects. The development of the site shall be in substantial
conformity with approved and filed Architectural Plans.
2. Effect of Conditional Approval. In the event of conditional approval, the Applicant shall satisfy
all required conditions (as are possible before construction) and prepare and submit to the
Building Inspector any revised plans which satisfy required conditions before a Building Permit is
issued. Violations of any required condition or the approved Architectural Plans shall be a
violation of this Ordinance and shall constitute grounds for revocation of the approval.
C. Review Process for Projects Also Requiring Site Plan Review. For all projects requiring Site Plan
Review under Section 19.06.0101, the following process shall be followed after submittal of a complete
Architectural Review Application to the Building Inspector:
1. Architectural Review Board Recommendation. The Architectural Review Board shall act to
recommend to the Plan Commission approval, conditional approval, or denial of the Architectural
Review Application.
2. Submittal with Application for Site Plan Review. Following Architectural Review Board
recommendation, the applicant shall submit Architectural Plans with the Village Clerk as a
component of the Site Plan Review Application, in quantities provided under Section 19.06.0103.
In the event the Architectural Review Board recommends conditional approval or denial, the
applicant may elect to revise Architectural Plans to meet recommended conditions or attempt to
satisfy objections before the Architectural Plans are included with the Site Plan Review
Application. The Village may permit the simultaneous submittal of an Architectural Review
Application and Site Plan Review Application including Architectural Plans; however, in such
instances, the time period for Site Plan Review, as provided in Section 19.06.0104(A) shall begin
from the date of Architectural Review Board recommendation. The Building Inspector shall
forward to the Plan Commission a written report of the Architectural Review Board action for
Plan Commission consideration.
3. Plan Commission Action. Following submittal of a complete Site Plan Review Application, the
Plan Commission shall act to approve, conditionally approve, or deny said application and
Architectural Plans following the procedures in Section 19.06.0104. In its review of Architectural
Plans submitted with the Site Plan Application, the Plan Commission may either:
a. Approve as a component of the Site Plan Review Application such Architectural Plans
with or without conditions, with any such conditions having the effect of reinforcing or
altering the recommendations of the Architectural Review Board; or
b. Refer the Architectural Plans back to the Architectural Review Board, with direction as to
key issues for it address or modifications for it to pursue before final Plan Commission
approval will be granted. The Architectural Review Board shall then review and make a
recommendation to the Plan Commission on such directions.
4. Effect of Conditional Approval. In the event of conditional approval, the Applicant shall satisfy
all required conditions (as are possible before construction) and prepare and submit to the
Building Inspector any revised plans which satisfy required conditions before a Building Permit is
issued. All conditions of both the Architectural Review Board and Plan Commission shall be
satisfied; except, where conflicting, the required conditions of the Plan Commission shall control.
Violations of any required condition or the approved Architectural Plans shall be a violation of this
Ordinance and shall constitute grounds for revocation of the approval.
(Ord. 041, Series 2000, Part 6)
19- 7 - 1
PART 7: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION
DIVISION 19.07.0100 ZONING PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 19.07.0101 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR DESIGNATED
The Building Inspector of the Village of Grafton is designated as the Zoning Administrator of said Village, to be responsible
for enforcing this Zoning Ordinance. Said Zoning Administrator shall have the power and shall see that the provisions of this
Ordinance are properly enforced.
A. Duties of the Zoning Administrator. In the enforcement of this Ordinance the Zoning Administrator shall perform
the following duties:
1. Advise applicants as to the provisions of this Ordinance and assist them in preparing application forms.
2. Issue the necessary Zoning Permits, Conditional Use Permits, and other permits as provided for in
the provisions of this Ordinance and assure that the provisions of this Ordinance have been complied with.
3. Inspect properties for compliance with this Ordinance.
4. Keep records of all permits issued, interpretations made, inspections made, work approved and
other official actions.
5. Have access to any structure or premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of performing
these duties.
6. Issue citations for violations of this Ordinance.
7. Issue stop work orders for violations of this Ordinance. The removal of said stop work orders
shall be unlawful.
8. Create such forms and procedures deemed necessary to administer and enforce this Ordinance.
B. Authority. In the enforcement of this Ordinance the Zoning Administrator shall have the power and authority for
the following:
1. At any reasonable time, and for any proper purpose, to enter upon any public or private premises and make
inspection thereof.
2. Upon reasonable cause or question as to proper compliance, to revoke any Zoning Permit, Building Permit,
or Occupancy Permit and issue cease and desist orders requiring the cessation of any building, moving,
alteration, or use that is in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance, such revocation to be in effect until
reinstated by the Zoning Administrator or the Zoning Board of Appeals.
3. In the name of the Village, commence any legal proceedings necessary to enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance including the collection of forfeitures provided for herein.
SECTION 19.07.0102 APPLICATIONS FOR ZONING PERMIT
In all zoning districts no vacant land shall be occupied or used and no building shall be erected, structurally altered, relocated,
or used including, but not limited to, use by a new use or changed use, until a Zoning Permit has been approved by the
Zoning Administrator to certify that any such site, building, or use complies with the provisions of this Ordinance. No
Zoning Permit is required for uses requiring a Conditional Use Permit.
19- 7 - 2
A. Zoning Permit Requirements in the MFR-1, MFR-2, CBD, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, O, BP, M-1, PID, I, PR, A-1
(nonresidential structures), A-2 (nonresidential structures), A-3 (nonresidential structures), and PUD (except
single-family and two-family residential dwelling structures) Districts. The following are the Zoning Permit
requirements in the MFR-1, MFR-2, CBD, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, O, BP, M-1, PID, I, PR, A-1 (nonresidential
structures), A-2 (nonresidential structures), A-3 (nonresidential structures), and PUD (except single-family and twofamily
residential dwelling structures) Districts:
1. Application. Application for a Zoning Permit shall be made in duplicate to the Zoning Administrator for
consideration of the intended use. The Zoning Permit shall include the following:
a. The name, address, and phone number of the applicant or agent to be contacted regarding the
application.
b. Description of the property by lot, block, and recorded Subdivision, Certified Survey Map, or by
metes and bounds; the address of the subject site; type of structure; a word description of the
existing and proposed operation or use of the structure or site; number of employees; the zoning
district within which the subject site lies; and any other information pertinent to an adequate
understanding of the intended use by the Zoning Administrator, Village Engineer, Village Planner,
and Plan Commission (when a Site Plan is involved).
c. A Site Plan of the property in a form and indicating information and data as set
forth under the requirements of Division 19.06.0100 of this Ordinance.
d. The Village Clerk (or other Village Board authorized agent), after scheduling an appearance
before the Plan Commission for review of the Site Plan, shall refer the application, site plan, and
related data to appropriate Village Departments and the Site Plan to the Plan Commission
members for their study and/or comment..
e. In considering the application, the Zoning Administrator shall take into account the basic intent of
this Ordinance to ensure attractive, efficient, and appropriate development of land in the
community and ensure that every reasonable step has been taken to avoid depreciating effects on
surrounding property values.
2. Issuance of Zoning Permit. If such use complies with the requirements of this Ordinance and such other
additional measures as may be imposed pursuant to the requirements of this Ordinance, the Plan
Commission shall approve the Site Plan and the Zoning Administrator shall authorize the issuance of a
Zoning Permit.
B. Zoning Permit Requirements in the R-RE, R-E, R-1, R-S, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, A-1 (residential
structures), A-2 (residential structures), A-3 (residential structures), and PUD (single-family and two-family
residential dwelling structures) Districts. The following are the Zoning Permit requirements in the R-RE, R-E, R-
1, R-S, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, A-1 (residential structures), A-2 (residential structures), A-3 (residential structures),
and PUD (single-family and two-family residential dwelling structures) Districts:
1. Application. Application for a Zoning Permit shall be made in duplicate to the Zoning Administrator for
consideration of the intended use. The Zoning Permit shall include the following:
a. The name, address, and phone number of the applicant or agent to be contacted regarding the
application.
b. Description of the property by lot, block, and recorded Subdivision, Certified Survey Map, or by
metes and bounds; the address of the subject site; type of structure; a word description of the
existing and proposed operation or use of the structure or site; the zoning district within which the
subject site lies; and any other information pertinent to an adequate understanding of the intended
use by the Zoning Administrator.
c. The Zoning Administrator may require a Site Plan of the property in a form and indicating
information and data as set forth under the requirements of Division 19.06.0100 of this Ordinance.
d. In considering the application, the Zoning Administrator shall take into account the basic intent of
this Ordinance to ensure attractive, efficient, and appropriate development of land in the
community and ensure that every reasonable step has been taken to avoid depreciating effects on
surrounding property values.
19- 7 - 3
2. Issuance of Zoning Permit. If such use complies with the requirements of this Ordinance and such other
additional measures as may be imposed pursuant to the requirements of this Ordinance, the Zoning
Administrator shall authorize the issuance of a Zoning Permit.
C. Zoning Permit Expiration. A Zoning Permit shall expire if within six (6) months of the date of issuance of a
Zoning Permit the proposed construction or preparation of land for use has not commenced or if the use has not
occupied the structure or location. Upon the showing of valid cause by the applicant, the Zoning Administrator may
grant an extension of such Zoning Permit for a period not to exceed six (6) months.
D. Enforcement. Failure to comply with this Section relating to Zoning Permits may be enforced pursuant to Division
19.07.0500 of this Ordinance, or any other provision of law including but not limited to revocation of the Zoning
Permit, injunction, or other civil suit.
SECTION 19.07.0103 APPLICATIONS FOR CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
A. General. It is recognized that there are uses which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be properly
classified in any particular zoning district or districts without consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses
upon neighboring land and of the public need for the particular use at the particular location. Such conditional uses
fall into two categories:
1. Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected with a public interest.
2. Uses entirely private in character but of such an unusual nature that their operation may give rise to unique
problems with respect to their impact upon neighboring property or public facilities.
B. Initiation of Conditional Uses. Any person owning or having an interest in the subject property may file an
application to use such land for one (1) or more of the conditional uses provided for in this Ordinance and in the
zoning district in which the land is situated, but in addition:
1. An existing or potential lessee of all or part of the land may also file an application for a conditional use
permit, provided that the application also includes written correspondence from the property owner indicating his or
her consent. (Ord. 008, Series 2001, Part 25).
2. A person may file concurrent applications for a conditional use permit and a zoning ordinance amendment
that would establish the desired use as an allowable conditional use on the subject property, or may file an
application for a conditional use subject to Village approval of a pending zoning ordinance amendment. However,
the applicant shall not be entitled to a refund of any fees or charges associated with the conditional use permit
application if the Village Board does not approve the proposed or pending zoning ordinance amendment. (Ord. 008,
Series 2001, Part 25).
C. Application for Conditional Uses. A Conditional Use Permit application for a Conditional Use, or for the
expansion of an existing conditional use, shall be filed with the Village Clerk (or other Village Board authorized
agent) on a Conditional Use Permit application form prescribed by the Village Clerk (or other Village Board
authorized agent). The Conditional Use Permit application shall be accompanied by a legal description of the
property for which a Conditional Use Permit is being applied for, such plans or data prescribed on the application
form, a statement in writing by the applicant, and adequate evidence showing that the proposed conditional use will
conform to the standards set forth in Division 19.03.0700 of this Ordinance and those other standards set forth in this
Ordinance that may also be applicable.
D. Hearing on Conditional Use Application. Upon receipt in proper form of the application and statement referred to
above, the Plan Commission shall hold at least one (1) public hearing. A notice of public hearing shall be published
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village of Grafton as a Class 2 legal notice, as defined in Wisconsin
Statutes Chapter 985. Due notice shall also be given to property owners of properties located within two hundred
(200) feet of the affected property and all property under the same ownership. The Village Clerk (or other Village
Board authorized agent) shall set the date for the public hearing(s). (Ordinance No. 005, Series 2004, Part 2)
19- 7 - 4
E. Authorization of Conditional Uses. For each application for a Conditional Use Permit, the Plan Commission shall
make its decision based upon its findings. In addition the Plan Commission shall have the ability to include the
stipulations of additional conditions and guarantees that such conditions will be complied with when they are
deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest. The Plan Commission may grant or deny any application
for a Conditional Use Permit. (Ord. 005, Series 2004, Part 2)
F. Effect of Denial of a Conditional Use Permit. No application for a Conditional Use Permit which has been denied
wholly or in part by the Plan Commission shall be resubmitted for thirty (30) days from the date of said order of
denial. (Ord. 005, Series 2004, Part 2)
G. Revocation. In any case where a conditional use has not been established within one (1) year after the date of
granting thereof, then without further action by the Plan Commission, the Conditional Use Permit shall be null and
void. (Ord. 005, Series 2004, Part 2)
H. Annual Review of Conditional Use Permits. All Conditional Use Permits shall be reviewed on an annual basis by
the Zoning Administrator for their continued compliance with all conditions of approval. If any Conditional Use
Permit granted is found be in violation of any conditions of its approval, said Conditional Use Permit shall be
referred by the Zoning Administrator to the Plan Commission for potential revocation. (Ord. 005, Series 2004, part
2)
SECTION 19.07.0104 APPLICATIONS FOR CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
A. When a Certificate of Occupancy is Required. A Certificate of Occupancy to be issued by the Building Inspector
shall be required for any of the following, except buildings incidental to agricultural operations other than
residences:
1. Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or enlarged.
2. Change in use of an existing building.
3. Any change in the use of a nonconforming use.
B. No Occupancy, Use, or Change of Use Shall Take Place. No such occupancy, use, or change of use shall take
place until a Certificate of Occupancy therefore shall have been issued and the requirements of both this Ordinance
and Title 16 "Buildings and Construction" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code have been met.
C. Site Plan Approval Required for Certificate of Occupancy.
1. If a Site Plan is a requirement of a zoning district, no person shall commence any use or erect any structure
or obtain a Building Permit without first obtaining the approval of a Site Plan by the Plan Commission as
set forth in this Ordinance, and no use shall be carried on, no structure erected or enlarged and no other
improvement or construction undertaken except as shown on approved Site Plan. The remodeling of the
interior of existing structures is exempt from the requirements of this Section.
2. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be granted until all improvements shown on a Plan Commission
approved Site Plan and Landscape Plan have been completed in accordance therewith; provided, that upon
a finding by the Building Inspector that certain improvements cannot be completed due to seasonal or other
factors beyond the control of the developer, and that temporary occupancy prior to the completion will
involve no health or safety hazard, the Building Inspector may issue a temporary Certificate of Occupancy
bearing an expiration date, which date shall allow reasonable time for completion, upon posting a surety in
conformance with the requirements of Section 19.06.0105 of this Ordinance to the Village Finance
Director, in double the sum estimated by the Building Inspector to be needed to complete all required
improvements, conditioned on completion of all required improvements prior to the date of expiration of
the temporary Certificate of Occupancy.
19- 7 - 5
3. Acceptance of a temporary Certificate of Occupancy implies consent to application of the bond money for
the completion of any required improvements not completed prior to the expiration date of the temporary
Certificate of Occupancy and forfeiture of any portion thereof not so applied. No action or inaction by the
Village regarding any required improvements shall serve to extend the time of validity of any temporary
Certificate of Occupancy.
4. A temporary Certificate of Occupancy may, however, be extended in time by the Building Inspector, and
from time to time for good cause shown, and any such extension shall operate to extend, for the same
period, the time for completion under the terms of the bond.
D. Application for a Certificate of Occupancy. Written application for a Certificate of Occupancy for the use of
vacant land, or for a change in a nonconforming use, as herein provided, shall be made to the Building Inspector.
E. Form of Certificate of Occupancy and Permanent Record. Each Certificate of Occupancy shall state that the
building or proposed use of a building or land complies with all provisions of this Ordinance. A record of all
Certificates of Occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Inspector and a copy shall be forwarded,
on request, to any person having proprietary or tenancy interests in the building or land affected.
F. Certificate of Occupancy Not Required for Gas and Electric Utility Uses Issued a Certificate of Public
Convenience and Necessity. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be required for gas and electric utility uses which
have been issued a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity pursuant to Section 196.491 of the Wisconsin
Statutes as amended.
SECTION 19.07.0105 APPLICATIONS FOR SITE PLAN REVIEW
See the provisions set forth in Division 19.06.0100 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 19.07.0106 APPLICATIONS FOR ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW
See the provisions set forth in Division 19.06.0400 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 19.07.0107 APPLICATIONS FOR ZONING APPEAL
Applications for a Zoning Appeal shall include the following (Also see the provisions set forth in Division 19.08.0200 of this
Ordinance):
A. Name and Address. Name and address of the appellant or applicant and all abutting and opposite property owners
of record.
B. Plat of Survey. For an appeal that involves a specific property, the Zoning Administrator may require a Plat of
Survey prepared by a registered land surveyor showing all of the information required under Section 19.07.0102 of
this Ordinance for a Zoning Permit.
C. Questions to be Answered by the Applicant. Items on the application to be provided in writing by the appellant or
applicant shall include the following:
1. Indication of the section(s) of the Ordinance being appealed.
2. A statement regarding the appeal requested, giving distances and dimensions where appropriate; or, for an
appeal of a decision of the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector, the circumstances and appeal being
requested.
3. A statement of the reason(s) for the request.
19- 7 - 6
4. A statement of the exceptional, extraordinary, or unusual circumstances or conditions applying to the lot or
parcel, structure, use, or intended use that do not apply generally to other properties or uses in the same
district which cause the hardship. [Note: Economic hardship and self-imposed hardship are not grounds
for the granting of a variance.]
5. Date of any previous application for an appeal and the disposition of the previous application (if any).
D. Additional Information. Additional information as required by the Plan Commission, Village Engineer, Zoning
Board of Appeals, Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector, or the Zoning Appeal Application Form.
SECTION 19.07.0108 APPLICATIONS FOR ZONING VARIANCE
Applications for a Zoning Variance shall include the following (Also see the provisions set forth in Division 19.08.0200 of
this Ordinance):
A. Name and Address. Name and address of the appellant or applicant and all abutting and opposite property owners
of record.
B. Plat of Survey. The Zoning Administrator may require a Plat of Survey prepared by a registered land surveyor
showing all of the information required under Section 19.07.0102 of this Ordinance for a Zoning Permit.
C. Questions to be Answered by the Applicant. Items on the application to be provided in writing by the appellant or
applicant shall include the following:
1. Indication of the section(s) of the Ordinance from which a variance is requested.
2. A statement regarding the variance requested, giving distances and dimensions where appropriate.
3. A statement of the reason(s) for the request.
4. A statement of the exceptional, extraordinary, or unusual circumstances or conditions applying to the lot or
parcel, structure, use, or intended use that do not apply generally to other properties or uses in the same
district which cause the hardship. [Note: Economic hardship and self-imposed hardship are not grounds
for the granting of a variance.]
5. Date of any previous application for a variance and the disposition of the previous application (if any).
D. Additional Information. Additional information as required by the Plan Commission, Village Engineer, Zoning
Board of Appeals, Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector, or the Zoning Variance Application Form.
SECTION 19.07.0109 APPLICATIONS FOR MINOR ZONING VARIANCE
Applications for a Minor Zoning Variance shall include the following (Also see the provisions set forth in Division
19.08.0200 of this Ordinance):
A. Name and Address. Name and address of the appellant or applicant and all abutting and opposite property owners
of record.
B. Photographs. Two (2) photographs of the subject structure from different views.
C. Drawing. If an existing structure, a drawing of the structure listing its size and dimensions and a site drawing or
survey setting forth the location of the structure and its distance from lot lines and adjacent buildings on the
property.
D. Questions to be Answered by the Applicant. Items on the application to be provided in writing by the appellant or
applicant shall include the following:
19- 7 - 7
1. Indication of the section(s) of the Ordinance from which a minor variance is requested.
2. A statement regarding the minor variance requested, giving distances and dimensions where appropriate.
3. A statement of the reason(s) for the request.
4. A statement of the exceptional, extraordinary, or unusual circumstances or conditions applying to the lot or
parcel, structure, use, or intended use that do not apply generally to other properties or uses in the same
district which cause the hardship. [Note: Economic hardship and self-imposed hardship are not grounds
for the granting of a variance.]
5. Date of any previous application for a minor variance and the disposition of the previous application (if
any).
E. Additional Information. Additional information as required by the Plan Commission, Village Engineer, Zoning
Board of Appeals, Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector, or the Minor Zoning Variance Application Form.
SECTION 19.07.0110 APPLICATIONS FOR ZONING INTERPRETATION
Applications for an Interpretation by the Zoning Administrator shall include the following (Also see the provisions set forth
in Division 19.08.0200 of this Ordinance):
A. Name and Address. Name and address of the applicant.
B. Questions to be Answered by the Applicant. Items on the application to be provided in writing by the appellant or
applicant shall include the following:
1. Indication of the section(s) of the Ordinance for which an interpretation from the Zoning Administrator is
requested.
2. A statement of the reason(s) for the request.
3. Date of any previous application and the disposition of the previous application (if any).
C. Additional Information. Additional information as required by the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector.
SECTION 19.07.0111 APPLICATIONS FOR CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS
Applications for a Certificate of Appropriateness for alterations in the architectural appearance of any structure within an
HPO District shall include the following (Also see the provisions set forth in Sections 19.03.0315 and 19.07.0210 and
Division 19.08.0400 of this Ordinance.):
A. Required Architectural Plans, Elevations, and Perspective Drawings. Architectural plans, elevations, and
perspective drawings and sketches illustrating the design and character of all proposed alterations. A color building
elevation or perspective rendering of the exterior of the proposed building(s) shall be required for review by the Plan
Commission for all types of structures. Said elevations and perspective drawings shall indicate the location and
placement of all auxiliary building equipment such as heating, ventilating, and/or air-conditioning equipment. These
drawings are to be drawn to a recognized architectural scale with the name of the project noted. Building plans shall
be submitted with all detail drawn on each elevation. Plans drawn with partial building details indicated will be
returned to the Applicant for redrafting.
B. Name and Address. Name and address of the applicant.
C. Owner/Developer. Owner's and/or developer's name and address.
19- 7 - 8
D. Architect/Engineer. Architect's and/or engineer's name and address.
E. Date. Date of submittal of plans.
F. Scale. Scale of drawings noted on each drawing.
G. Building Type, Size, and Location. The type, size, and location of all structures with all building dimensions
shown.
H. Height. The height of building(s).
I. Exterior Materials Samples to be Provided. Samples of exterior materials and their colors.
J. Additional Information May be Required. Additional information and data that may be required by the Village
Planner, Plan Commission, or Historic Preservation Commission may include, but not be limited to, the following
upon request:
1. Photographs from the site of adjacent neighboring structures and/or property.
2. Detailed drawings of decorative elements of the building(s) or structure(s).
3. Sectional building or site drawings drawn to a recognized engineering or architectural scale.
SECTION 19.07.0112 OTHER REQUIRED PERMITS
It is the responsibility of the permit applicant to secure all other necessary permits required by any state, federal, or local
agencies. This includes, but is not limited to, a water use permit pursuant to Chapters 30 or 31 of the Wisconsin Statutes, a
wetland fill permit pursuant to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, and highway access permits.
DIVISION 19.07.0200 ZONING ORDINANCE TEXT AND ZONING MAP
CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
SECTION 19.07.0201 AUTHORITY
Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or good zoning practice requires, the Village Board may, by
ordinance, change the district boundaries or amend, change, or supplement the regulations established by this Ordinance or
amendments thereto. Such change or amendment shall be subject to the review and recommendation of the Plan
Commission.
SECTION 19.07.0202 INITIATION
A change or amendment may be initiated by the Village Board, the Plan Commission, or by a petition of one (1) or more of
the owners or lessees with signed written permission of the property owner(s) of property within the area proposed to be
changed.
SECTION 19.07.0203 PETITIONS
Petitions for any change in the district boundaries or amendments to the regulations shall be filed with the Village Clerk (or
other Village Board authorized agent), shall describe the premises to be rezoned or the regulations to be amended, shall list
the reasons justifying the petition, shall specify the proposed use, and shall include the following, except where the petition is
initiated by the Village Board: (Ord. 029, Series 2001, Part 1)
19- 7 - 9
A. Owners' Names and Addresses Required. Name, address, and telephone number of the petitioner for a zoning
amendment and agent; and tax key numbers, names, and addresses of all property owners of all properties lying
within two hundred (200) feet of the area proposed to be rezoned.
B. Plot Plan Required. Plot plan drawn to scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1"=100') showing the area
proposed to be rezoned, its location, its dimensions, the location and classification of adjacent zoning districts, and
the location and existing use of all properties within two hundred (200) feet of the area proposed to be rezoned.
C. Description of Requested Zoning District Boundary Change or Zoning Ordinance Text Amendment
Required. The petitioner shall provide a complete legal description of the property for which a change in zoning is
requested. For a proposed Ordinance text amendment, the petitioner shall provide a copy of the text proposed to be
changed and the new text being proposed by the petitioner.
D. General Description of Proposed Development Required. A general description of the proposed development of
the property.
E. Site Plan Required. A Site Plan of the proposed development of the property meeting the requirements set forth
under Division 19.06.0100 of this Ordinance.
F. Landscape Plan Required. A Landscape Plan meeting the requirements set forth under Division 19.07.0300 of this
Ordinance. Any required bufferyard easements shall be so noted on the Landscape Plan.
G. Natural Resource Protection Plan Required. If natural resource features are present on the subject property, as
defined in Divisions 19.04.0100 and 19.09.0100 of this Ordinance, a Natural Resource Protection Plan meeting the
requirements set forth in Division 19.06.0200 of this Ordinance.
H. Site Intensity and Capacity Calculations Required. Site Intensity and Capacity Calculations meeting the
requirements set forth in Division 19.03.0500 and in the prescribed format set forth in the Village's application form.
I. Architectural Plans Required. Architectural Plans meeting the requirements set forth under Division 19.06.0400
of this Ordinance. All single-family dwellings on lots (and their associated accessory structures, except in PUD
Districts), two-family dwellings on lots (and their associated accessory structures, except in PUD Districts), and
agricultural structures (in the A-1, A-2, and A-3 Districts only) are deemed exempt from the requirements of
architectural review.
J. Additional Information May be Required. Additional information may be required by the Village Engineer,
Zoning Administrator, Village Planner, Plan Commission, or the Village Board.
SECTION 19.07.0204 REVIEWS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The Plan Commission shall review all proposed changes and amendments within the corporate limits and shall recommend
that the petition be granted as requested, be modified, or be denied. The recommendation shall be made in writing to the
Village Board.
SECTION 19.07.0205 PUBLIC HEARINGS
The Plan Commission, shall hold a public hearing upon each proposed change or amendment giving notice of the date, time,
place of such hearing, and the matter to be presented at the hearing by publication in the Village of a Class 2 notice under
Chapter 985 of the Wisconsin Statutes. Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to all parties-in-interest at least ten (10)
days before the hearing. Parties-in-interest shall be defined as the petitioner, the clerk of any municipality within one
thousand (1,000) feet of any lands included in the petition, and the owners of all lands included in the petition and all lands
lying within two hundred (200) feet of lands included in the petition. The Village Clerk (or other Village Board authorized
agent) shall set the date for the public hearing(s). (Ord. 005, Series 2004, Part 3)
19-7 - 1 0
SECTION 19.07.0206 VILLAGE BOARD'S ACTION
Following such hearing and after careful consideration of the Plan Commission's recommendations, the Village Board shall
take action on the proposed change or amendment.
SECTION 19.07.0207 FLOODLAND DISTRICT BOUNDARY CHANGES
See procedures as specified under the provisions of Title 21 "Floodplain Zoning" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code as
amended.
SECTION 19.07.0208 SHORELAND AND WETLAND DISTRICT BOUNDARY CHANGES
See procedures as specified under the provisions of Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the Village of Grafton Municipal
Code as amended.
SECTION 19.07.0209 PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT PROCEDURES
A. Pre-Application Conference. Before official submittal of an application for a PUD District, the applicant shall file
an application to meet with the Plan Commission for a preliminary discussion on the scope and proposed nature of
the contemplated development.
B. Application for a PUD District. Following the pre-application conference, the owner or his agent may file an
application with the Village Clerk (or other Village Board authorized agent) for an amendment to the Zoning
Ordinance text and map for the creation of a PUD District pursuant to the requirements of Division 19.07.0200 of
this Ordinance Such application shall be accompanied by all required fees. In addition, the following materials
shall be attached to the application for a PUD District:
1. A statement describing the relationship of the PUD District to the Village of Grafton's Comprehensive
Plan, detailed neighborhood or planning district plans, the general character of and the uses to be included
in the proposed PUD District, and the following:
a. Total area to be included in the PUD District, area of open space, residential density computations,
proposed number of dwelling units and number of bedrooms per dwelling unit, population
analysis, availability of or requirements for municipal services, and any other similar data
pertinent to a comprehensive evaluation of the proposed development.
b. A general summary of the estimated value of structures and site improvement costs, including
landscaping and special features.
c. An outline of the organizational structure of a property owner's or management's association
proposed to be established for providing necessary private services.
d. A Site Plan that meets all of the Site Plan requirements set forth in Division 19.06.0100 of this
Ordinance including, but not limited to: requirements for the submission of a Landscape Plan
meeting the requirements set forth under Division 19.06.0300 of this Ordinance; architectural
plans meeting the requirements of Division 19.06.0400 of this Ordinance; a Lighting Plan meeting
the requirements of Division 19.05.0400 of this Ordinance; and, if natural resource features are
present on the subject property, as defined in Divisions 19.04.0100 and 19.09.0100 of this
Ordinance, a Natural Resource Protection Plan meeting the requirements set forth in Division
19.06.0200 of this Ordinance.
e. Site Intensity and Capacity Calculations meeting the requirements set forth in Division 19.03.0500
and in the prescribed format set forth in the Village's application form.
19-7 - 1 1
C. Referral to Plan Commission. The application for a PUD District shall be referred to the Plan Commission for its
review and recommendation to the Village Board, including any additional conditions or restrictions that it may
deem necessary or appropriate.
D. Public Hearing Required. The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing pursuant to the provisions of Section
19.07.0205. Notice for such hearing shall include reference to the various plans required to be filed with the
requested zoning change. The Village Clerk (or other Village Board authorized agent) shall set the date for the
public hearing(s). (Ord. 005, Series 2004, Part 3)
E. Basis for Approval. No PUD District approval shall be granted unless the Plan Commission shall find that the
PUD District is appropriate in the location proposed based upon its consideration of the following criteria:
1. Intent to Meet Construction Schedule. That the applicant for the proposed PUD District has
demonstrated that applicant intends to meet the time schedule as set forth in the proposed PUD District
application following the approval of the change in zoning districts and that the development will be
carried out according to the construction schedule satisfactory to the Village.
2. Consistency with Zoning Ordinance and Comprehensive Plan Required. That the proposed PUD
District is consistent in all respects to the purpose of this Section and to the spirit and intent of this
Ordinance; is in conformity with the Comprehensive Plan, and elements thereof, for community
development; is in conformity with, or serves to implement, the appropriate detailed planning district or
neighborhood unit development plan, including amendments thereto; would not be contrary to the general
welfare and economic prosperity of the Village or the immediate neighborhood; and that the benefits and
improved design of the resultant development justifies the establishment of a PUD District.
3. Common Open Space. Common open space consisting of land unoccupied by nonrecreational structures,
buildings, streets, rights-of-way, minimum required lot areas, and automobile parking lots and designed and
intended for the use and enjoyment of residents of a PUD District shall be provided in each PUD District.
Common open space may contain structures for recreational use.
4. Public Facilities and Services. The extent to which the proposed use will be served adequately by, or will
provide for, essential public facilities and services such as highways, streets, parking spaces, police and fire
protection, drainage structures, refuse disposal, water and sewers, and schools.
5. Adequacy of Public Infrastructure. The adequacy of the public infrastructure to support the proposed
use at the proposed location. In considering this use criteria, the Plan Commission shall consider not only
the proposed uses, but other proposed rezonings and the zoning of vacant properties to determine both the
individual and cumulative impacts.
6. Community Need. The extent of the community need for the proposed use at the proposed location in
light of existing and proposed uses of a similar nature in the area, and the need to provide or maintain a
proper mix of uses within the Village and within the immediate area of the proposed use. The Plan
Commission shall not recommend Village Board approval of any PUD District unless it can find that the
proposed use in the proposed location will not result in an over concentration either of a particular use
within the Village or within the immediate area of the proposed use.
7. Effects of the Proposed Use. The extent to which the proposed use at the proposed location will, or may,
have a substantial or undue adverse effect upon adjacent property, the character of the neighborhood, traffic
conditions, parking, utility facilities, and other matters affecting the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
8. Preservation and Enhancement of Neighboring Land Uses. The extent to which the proposed use and
its design and landscaping will enhance and protect the existing character of neighboring land uses, if any,
or enhance the community character of the Village.
9. Pedestrian and Public Transportation Linkages. The extent to which the proposed use will be served
by, or will provide, proper pedestrian and public transportation linkages both within the immediate area of
19-7 - 1 2
the development and with other parts of the Village, neighboring communities, or County.
10. Adequacy of Public and Private Open Space. The extent to which the proposed use will be served by, or
will provide, adequate public and private open space both in the immediate vicinity of the proposed use and
throughout the Village. The Plan Commission shall, in considering this criteria, consider the adequacy of
such open spaces both as to site design and buffering and as to the open space needs of the permanent or
transient population likely to be generated by the proposed use.
11. General Standards for PUD Districts. No PUD District shall be recommended or granted unless the
applicant shall establish that the proposed development will meet each of the following standards as well as
all those standards set forth under Division 19.03.0400 of this Ordinance:
a. Unified Ownership Required. The entire property proposed for planned unit development
treatment shall be in single ownership or under such unified development control (by using deed
restrictions, protective covenants, or property owners' association, as applicable) to ensure that the
entire property will be developed as a unified whole. All owners of the property shall be included
as joint applicants on all applications and all approvals shall bind all owners. The violation of any
owner as to any individual lot or parcel within a PUD District shall be deemed a violation as to all
owners and of all lots or parcels.
b. Covenants and Restrictions. All covenants, deed restrictions, easements, and similar restrictions
to be recorded concerning the PUD District shall provide that they may not be modified, removed,
or released without the express consent of the Village Board.
c. Open Space.
1) Amount, Location, and Use of Open Space. The failure of a proposed PUD District to
provide adequate open space shall be considered an indication that it has not satisfied the
objectives for which such PUD District developments may be approved pursuant to this
Ordinance. When open space is provided in a PUD District, the amount and location of
such open space shall be consistent with its intended function as set forth in this
Ordinance, the application, and PUD District plans. No such open space shall be used for
the construction of any structure or improvement except such structures and
improvements as may be approved by the Village as appropriate to the intended leisure
and recreational uses for which such open space is intended.
2) Preservation of Open Space Required. Adequate safeguards, including recorded
covenants and deed restrictions, shall be provided to prevent the subsequent use of open
space for any use, structure, improvement, or development other than that shown on the
Village approved PUD District plans. The covenants and restrictions must be permanent,
not be for a given period of years, and must run with the land. Such covenants and deed
restrictions may provide that they may be released, but only with the approval of the
Village Board.
3) Ownership and Maintenance. The PUD District plans shall include such provisions for
the ownership and maintenance of such open space and improvements as are reasonably
necessary to ensure their continuity, care, conservation, maintenance, and operation
according to predetermined standards and to ensure that remedial measures will be
available to the Village if such open space or improvements are permitted to deteriorate
or are not maintained in a condition consistent with the best interests of the subject PUD
District or the Village.
4) Property Owners' Association. When the requirements of the preceding subparagraph
3) above are to be satisfied by the ownership or maintenance of such open space or
improvements by a property owners' association, such association shall meet each of the
following standards:
19-7 - 1 3
a) That the bylaws and rules of the property owners' association and all
declarations, covenants, and restrictions to be recorded must be approved as part
of the PUD District plans before becoming effective. Each such document shall
provide that it shall not be amended in any manner that would result in it being
in violation of the requirements of this Ordinance.
b) That the property owners' association must be established and all declarations,
covenants, and deed restrictions must be recorded before the sale of any
property within the area of the PUD District designated to have the exclusive
use of the proposed open space or improvements.
c) That the property owners' association must be responsible for casualty and
liability insurance, taxes, and the maintenance of the open space and
improvements to be deeded to the property owners' association.
d) That membership in the property owners' association must be mandatory for
each property owner of the PUD District and any successive property owner
having a right to the use or enjoyment of such open space or improvements.
e) That every property owner having a right to the use or enjoyment of such open
space or improvements must pay its pro rata share of the cost of the property
owners' association by means of an assessment to be levied by the property
owners' association that meets the requirements for becoming a lien on the
property according to the State statutes.
f) That the property owners' association must have the right to adjust the
assessment to meet changed needs. The membership vote of the property
owners' association required to authorize such adjustment shall not be fixed at
more than two-thirds of the property owners' association members voting on the
issue.
g) The Village must be given the right, after ten (10) days' written notice to the
property owners' association, to perform any maintenance or repair work that the
property owners' association has neglected to perform, to assess the property
owners' association membership for such work and to have a lien against the
property of any member failing to pay such assessment. For this purpose alone,
the Village shall have all the rights and powers of the property owners'
association and its governing body under the agreements and declarations
creating the property owners' association.
d. Landscaping and Perimeter Treatment Required. Any area of a PUD District not used for
structures or circulation elements shall be landscaped meeting all landscaping provisions of this
Ordinance or otherwise improved according to the provisions of this Ordinance. The perimeter of
the PUD District shall be treated to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses by means such as
the provision of compatible uses and structures, setbacks, screening, or natural or manmade
bufferyards.
e. Private Streets and/or Drives. If recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the
Village Board, private streets may be allowed. If so approved, such private streets and/or drive
shall meet all Village construction standards for private streets and/or drives. No such private
streets and/or drives shall be approved except upon the condition that they shall be owned and
maintained by a property owners' association meeting the requirements set forth in this Section.
g. All New Utilities to Be Placed Underground. All new utility lines, including electric, cable
television, and telephone lines shall be installed underground.
19-7 - 1 4
12. General Site Design Standards. No PUD Planned Unit Development District approval shall be granted
unless the Plan Commission shall find that the plans of the proposed use address and are consistent with the
following standards:
a. Building Orientation. The orientation and placement on the lot of buildings and other structures
shall take into consideration such matters as sun and wind direction; relation to surrounding uses
and development; relation to nearby natural and manmade features, amenities and vistas; and
proper circulation both on-site and off-site.
b. Architectural Design. The extent to which the design and architecture of buildings and other
structures on the site are compatible with nearby developments considering such elements, as
scale, height, and mass; proportion and directional expression of facades; spacing and relation
between buildings; and materials, texture, color, and design elements employed. Division
19.06.0400 of this Ordinance provides further guidelines for the review of architectural design.
(Ord. 008, Series 2001, Part 26).
c. Landscaping, Streetscape, and Bufferyards. Landscaping shall be integrated into building
arrangements, topography, off-street parking, and bufferyard requirements. Landscaping shall
include trees, bushes, shrubs, ground cover, perennials, annuals, plant sculpture, open area, and the
use of building and paving materials in an imaginative manner. Bufferyard shall be located
around the perimeter of the site to minimize the off-site impacts of headlight glare, noise, light
from structures and open areas and the movement of people and vehicles. Bufferyard may consist
of fencing, evergreens, shrubs, bushes, deciduous trees, or combinations thereof to achieve the
intent of the PUD District. Division 19.05.0300 of this Ordinance provides further guidelines for
the review of landscaping and bufferyards.
d. Signs. Signs shall be designed to be aesthetically pleasing, harmonious with other signs on the
site, and located to achieve their purpose without constituting hazards to vehicles and pedestrians.
All signage in a PUD District shall be reviewed by the Plan Commission and approved by the
Village Board.
e. Building Bulk. The height, mass, and floor area ratio of buildings proposed shall be assessed as
to consistency with existing development in the area.
f. Vehicular and Pedestrian Access and Circulation. Pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement
within and adjacent to the site shall be safe and efficient with particular emphasis on the provision
and layout of sufficient parking areas, off-street loading and unloading, and the safe and efficient
movement of people, goods, and vehicles from access streets, within the site, and between
buildings and vehicles. Adequate provisions shall be made to provide ingress and egress so
designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets. The proposed site shall be
accessible from public roads that are adequate to carry the traffic that will be imposed upon them
by the proposed development. A traffic study prepared by a Traffic Safety Engineer may be
required as determined by the Plan Commission. Off-street parking spaces and areas are to be
usable and conveniently arranged. Access to the site from adjacent roads shall be designed so as
to interfere as little as possible with traffic flow on these roads and to permit vehicles, including
emergency vehicles, a rapid and safe ingress and egress to the site. The streets and driveways on
the site of the proposed development shall be adequate to serve the residents of the proposed
development and shall meet the minimum standards of all applicable ordinances of the Village.
g. Lighting. Adequate lighting shall be provided to ensure safe movement of persons and vehicles
and for security purposes. Directional lights shall be arranged to minimize glare and reflection on
adjacent properties. Lighting standards shall be a type approved by the Plan Commission based,
in part, upon the lighting standards set forth in Division 19.05.0400 of this Ordinance.
h. Environmental Considerations. Environmental elements relating to soil erosion, preservation of
trees, protection off water courses, lakes, wetlands, and other resources; noise; topography; and
animal life shall be reviewed and the design for the PUD District shall minimize any adverse
19-7 - 1 5
impact on these elements. Division 19.03.0500 and Part 4 of this Ordinance provides further
guidelines for the protection of natural resources.
i. Adverse Impacts on Surrounding Property(s). The use shall not have a substantial or undue
adverse effect upon adjacent property, the character of the neighborhood, traffic conditions,
parking, utilities, facilities, and other matters affecting the public health, safety, and general
welfare and shall be constructed, arranged, and operated so as not to dominate the immediate
vicinity or to interfere with the development and use of neighboring property or properties.
j. Amenities and Services. The proposed use shall provide on-site amenities and services that are
consistent with the nature and intensity of the proposed use and the availability of amenities and
services in the immediate area of the site.
k. Other Standards. The PUD District must not be detrimental to, or endanger the public health,
safety, morals, comfort, or general welfare. The Plan Commission in making its
recommendations, and the Village Board in making its determination, shall further find that:
1) The proposed site shall be provided with adequate drainage facilities for surface and
storm water.
2) The proposed development shall not impose any undue burden on public services and
facilities, such as fire and police protection.
3) Water, sanitary sewer, and storm sewer facilities shall be provided.
4) The entire tract or parcel of land to be included in a PUD District shall be held under
single ownership. If there are two (2) or more owners, the application for such PUD
District shall be filed jointly by all of such owners. The PUD District shall be considered
as one (1) tract, lot, or parcel, and the legal description must define said PUD District as a
single parcel, lot, or tract and so recorded with the Ozaukee County Register of Deeds.
The PUD District shall not be subdivided unless no development occurs and appropriate
steps and procedures are taken to vacate the district either by the owners or the Village
Board.
13. Standards for Residential PUD Districts. For proposed residential PUD Districts:
a. That such development will create an attractive residential environment of sustained desirability
and economic stability, including structures in relation to terrain, consideration of safe pedestrian
flow, ready access to recreation space, and coordination with overall plans for the neighborhood.
b. That the total average residential density within the PUD District will be compatible with the
Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan, elements thereof, and the detailed planning district or
neighborhood unit development plan prepared for the area.
1) That the population composition of the development will not have an adverse effect upon
the community's capacity to provide needed school or other municipal service facilities.
2) That adequate guarantee is provided for permanent preservation of open space areas as
shown on the approved site plan either by private reservation or by dedication to the
public.
c. That the locations for entrances and exits have been designed to prevent unnecessary interference
with the safe and efficient movement of traffic on surrounding streets, and that the development
will not create an adverse effect upon the general traffic pattern of the surrounding neighborhood.
d. That the architectural design, landscaping, control of lighting, and general site development will
result in an attractive and harmonious service area compatible with and not adversely affecting the
19-7 - 1 6
property values of the surrounding neighborhood.
14. Standards for Commercial and Institutional PUD Districts. For proposed commercial PUD Districts:
a. That the economic practicality of the proposed development can be justified.
b. That the proposed development will be adequately served by off-street parking and truck service
facilities.
c. That the locations for entrances and exits have been designed to prevent unnecessary interference
with the safe and efficient movement of traffic on surrounding streets, and that the development
will not create an adverse effect upon the general traffic pattern of the surrounding neighborhood.
d. That the architectural design, landscaping, control of lighting, and general site development will
result in an attractive and harmonious service area compatible with and not adversely affecting the
property values of the surrounding neighborhood, and will be compatible with the Village of
Grafton Comprehensive Plan.
e. That the total average intensity of development within the PUD District will be compatible with
the Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan, elements thereof, and the detailed planning district or
neighborhood unit development plans prepared for the area.
15. Standards for Industrial PUD Districts. For proposed industrial PUD Districts:
a. That the operational character, physical plant arrangement, architectural design of buildings, and
the design recommendations of the Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan will be compatible
with the latest in performance standards and industrial development design and will not result in
adverse effects upon the property values of the surrounding neighborhood.
b. That the proposed development will have adequate provision for off-street parking and truck
service areas and will be adequately served by rail or highway facilities.
c. That the proposed development is properly related to the total transportation
system of the community and will not result in an adverse effect on the safety and efficiency of the
public streets.
d. That the total average intensity of development within the PUD District will be compatible with
the Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan, elements thereof, and the detailed planning district or
neighborhood unit development plans prepared for the area.
16. Standards for Mixed-Use PUD Districts. For mixed-use PUD Districts:
a. That the proposed mixture of uses produces a unified composite that is compatible within itself
which, as a total development entity, is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and
consistent with the standards and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.
b. That the various types of uses conform to the general requirements as hereinbefore set forth,
applicable to projects of such use character.
c. That the total average intensity of development within the PUD District will be compatible with
the Village of Grafton Comprehensive Plan, elements thereof, and the detailed planning district or
neighborhood unit development plans prepared for the area.
17. Additional Standards May be Required to be Met. The Plan Commission may recommend, and the
Village Board may adopt by conditions and restrictions for PUD Planned Unit Developments that specify
permitted uses, set bulk regulations and density standards for lot coverage and dwelling with size and
distribution, yard setbacks and design guidelines. Conditions and restrictions adopted to govern any PUD
19-7 - 1 7
Planned Unit Development may include nonstandard or non-uniform requirements, regulations and
provisions recommended by the Plan commission and approved by the Village Board. Such non-standard
requirements, regulations and provisions shall be designed to ensure proper development and appropriate
operation and maintenance of specific developments on specific sites. (Ord. 005, Series 2004, Part 5)
18. Determination.
a. Village Board Action. The Village Board, after due consideration, may deny the application,
approve the application as submitted, or approve the application subject to additional conditions
and restrictions.
b. Village Board Approval. The Village Board approval of an application for rezoning to the PUD
District shall be based on and include as conditions thereto the building, site, and operational plans
for the development as approved by the Village Board.
c. Subsequent Change or Addition to the Plans or Use. Any subsequent change or addition to the
plans or use shall first be submitted for approval to the Plan Commission and, if in the opinion of
the Plan Commission such change or addition constitutes a major change to the original plan, a
public hearing before the Village Board shall be required and notice thereof be given pursuant to
the provisions of this Division, and said proposed alterations shall be submitted to the Village
Board for approval. The Village Clerk (or other Village Board authorized agent) shall set the date
for the public hearing(s). The Plan Commission shall find that any modification therein, including
modifications in location, design, and number of buildings; roadways; and utilities shall be
considered a major change if such modification:
1) Changes the concept or intent of the approved plan;
2) Increases the gross residential density or intensity of use;
3) Decreases the total area set aside for common open space or deed restricted open space;
4) Changes by more than five (5) percent in the gross floor area for a nonresidential use; or
5) Increases by more than five (5) percent the total ground area covered by buildings or
structures.
19. Expiration of Approved PUD Planned Unit Development District Plans. If the applicant does not
commence construction within an approved PUD District within one (1) year after Village Board approval
of the PUD District plans, or complete construction within three (3) years of the approved PUD District
plans, the approved plans for the PUD District shall be considered null and void. A new PUD District
application and required plans shall be required to be approved by the Village under the procedures set
forth in this Section. The provisions of this Paragraph shall only apply to those PUD Districts approved
after the effective date of this Ordinance.
SECTION 19.07.0210 HISTORIC STRUCTURES AND HISTORIC SITES AND HPO HISTORIC
PRESERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT DESIGNATION AND PROCEDURES
A. Designation of Historic Structures and Historic Sites.
1. Historic Preservation Commission Recommendation to Village Board. The Historic Preservation
Commission may recommend to the Village Board the designation of historic structures and historic sites,
or recission of such designation, after application of the criteria set forth in Chapter 2.35 of the Grafton
Municipal Code. (Ord. 025, Series 2008, Part 8).
19-7 - 1 8
2. Public Hearing and Village Board Action On Historic Structures and Historic Sites. The Village
Board, upon receipt of the recommendation from the Historic Preservation Commission for the designation
of historic structures and historic sites, or the recission of such designation, shall hold a public hearing.
The Village Clerk (or other Village Board authorized agent) shall set the date for the public hearing(s). At
least ten (10) days before such public hearing, the Village Clerk (or other authorized agent) shall notify the
owners of record, as listed in the office of the Village Assessor, who are owners of property in whole or in
part lying immediately adjacent to the boundaries of the property affected. Said notification shall be via
regular mail. The Village Board may hear expert witnesses and shall have the power to subpoena such
witnesses and records as it deems necessary. After the public hearing, the Village Board may designate the
property as either a historic structure, or a historic site, or rescind the designation. No designation shall be
made without the consent of the property owner or property owners of record title. After the designation or
rescission has been made, notification shall be sent to the property owner or owners. Notification shall also
be given to the Village Clerk (or other Village Board authorized agent), Building Inspection Department,
Plan Commission, and the Village Assessor. The Village Board shall cause the designation or rescission of
historic structures and historic sites to be recorded, at the owner’s expense, in the Ozaukee County Register
of Deeds Office. (Ord. 001, Series 2005, part 1)
B. Creation of HPO District. For preservation purposes, the Historic Preservation Commission shall select
geographically defined areas within the Village to be designated by the Village Board as HPO Districts and shall
prepare a historic preservation plan for each such designated area. An HPO District may be designated for any
geographic area of particular historic, architectural or cultural significance to the Village, after application of the
criteria set forth in Chapter 2.35 of the Grafton Municipal Code. Each historic preservation plan prepared for or by
the Historic Preservation Commission for an HPO District shall include a cultural and architectural analysis
supporting the historic significance of the area, the specific guidelines for development, and a statement of
preservation objectives. (Ord. 025, Series 2008, Part 8).
1. Historic Preservation Commission to Recommend Designation of HPO Districts to Village Board.
The Historic Preservation Commission may recommend to the Village Board the designation of HPO
Districts, or recission of such designations, after application of the criteria set forth in Chapter 2.35 of the
Grafton Municipal Code. (Ord. 025, Series 2008, Part 8).
2. Village Board Action on the Designation of HPO Districts by the Historic Preservation Commission.
The Village Board, upon receipt of the recommendations from the Historic Preservation Commission for
the designation of HPO Districts, or the rescission of such designation, shall hold a public hearing. The
Village Clerk (or other Village Board authorized agent) shall set the date for the public hearing(s). Notice
of the time, place, and purpose of the public hearing shall be sent by the Village Clerk (or other Village
Board authorized agent) to the Village Board and the owners of record located with the HPO District, as
listed in the office of the Village Assessor, who are owners of the property within the proposed HPO
District or are situated in whole or in part within two hundred (200) feet of the boundaries of the proposed
HPO District. Said notice is to be sent at least ten (10) days before the date of the public hearing.
Following the public hearing, the Village Board shall either designate or reject the HPO District. No
designation or rescission of a designation of individual properties within the HPO District shall be made
without the consent of the property owner or property owners of record title. Designation of the HPO
District shall constitute adoption of the plan prepared for that HPO District and direct the implementation
of said plan.
C. Interim Control. No Building Permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector for exterior alteration, construction,
demolition, or removal of a nominated historic structure, historic site, or any property or structure within a
nominated HPO District from the date of the meeting of the Historic Preservation Commission at which a
nomination form is first presented until the final disposition of the nomination by the Historic Preservation
Commission and Village Board action unless such alteration, removal or demolition is authorized by formal
resolution of the Village Board as necessary for public health, welfare, or safety. In no event shall the delay due to
determination of final disposition of the nomination for said Building Permit issuance be for more than one hundred
eighty (180) days.
19-7 - 1 9
D. Regulation of Construction, Reconstruction, Alteration and Demolition.
1. Certificate of Appropriateness Required. No owner or person in charge of a historic structure, historic
site or structure within a HPO District shall reconstruct, alter or demolish all or any part of the exterior of
such property or construct any improvement upon such designated property or properties or cause or permit
any such work to be performed upon such property or demolish such property unless a Certificate of
Appropriateness has been granted by the Historic Preservation Commission. Also, unless such Certificate
of Appropriateness has been granted by the Historic Preservation Commission, the Building Inspector shall
not issue a permit for any such work.
2. Certificate of Appropriateness Approval. Upon filing of any application and applicable fee for a
Certificate of Appropriateness with the Historic Preservation Commission, the Historic Preservation
Commission shall approve the application unless:
a. For a designated historic structure or historic site, the proposed work would detrimentally change,
destroy or adversely affect any exterior feature of the improvement or site upon which said work is
to be done;
b. For the construction of a new improvement upon a historic site, or within a HPO District, the
exterior of such improvement would adversely affect or not harmonize with the external
appearance of other neighboring improvements on such site or within the district;
c. For any property in a HPO District, the proposed construction, reconstruction, exterior alteration
or demolition does not conform to the purpose and intent of this section and to the objectives and
design criteria of the historic preservation plan for said HPO District;
d. The building or structure is of such architectural or historical significance that its demolition
would be detrimental to the public interest and contrary to the general welfare of the people of the
Village and state;
e. For a request for the demolition of a deteriorated building or structure, any economic hardship or
difficulty claimed by the owner is self-created or is the result of any failure to maintain the
property in good repair.
3. Consistency with the Character and Features of the Property or the HPO District. If the Historic
Preservation Commission determines that the application for a Certificate of Appropriateness and the
proposed changes are consistent with the character and features of the property or HPO District, it shall
issue the Certificate of Appropriateness. The Historic Preservation Commission shall make this decision
within forty-five (45) days of the filing of the application.
4. Other Permits and Approvals Required. The issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness shall not
relieve the applicant from obtaining other permits and approvals required by the Village. A Building
Permit or other municipal permit shall be invalid if it is obtained without the presentation of the Certificate
of Appropriateness required for the proposed work.
5. Maintenance and Repairs. Ordinary maintenance and repairs may be undertaken without a Certificate of
Appropriateness if the work involves repairs to existing features of a historic structure or site or the
replacement of elements of a structure with pieces identical in appearance and if the work does not change
the exterior appearance of the structure or site and does not require the issuance of a Building Permit.
6. Appeals. In addition, if the Historic Preservation Commission fails to issue a Certificate of
Appropriateness, the Historic Preservation Commission shall, with the cooperation of the applicant, work
with the applicant in an attempt to obtain a Certificate of Appropriateness within the guidelines of this
Ordinance. Should the Historic Preservation Commission fail to issue a Certificate of Appropriateness due
to the failure of the proposal to conform to the guidelines set forth in this Ordinance, the applicant may
appeal such decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals per Section 19.07.0107 of this Ordinance.
19-7 - 2 0
E. Recognition of Historic Structures, Sites and HPO Districts. When a historic structure, site or HPO District has
been properly designated, the Historic Preservation Commission, in cooperation with the property owner, may cause
to be prepared and erected on such property at the Village’s expense, a suitable plaque declaring that such property
is a historic structure, site or HPO District.
SECTION 19.07.0211 PROTEST
In the event of a protest against such district change or amendment to the regulations of this Ordinance, duly signed and
acknowledged by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more of the land immediately adjacent extending one hundred (100)
feet therefrom, or by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more of the land directly opposite thereto extending one hundred
(100) feet from the street frontage of such opposite land, such changes or amendments shall not become effective except by
the favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the full Village Board membership voting on the proposed change.
SECTION 19.07.0212 SUCCESSIVE APPLICATIONS FOR CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS, ZONING
DISTRICT CHANGE, OR AMENDMENT TO THE ZONING REGULATIONS
A. Second Applications Without New Grounds Barred. Whenever any application filed for a Conditional use
Permit, zoning district change, or amendment to the zoning regulations pursuant to this Ordinance has been finally
denied on its merits, a second application seeking essentially the same relief, whether or not in the same form or on
the same theory, shall not be brought unless in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, Village Board, or Plan
Commission before which it is brought there is substantial new evidence available or a mistake of law or fact
significantly affected the prior denial.
B. New Grounds to Be Stated. Any such second application shall include a detailed statement of the grounds
justifying consideration of such application.
C. Summary Denial With or Without Hearing. Any such second application may be denied by the Zoning
Administrator summarily, and without hearing, on a finding that no grounds appear that warrant a new hearing. In
any case where such application is set for hearing, the applicant shall be required to establish grounds warranting
reconsideration of the merits of its application before being allowed to offer any evidence on the merits. Unless
such grounds are established, the application may be summarily dismissed for such failure unless approved by a
two-thirds (2/3) vote of the Plan Commission.
D. Exception. Whether or not new grounds are stated, any such second application filed more than eighteen (18)
months after the final denial of a prior application shall be heard on the merits. The applicant shall, however, be
required to place in the record all evidence available concerning changes of conditions or new facts that have
developed since the denial of the first application. Without such evidence, it shall be presumed that no new facts
exist to support the new petition that did not exist at the time of the denial of the first application.
E. Appeal of Decisions Made to Dismiss Applications. Decisions made to dismiss applications based upon this
Section may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
DIVISION 19.07.0300 ZONING ADMINISTRATIVE FEES
SECTION 19.07.0301 ADMINISTRATIVE FEES
As a condition of the review of any application for any type of permit as required under the provisions of this Ordinance, the
applicant shall pay to the Village Finance Director of the Village of Grafton all fees as required by the Village of Grafton
"Fee Schedule," and at the times specified by Title 3 "Revenues and Finances" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code,
before being entitled to any approvals or permits. No application filed pursuant to this Ordinance shall be considered
complete unless and until all fees due pursuant to this Ordinance have been paid. Every approval granted and every permit
issued pursuant to this Ordinance, whether or not expressly so conditioned, shall be deemed to be conditioned upon payment
of the required fees. The failure to pay any such fee fully when due shall be grounds for the Village of Grafton to refuse to
process, or to continue to process, an application and to deny or revoke any permit or approval sought or issued with respect
to the land or development to which the unpaid fee(s) relate.
19-7 - 2 1
DIVISION 19.07.0400 VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES, AND REMEDIES
SECTION 19.07.0401 VIOLATIONS
A. Unlawful to Use or Improve Any Structure or Land, or to Use Water or Air in Violation of Any Provisions of
This Ordinance. It shall be unlawful to use or improve any structure or land, or to use water or air in violation of
any provisions of this Ordinance. In case of violation, the Village Board, the Zoning Administrator, the Village
Attorney, the Plan Commission or any property owner who would be specifically damaged by such violation, may
begin appropriate action or proceeding to enjoin a violation of this Ordinance or cause a structure to be vacated or
removed.
B. Actions and Proceedings to Enjoin Violations. The Village of Grafton may institute appropriate action or
proceedings to enjoin violations of this Ordinance or the applicable Wisconsin Statutes or Wisconsin Administrative
Code.
C. Violations of Approved Plans or Conditions of Plan Approval. Any violation of a Site Plan, Landscape Plan,
Natural Resource Protection Plan, Architectural Plan, Lighting Plan, Grading Plan, Stormwater Management Plan,
Utility Plan, or other plans approved by the Village under division 19.06.0100, shall be considered a violation of this
ordinance. Any violation of conditions of Village approval of said plans, a Conditional Use Permit, a Variance or a
Planned Unit Development shall also be considered a violation of this Ordinance. All such violations to plans and
conditions may be subject to the penalties and remedies specified in Section 19.07.0402. (Ord. 010, Series 2002,
Part 20)
SECTION 19.07.0402 PENALTIES AND REMEDIES
A. Double Fee. A double fee may be charged by the Zoning Administrator if work is started before a permit is applied
for and issued. Such double fee shall not release the applicant from full compliance with this Ordinance nor from
prosecution for violation of this Ordinance.
B. Remedial Action. Whenever an order of the Zoning Administrator has not been complied with within thirty (30)
days after written notice has been mailed to the owner, resident agent, or occupant of the premises, the Village
Board, the Zoning Administrator, the Building Inspector, or the Village Attorney may institute appropriate legal
action or proceedings to prohibit such owner, agent, or occupant from using such structure, land, or water.
C. Forfeiture and Imprisonment. Any person, firm, or corporation who violates or fails to comply with the
provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than two-hundred dollars ($200.00) nor
more than one thousand ($1,000) dollars plus the costs of prosecution for each offense. (Ord. 032, Series 2000)
D. Separate Offense. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
E. Injunctive Relief. In addition to the above described fines, the Village Board or its agent shall have the power to
institute appropriate action for injunctive relief to prevent persons, firms, or corporations from acting in violation of
the provision of this Ordinance.
19- 8-1
PART 8: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
DIVISION 19.08.0100 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION 19.08.0101 ESTABLISHMENT
There is hereby established a Zoning Board of Appeals in the Village of Grafton in accordance with Section
62.23(7)(e) of the Wisconsin State Statutes for hearing appeals and applications, and granting variations and
exceptions to the provisions of this Ordinance in harmony with the purpose and intent of the Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 19.08.0102 MEMBERSHIP
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the Village President and confirmed by
the Village Board. In addition:
A. Terms. Terms of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be staggered three (3) year periods.
B. Chairman. The Chairman of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be designated by the Village President.
C. Alternate Members. Two (2) alternate members of the Zoning Board of Appeals may be appointed by the
Village President for a term of three (3) years and shall act only when a regular member, or more than one
(1) regular member, is absent or refused to vote because of conflict of interest. The Village President shall
designate one (1) of the alternate members as first alternate and the other as second alternate. The first
alternate shall act, with full power, only when a member of the Zoning Board of Appeals is absent or
refuses to vote because of conflict of interest. The second alternate shall act, with full power, only when
the first alternate member of the Zoning Board of Appeals is absent or refuses to vote because of conflict of
interest.
D. Zoning Administrator and Building Inspector. The Zoning Administrator shall attend, and the Building
Inspector may attend, all meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals for providing technical assistance when
requested by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
E. Official Oaths. Official Oaths shall be taken by all members of the Zoning Board of Appeals according to
Section 19.01 of the Wisconsin Statutes within ten (10) days of receiving notice of their appointment.
F. Vacancies. Vacancies of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same
manner as appointments for a full term.
G. Removal. Members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be removable by the Village President for cause
upon written charges and after public hearing. The provisions for removal shall also apply to alternate
members of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
SECTION 19.08.0103 ORGANIZATION
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall organize and adopt rules of procedure for its own government according to the
provisions of this Ordinance.
A. Meetings. Meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at the scheduled time and shall be open
to the public.
19- 8-2
B. Minutes. Minutes of the proceedings of the Zoning Board of Appeals and a record of all actions shall be
kept by the Village Clerk, showing the vote of each member upon every question, the reasons for the Zoning Board
of Appeals' determination, and its findings of facts. These records shall be immediately filed in the office
of the Zoning Board of Appeals and shall be a public record.
C. Recording Secretary. The recording secretary shall be the Zoning Administrator or the Building
Inspector.
SECTION 19.08.0104 POWERS
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
A. Errors. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Zoning Administrator or the Building Inspector.
B. Variances and Minor Variances. To hear and grant applications for variances (except variances relating
to land divisions) pursuant to the provisions of Section 62.23(3) of the Wisconsin Statutes as amended from
time to time and to hear and grant applications for minor variances pursuant to this Division of this
Ordinance. Use variances are not permitted and shall not be granted.
C. Interpretations. To hear and decide applications for interpretation of the zoning regulations and the
boundaries of the zoning districts after the Plan Commission has made a review and recommendation.
D. Substitutions. To hear and grant applications for substitution of more restrictive nonconforming uses for
existing nonconforming uses provided no structural alterations are to be made and the Plan Commission
has made a review and recommendation. Whenever the Zoning Board of Appeals permits such a
substitution, the use may not thereafter be changed without application.
E. Unclassified Uses. To hear and grant applications for unclassified and unspecified uses if such uses are
similar in character to the principal uses permitted in the district and the Plan Commission has made a
review and recommendation.
F. Permits. The Zoning Board of Appeals may reverse, affirm wholly or partly, modify the requirements
appealed from, and may issue or direct the issue of a permit.
G. Assistance. The Zoning Board of Appeals may request assistance from other Village officers, departments,
commissions, and boards.
H. Oaths. The Chairman of the Zoning Board of Appeals may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses.
I. Variances to the Subdivision, Land Division, and Platting Provisions of Title 18 "Subdivisions" of the
Village of Grafton Municipal Code. The granting of variances to the land division and platting related
issues of Title 18 "Subdivisions" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code shall be the sole charge of the
Plan Commission [See State ex rel. Westbrook v. City of New Berlin, 120 Wis.2d 256, 354 N.W.2d 206 (Ct.
App. 1984)].
SECTION 19.08.0105 APPEALS AND APPLICATIONS
A. General Application Requirements. Appeals from the decision of the Zoning Administrator and the
Building Inspector concerning the literal enforcement of this Ordinance may be made by any person
aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the Village. Such appeals shall be filed with
the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Appeals within thirty (30) days after the date of written notice of the
decision or order of the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector. Applications may be made by the
19- 8-3
owner or lessee of the structure, land, or water to be affected anytime and shall be filed with the Secretary.
Such appeals and application shall include that information and data as required under Section 19.07.0106
of this Ordinance.
B. Applications Relating to Floodplain-Related Mapping Disputes. See the provisions of Title 21
"Floodplain Zoning" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code.
C. Applications Relating to Shoreland Wetland Related Mapping Disputes. See the provisions of Title 22
"Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code.
SECTION 19.08.0106 VARIANCES
A. Purpose. The Zoning Board of Appeals, after a public hearing, may determine and vary the regulations of
this Ordinance in harmony with their general purpose and intent, only in the specific instances hereinafter
set forth, where the Zoning Board of Appeals makes findings of fact according to the standards hereinafter
prescribed, and further finds that there are practical difficulties or particular hardships in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of the regulations of this Ordinance.
B. Application and Notice of Hearing.
1. Variance (except Minor Variances). An application for a variance shall be filed in writing with
the Zoning Administrator. The application shall contain such information as set forth in Section
19.07.0107 of this Ordinance. Before decisions on such petitions, the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall hold a public hearing thereon pursuant to the requirements set forth under Section
19.08.0208 of this Ordinance.
2. Minor Variances. Appeals from the decision of the Zoning Administrator and the Building
Inspector concerning the literal enforcement of this Ordinance regarding the accessory buildings
of one hundred fifty (150) square feet or less in area, decks and fences may be made by the owner
of the structure or land to be affected. Such appeals may be filed with the Secretary within thirty
(30) days after the date of written notice of the decision or order of the Zoning Administrator or
Building Inspector, or if such decision or order of the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector
has been made before the effective date of this ordinance and no appeal has been taken therefrom,
then sixty (60) days from the effective date of this ordinance, whichever date occurs later.
Applications for a minor variance may be made by the owner of the structure or land to be affected
anytime and shall be filed with the Secretary. Before decisions on such petitions, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing thereon pursuant to the requirements set forth under
Section 19.08.0208 of this Ordinance.
C. Findings and Factors.
1. Variances (except Minor Variances). No variance to the provisions of this Ordinance (except as
otherwise provided) shall be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals unless it finds that if the
variance is granted it would not be contrary to the public interest; a literal enforcement of the
Ordinance provisions would result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship due to special
conditions; the spirit of the Ordinance is preserved; public safety and welfare are secured and
substantial justice done. In reviewing the application and evidence relating to a variance the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider the findings statements set forth in Section 19.08.0209 of
this Ordinance.
2. Minor Variances. No minor variances to the provisions of this ordinance or the building code
shall be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals unless it finds by a preponderance of the
evidence, considering the interests of the abutting and opposite property owners and the public
that there exist conditions under which a literal enforcement of the building codes and zoning
regulations of this Ordinance as to the subject structure would result in a substantial burden to the
19- 8-4
appellant or applicant and no material impact upon the community, so that the spirit and purpose of such
regulations be observed and the safety, welfare and health of the public and the abutting and opposite property
owners be protected. In reviewing the application and evidence relating to a minor variance, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider the following factors and indicate its findings in the
minutes of the proceedings:
a. The change sought by the minor variation shall be consistent with the intent of the zoning
regulations for the district in which the property is located;
b. Minor variances shall not create substantial detriment to or materially impair adjacent
property;
c. The Zoning Board of Appeals may consider such other factors that appear relevant to the
grant or denial of the minor variance.
D. Authorized Variances. Variances from the regulations of this Ordinance shall be granted by the Zoning
Board of Appeals only according to the standards established in this Section, and may be granted only in
the following instances and in no others:
1. To permit any yard or setback less than the yard or setback required by the applicable regulations
(except as limited by Section 19.02.0203(C) of this Ordinance for corner lot setbacks.);
2. To permit the use of a lot or lots for a use otherwise prohibited solely because of insufficient area
or width of the lot or lots, but in no event shall the respective area and width of the lot or lots be
less than ninety (90) percent of the required area and width (except as limited by Section
19.02.0205(B) of this Ordinance.);
3. To permit the same off-street parking facility to qualify as required facilities for two (2) or more
uses, provided the substantial use of such facility by each user does not take place at
approximately the same hours of the same days of the week;
4. To reduce the applicable off-street parking or loading facilities required by not more than one (1)
parking space or loading space or twenty (20) percent of the applicable regulations, whichever
number is greater;
5. To increase by not more than twenty five (25) percent the maximum distance that required parking
spaces are permitted to be located from the use served;
6. To increase by not more than ten (10) percent the maximum gross floor area of any use so limited
by the applicable regulations;
7. To exceed any of the authorized variations allowed under this Section, when a lot of record or a
zoning lot, vacant or legally used on the effective date of this Ordinance, is by reason of the
exercise of the right of eminent domain by any authorized governmental body or by reason of a
nonconveyance under threat of an eminent domain proceeding reduced in size so that the
remainder of said lot of record or zoning lot or structure of said lot does not conform with one (1)
or more of the regulations of the district in which said lot of record or zoning lot or structure is
located.
SECTION 19.08.0107 INTERPRETATIONS
A. General. Appeals from interpretations rendered by the Zoning Administrator may be taken to the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
B. Standards for Use Interpretations. The following standards shall govern both the Zoning Administrator
19- 8-5
and the Zoning Board of Appeals on appeals from the Zoning Administrator in issuing use interpretations:
1. No use interpretation shall be given with respect to the residential zoning districts.
2. Any use defined in either Divisions 19.03.0600 or 19.09.0100 of this Ordinance shall be
interpreted as therein defined.
3. No use interpretation shall permit a use listed as a permitted use or a conditional use in any district
to be established in any zoning district in which such use is not so listed.
4. No use interpretation shall permit any use in any district unless evidence shall be presented that
shows that it will comply with each use limitation established for that particular district.
5. No use interpretation shall permit any use in a particular district unless such use is substantially
similar to other uses permitted in such district and is more similar to such other uses than to uses
permitted or specially permitted in a more restrictive district.
6. If the proposed use is most similar to a use permitted only as a conditional use in the district in
which it is proposed to be located, then any use interpretation permitting such use shall be
conditioned upon the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit for such use pursuant to Divisions
19.03.0700 and 19.09.0100 of this Ordinance.
7. No use interpretation shall permit the establishment of any use that would be inconsistent with the
district intent statement of the district in question.
8. Subject to the foregoing conditions and limitation, as set forth in this Section, in rendering use
interpretations the Zoning Administrator and Zoning Board of Appeals shall be guided by the SIC
use classification system and methodology described herein.
9. No interpretation shall have the effect of amending, abrogating, or waiving any other standard or
requirement established by this Ordinance.
C. Effect of Favorable Use Interpretations. No use interpretation finding a particular use to be permitted or
specially permitted in a particular district shall authorize the establishment of such use nor the
development, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or moving of any building or structure, but shall
merely authorize the preparation, filing, and processing of applications for any permits and approvals that
may be required by the codes and ordinances of the Village of Grafton including, but not limited to Zoning
Permit, Conditional Use Permit, Building Permit, or any other required permit.
D. Limitations on Favorable Use Interpretations. Limitations on favorable use interpretations are as
follows:
1. Subject to an extension of time granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals, no use interpretation
finding a particular use to be permitted or specially permitted in a particular district shall be valid
for a period longer than six (6) months from the date of issue unless a Building Permit is issued
and construction is actually begun within the six (6) month period and is thereafter diligently
pursued to completion, or a Zoning Permit or Conditional Use Permit is obtained and a use
commenced within that period.
2. A use interpretation finding a particular use to be permitted or specially permitted in a particular
district shall be deemed to authorize only the particular use for which it was issued, and such
permit shall not be deemed to authorize any allegedly similar use for which a separate use
interpretation has not been issued. Such permit shall automatically expire and cease to be of any
force or effect if the particular use for which it was issued shall, for any reason, be discontinued
for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months or more.
19- 8-6
E. Floodplain-Related Mapping Interpretations and/or Disputes. See the provisions of Title 21
"Floodplain Zoning" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code.
F. Shoreland-Wetland Related Mapping Interpretations and/or Disputes. See the provisions of Title 22
"Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code.
SECTION 19.08.0108 PUBLIC HEARINGS
A. General. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing upon each variance giving notice of
the date, time, place of such hearing, and the matter to be presented at the hearing by publication in the
Village of a Class 2 notice under Chapter 985 of the Wisconsin Statutes. Notice of the public hearing shall
be given to the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector and mailed to all parties-in-interest at least ten
(10) days before the hearing. Parties-in-interest shall be defined as the petitioner, the clerk of any
municipality within one thousand (1,000) feet of any lands included in the petition, and the owners of all
lands included in the petition and all lands lying within one hundred (100) feet of lands included in the
petition. The Zoning Administrator (or other Village Board authorized agent) shall set the date for the
public hearing(s). At the hearing the appellant or applicant may appear in person, by agent, or by attorney.
B. Conduct of Public Hearing. The Chairman of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall place all witnesses
under oath. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear all relevant evidence presented for and against the
application. The Chairman of the Zoning Board of Appeals may rule on exceptions to evidence and permit
examination of witnesses.
SECTION 19.08.0109 FINDINGS
No variance to the provisions of this Ordinance shall be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals unless it finds
beyond a reasonable doubt that all the following facts and conditions exist and so indicates in the minutes of its
proceedings.
A. Preservation of Intent. No variance shall be granted that is not consistent with the purpose and intent of
the regulations for the district in which the development is located. No variance shall permit a use in any
district that is not a stated permitted use, accessory use, or conditional use in that particular district.
B. Exceptional Circumstances. There must be exceptional, extraordinary, or unusual circumstances or
conditions applying to the lot or parcel, structure, use, or intended use that do not apply generally to other
properties or uses in the same district and the granting of the variance would not be of so general or
recurrent nature as to suggest that the Zoning Ordinance should be changed.
C. Economic Hardship and Self-Imposed Hardship Not Grounds for Variance. No variance shall be
granted solely based on economic gain or loss. Self-imposed hardships shall not be considered as grounds
for the granting of the variance.
D. Preservation of Property Rights. The variance must be necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of
substantial property rights possessed by other properties in the same district and same vicinity.
E. Absence of Detriment. No variance shall be granted that will create substantial detriment to adjacent
property and will materially impair or be contrary to the purpose and spirit of this Ordinance or the public
interest.
F. Additional Requirements in Floodland Districts. See the provisions of Title 21 "Floodplain Zoning" of
the Village of Grafton Municipal Code.
19- 8-7
G. Additional Requirements in Shoreland-Wetland Districts. See the provisions of Title 22 "Shoreland-
Wetland Zoning" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code.
SECTION 19.08.0110 DECISION
A. Variances (except Minor Variances). The Zoning Board of Appeals shall decide all appeals and
applications within thirty (30) days after the final hearing and shall transmit a signed copy of the Zoning
Board of Appeals' decision to the appellant or applicant, Zoning Administrator, and Building Inspector.
The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be necessary to grant a
variation.
1. Conditions. Conditions may be placed upon any Zoning Permit ordered or authorized by the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
2. Expiration of Variances, Substitutions, and Permits. Variances, substitutions, or use permits
granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall expire within six (6) months unless substantial work
has commenced pursuant to such grant.
B. Minor Variances. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall decide all minor variances within thirty (30) days
after the final hearing. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
necessary to grant a minor variance. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall transmit a signed copy of the
Zoning Board of Appeals' decision to the appellant or applicant, and Zoning Administrator and file a copy
of same with the office of the Building Inspector for maintenance as a permanent record.
1. Conditions. Conditions may be placed upon any grant of a minor variance ordered or authorized
by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
2. Expiration of Minor Variance. Any minor variances granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall expire within six (6) months unless substantial work has commenced pursuant to such grant.
3. Structural Repairs or Alterations. Any grant of a minor variance by the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall state that the total structural repairs or alterations to the subject structure shall not,
from the date of the decision and during the structure's life, exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the
value of the structure and that no additions shall be made to the structure.
SECTION 19.08.0111 REVIEW BY COURT OF RECORD
Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may present to the court of record
a petition duly verified setting forth that such decision is illegal and specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such
petition shall be presented to the court within thirty (30) days after the filing of the decision in the office of the
Zoning Administrator.
SECTION 19.08.0112 COMPENSATION
The members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall receive such compensation as the Village Board shall from time
to time designate.
19- 9-0
9Chapter 19
19- 9-1
PART 9: DEFINITIONS
DIVISION 19.09.0100 DEFINITIONS
SECTION 19.09.0101 GENERAL DEFINITIONS
The language set forth in the text of this Ordinance shall be interpreted according to the following rules of
construction:
A. Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular;
B. Tense. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future the present;
C. Shall and May. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive;
D. Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders;
E. Defined Words and Terms. Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this
Ordinance, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in the definition thereof. Any word appearing in
parentheses between a word and its definition herein, shall be construed in the same sense as that word.
F. Words Not Defined Herein. Any words not defined in this Division shall be presumed to have their
customary dictionary definitions.
G. Words "this Ordinance." Shall mean this Zoning Ordinance of the Village of Grafton, Ozaukee County,
Wisconsin.
SECTION 19.09.0102 ABBREVIATIONS AND SYMBOLS
The following abbreviations are used in this Ordinance and are intended to have the following meanings:
ac acre(s)
ADT average daily traffic
BC building coverage
DBH diameter at breast height for a tree
DNR Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
D.U. dwelling unit
FEMA Federal Emergency Management Agency
ft. foot/feet
GFAR gross floor area ratio
Hz hertz
ISR impervious surface ratio
GD gross density
LSR landscape surface ratio
max. maximum
min. minimum
ND net density
NFAR net floor area ratio
OSR open space ratio
SEWRPC Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission
s.f. square foot/square feet
19- 9-2
SIC Standard Industrial Classification
sq.ft. square feet
= equal
< is less than
?? is less than or equal to
> is greater than
?? is greater than or equal to
SECTION 19.09.0103 SPECIFIC WORDS AND PHRASES
A Zones. Areas of potential flooding shown on the Village's "Flood Insurance Rate Maps" which would be
inundated by the regional flood as defined herein. These numbers may be numbered as A0, A1 to A99, or be
unnumbered A Zones. The A Zones may or may not reflect flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for
a given area.
Abandonment. An action to give up one's rights or interests in property.
Abutting. Having a common border with, or being separated from such common border by an alley or easement,
other than publicly dedicated and approved rights-of-way.
Access. A means of vehicular or nonvehicular approach or entry to or exit from property, a street, or highway.
Access, Dryland. See definition in Title 21 "Floodplain Zoning" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code as
amended.
Access, Secondary. A means of vehicular or nonvehicular approach or entry to or exit from property from other
than a public street or highway (such as an alley). This is not necessarily meant to include a second primary access
that might be required for developments.
Accessory Structure or Use. An "accessory structure or use" is one which:
a. Is subordinate to and serves a principal structure or principal use;
b. Is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal structure or principal use served;
c. Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants of the principal structure or
principal use served;
d. Is on the same zoning lot as the principal structure or principal use served; and
e. Is not established prior to the establishment of the principal structure or principal use served.
An "accessory use" includes, but is not limited to, the following:
a. A child's playhouse, garden house, or private greenhouse;
b. A garage, shed, or building for domestic storage;
c. Incinerators incidental to residential use meeting Wisconsin Administrative Code standards;
d. Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock on the same lot or parcel with any retail service
or business use, unless such storage is excluded by the district regulations;
e. Storage of goods used in or produced by manufacturing activities on the same lot or parcel of
ground with such activities, unless such storage is excluded by the district regulations;
19- 9-3
f. Off-street motor car parking areas, and loading and unloading facilities;
g. Carports;
h. Signs (other than advertising signs), in conformity with the provisions of an Ordinance known as
the Sign Ordinance, heretofore adopted by the Village of Grafton and as amended from time to
time;
I. Public utility facilities--telephone, electric, gas, water, and sewer lines, their supports and
incidental equipment;
j. Decks when used as a patio, porch, or platform without any form of enclosing wall or roof
structure.
Acreage. In the case of plats, any tract or parcel of land having an area of one (1) acres or more, which has not
heretofore been subdivided or platted.
Acreage, Gross. Ground area including all portions for proposed and existing streets within a development,
Subdivision, Certified Survey Map, or Condominium.
Acreage, Net. The remaining ground area after deleting all portions for proposed and existing streets within a
development, Subdivision, Certified Survey Map, or Condominium.
Adjacent. Nearby, but not necessarily touching or abutting.
ADT. Average daily traffic. The average total number of vehicles traversing a street on a typical day.
Agent, Authorized. A person or firm duly authorized by the property owner to submit applications on his, her,
their, or its behalf.
Agriculture. All of the growing of crops in the open and the raising and feeding of livestock and poultry; including
farming, farm buildings, and farm dwellings; truck gardens; flower gardens; apiaries; aviaries; mushroom growing;
nurseries; orchards; forestry; dairying; greenhouses; and commercial vegetables. Specific agricultural uses are
further defined in Section 19.03.0603 of this Ordinance.
Airport. Any area of land or water which is used, or intended for use, for the landing and takeoff of aircraft; and
any appurtenant areas which are used or intended for use as airport buildings or other airport structures or right-ofway,
with all airport buildings and structures located thereon.
Alley. A public way, not more than thirty (30) feet wide, which affords only a secondary means of access to
abutting property.
Alteration, Structural. Any change which would tend to prolong the life of the supporting members of a building
or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders.
Antenna. A device designed to receive or send broadcasts either as over the air signals from transmitters, including
fixed television or radio signals, signals from land-based wireless telecommunications systems (including, but not
limited to, wireless telephone service providers such as cellular, personal communications service, enhanced
specialized mobile radio, etc.), and signals to or from earth-orbiting communications satellites.
Antenna, Satellite. Any antenna designed to send or receive broadcasts relayed by signals to or from earth-orbiting
communications satellites.
19- 9-4
Apartment. A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure, which is arranged, designed, used, or intended
to be used, as a single housekeeping unit. Complete kitchen and bathroom facilities, permanently installed, must
always be included for each apartment.
Architectural Plans. (See Division 19.06.0400 of this Ordinance.)
Assembly. When used in describing an industrial operation, the fitting or joining of parts of a mechanism by means
of fasteners, nuts and bolts, screws, glue, welding or other similar technique. Assembly shall not include the
construction, stamping, or reshaping of any component parts.
Athletic Field. (See definition of "Playfields.")
Attic. That part of a building that is immediately below and wholly or partly within the roof framing.
Auditorium. A room, hall, or building assigned to the gathering of people as an audience, to hear lectures, plays, or
other presentations.
Auto Court. (See definition of "Hotel-Inn.")
Automated Teller Machine (ATM). An electronic information processing device that accepts or dispenses cash
money in connection with a credit, deposit, or convenience account. An automated teller machine does not include a
device used primarily to facilitate check guarantees or check authorizations, used in connection with the acceptance
or dispensing of cash on a person-to-person basis such as by a store cashier, or used in payment for goods and/or
services.
Automobile Laundry. A building or portion thereof, where automobiles are washed with the use of a mechanical
conveyor and blower or steam-cleaning device.
Automobile Lot, New. A zoning lot on which new cars, trailers, or trucks are displayed in the open for sale or
trade.
Automobile Lot, Used. A zoning lot on which used cars, trailers, or trucks are displayed in the open for sale or
trade.
Automobile Repair, Major. Engine rebuilding or major reconditioning of worn or damaged motor vehicles or
trailers; collision service, including body frame or fender straightening or repair; and painting of vehicles.
Automobile Repair, Minor. Incidental repairs, replacement of parts, and motor service to automobiles but not
including any operations specified under Automobile Repair, Major.
Automobile Sales Area. An open area, other than a street, used for the display or sale of new or used automobiles,
and where no repair work is done except minor incidental repair of automobiles to be displayed and sold on the
premises.
Automobile Service Station. A place where gasoline, stored only in underground tanks; kerosene; lubricating oil;
or grease for operation of automobiles are offered for sale directly to the public, on the premises, and including
minor accessories and servicing of automobiles; but not including major automobile repairs; and including washing
of automobiles where no chain conveyor, blower, or steam-cleaning device is employed. When the dispensing, sale,
or offering for sale of motor fuels or oil is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the premises shall be
classified as a public garage. Automobile service stations shall not include sales, rental, or storage of automobiles or
trailers (new or used).
Automobile Wrecking Yard. Any place where two (2) or more motor vehicles, not in running condition, or parts
thereof, are stored in the open and are not being restored to operation; or any land, building, or structure used for
wrecking or storing of such motor vehicles or parts thereof, and including any used farm vehicles or farm
machinery, or parts thereof, stored in the open and not being restored to operating condition; and including the
19- 9-5
commercial salvaging of any other goods, vehicles, or merchandise stored in the open. The open storage of any type
of mechanical equipment from which parts can be salvaged shall be classified as salvaging.
Awning. A roof-like cover, temporary in nature, which projects from the wall of a building and overhangs the wall
or building.
Basement. A story wholly underground; or a story of a building, the floor line of which is below lot grade and the
ceiling of which is not more than one (1) foot above lot grade; the lot grade being the front center of the garage floor
elevation set at time of building permit, or the street centerline, whichever is the highest elevation.
Basement, Half. That story of the building, the floor line of which is below lot grade and the ceiling of which is
greater than one (1) foot above lot grade, with an exterior exposure to provide for living area with safe egress, as
determined by the building code. The lot grade shall be the front center of the garage floor elevation set at time of
building permit, or the street centerline, whichever is the highest elevation. If any story conforms to the definition
of "Living Area, First Floor," or "Basement," that story shall never be considered a half basement. For the purposes
of height measurement, a half basement shall be counted as a story where more than one-half (0.5) of the height is
above the average level of the abutting ground elevation.
Basin, Detention. A manmade or natural depression below the surrounding grade level designed to collect surface
and subsurface water so that it might impede the water flow and to gradually release the same at a rate not greater
than that before the development of the property, into natural or manmade outlets (i.e., the storm sewer system or
stream).
Basin, Retention. A manmade or natural body of water of a depth of not less than three (3) feet, designed to
contain water at all times, the level of which will be increased from the flow into it of surface and subsurface water,
collected therein and released gradually into natural or manmade outlets.
Bed and Breakfast. A dwelling, or portion thereof, that contains quest rooms (not exceeding six such guest rooms)
where short-term lodging, with or without meals, is provided for compensation.
Bedroom. Any room other than a living room, family room, dining room, kitchen, bathroom, closets, or utility
room, for the purpose of this Ordinance, shall be considered a bedroom. Dens, studies, etc. with or without closets
and similar areas which may be used as bedrooms shall be counted as bedrooms for the purposes of this Ordinance.
Berth, Loading. (See definition of "Loading and Unloading Space, Off-Street.")
Boat. Every description of watercraft used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water, except a
seaplane on the water and a fishing raft.
Boathouse. Any structure designed for protecting or storing of boats used with a residence for noncommercial
purposes, and located on the same lot as the principal building and not for human habitation.
Buffer. (See definition of "Bufferyard.")
Buffer, Shore. All of that land area located within seventy-five (75) feet inland of the ordinary high water mark of
all ponds, streams, lakes, wetlands, and navigable waters and parallel to that ordinary high water mark.
Bufferyard. An area of land within the boundaries of a lot or site, generally adjacent to and parallel with the
property line, either consisting of natural existing vegetation or using trees, shrubs, fences, walls, and/or earthen
berms, or other visual and/or sound barriers designed to limit continuously the view and/or sound from the lot, site,
or land use to adjacent lots, sites, or land uses. Bufferyards are typically defined by a delineated easement
graphically indicated on the face of the Site Plan, Landscape Plan, Certified Survey Map, Subdivision Plat, or
Condominium Plat. Bufferyards may be required between zoning districts and/or land uses to eliminate or minimize
conflicts between them as set forth in Division 19.05.0300 of this Ordinance. (Also see Section 19.05.0303 "Credit
for Existing Plant Materials" for information on how existing bufferyard area vegetation counts towards required
bufferyards.)
19- 9-6
Bufferyard Intensity Factor. The relative sight screening value of a bufferyard as measured by levels of intensity
of bufferyard plant foliage or other characteristics of the bufferyard including fencing, earthen berms, or walls.
Buildable Area. The space remaining on a zoning lot after the minimum space requirements of this Ordinance have
been complied with.
Building Area. (See definition of "Floor Area, Gross.")
Building Code. The Village of Grafton Building Code.
Building, Completely Enclosed. A building separated on all sides from the adjacent open space, or from other
buildings or other structures, by a permanent roof and by exterior walls, pierced only by windows and normal
entrance or exit doors.
Building, Detached. A building surrounded by open space on the same zoning lot.
Building Height. The vertical distance measured from the curb level or its equivalent established grade opposite
the middle of the front of the building to the highest point of the roof for a flat or slant roof, to the deck line of a
mansard roof; and to the mean height level between eaves and ridge of a gable, or hip, or gambrel roof; provided
that where buildings are set back from the street line, the height of the building may be measured from the average
elevation of the finished grade at the front of the building.
Building Inspector. The Building Inspector of the Village of Grafton, Ozaukee County, Wisconsin.
Building Line. The line nearest the front of and across a zoning lot, establishing the minimum setback to be
provided between the front line of a building or structure and the street right-of-way line.
Building, Accessory. (See definition of Accessory Structure or Use.")
Building, Permanent. Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed to the land and entirely
separated on all sides from any other structure by space or by walls in which there are no connecting doors,
windows, or openings; and which is designed or intended for the shelter, enclosure or protection of persons, animals,
or chattels. Any structures with interior areas not normally accessible for human use, such as gas holders, oil tanks,
water tanks, grain elevators, coal bunkers, oil cracking towers, and other similar structures, are not considered as
permanent buildings.
Building, Principal. A non-accessory building in which the principal use of the zoning lot on which it is located is
conducted.
Building, Temporary. A structure designed, built, created, or occupied for short and/or intermittent periods of time
not to exceed one (1) year, including tents, inflatable structures, lunch wagons, dining cars, trailers, and other roofed
structures on wheels or other supports used for residential, business, mercantile, storage, commercial, industrial,
institutional, assembly, educational, or recreational purposes; or for the enclosure or screening of goods or property;
or for the display of signs and advertising. For the purpose of this definition, "roof" shall include an awning or other
similar covering whether or not it is permanent in nature.
Bulk. Term used to indicate the size, height, area, density, intensity, and location of structures. (See Part 3 of this
Ordinance.)
Business. An occupation, employment, or enterprise which occupies time, attention, labor, and materials, or in
which merchandise is exhibited or sold, or where services are offered other than home occupations.
Caliper. A measurement of the diameter of a tree taken six (6) inches from above the ground level for trees up to
and including four (4) inch caliper sizes, and twelve (12) inches above the ground level for larger sizes.
19- 9-7
Camp. Any land, including structures, used for assembly or temporary occupancy by individuals and providing
outdoor recreational facilities.
Camp, Recreational. An establishment consisting of a permanent building or group of permanent buildings used
periodically by an association of persons where seasonal accommodations for recreational purposes are provided
only to members of such association and not to anyone who may apply.
Carport. A roofed-over area attached to the principal building for vehicle storage, which may be open on a
minimum of two (2) sides.
Car Wash. (See definition of "Automobile Laundry.")
Certificate of Appropriateness. The certificate issued by the Historic Preservation Commission approving exterior
alteration, rehabilitation, construction, reconstruction or demolition of a historic structure, historic site or any
improvement in a historic district.
Certified Survey Map. A plat or map prepared for a minor land division as defined, prepared, and recorded as set
forth in Section 236.34 of the Wisconsin Statutes. (Also see definition for "Minor Land Division.")
Channel. See definition in Title 21 "Floodplain Zoning" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code as amended.
Class 2 Notice. Publication of a public hearing notice under the provisions of Chapter 985 of the Wisconsin
Statutes in a newspaper of circulation in the affected areas. Publication is required on two (2) consecutive weeks,
the last at least seven (7) days before the public hearing.
Clinic. (See definition of "Medical Health Center.")
Club, Private. A nonprofit association of persons, who are bona fide members paying annual dues, which owns,
hires, or leases a building or portion thereof, the use of such premises being restricted to members and their guests.
It shall be permissible to serve food and meals on such premises if adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities
are available. The sale of alcoholic beverages to members and their guests shall be allowed with the operation of a
dining room for the purpose of serving food and meals, though such beverages may be served in a separate room or
rooms, and if such sale of alcoholic beverages meets the applicable federal, state, and county laws.
Coffee Shop. Means a retail establishment that is distinguished from a fast food restaurant or snack shop and has
more than 50 percent of its gross receipts from the sale of coffee, or other non-alcoholic beverages for consumption
on the premises or for take out. (Ord. 022, Series 2003, Part 2)
Combustible Materials. (See definition for "Materials, Inflammable.")
Common Area. Land in a residential development held in common and/or single ownership and not reserved for
the exclusive use or benefit of an individual tenant or owner but rather for the benefit of all occupants of the
development.
Community. A town, municipality, or a group of adjacent towns and/or municipalities having common social,
economic, or physical interests.
Community Living Arrangement. The following facilities licensed or operated, or permitted under the authority
of Wisconsin State Statutes: child welfare agencies under Section 48.60, group foster homes for children under
Section 48.02(7m), and community-based residential facilities under Section 50.01; but does not include day care
centers, nursing homes, general hospitals, special hospitals, prisons, and jails. The establishment of a community
living arrangement shall be in conformance with Sections 46.03(22), 59.97(15), 62.23(7)(I), and 62.23(7a) of the
Wisconsin State Statutes and amendments thereto.
Comprehensive Plan. (See definition of "Master Plan")
19- 9-8
Comprehensive Master Plan. (See definition of "Master Plan")
Conditional Use. A use permitted by a special zoning certificate, called a "Conditional Use Permit," according to
the provisions of this Ordinance.
Condominium. Property subject to a condominium declaration as defined, regulated, and established under Chapter
703 of the Wisconsin State Statutes.
Congregate Residence. Any building or portion thereof which contains facilities for living, sleeping, and
sanitation, as required by this Ordinance, and may include facilities for eating and cooking, for occupancy by other
than a family. A congregate residence may be a convent, monastery, dormitory or fraternity or sorority house but
does not include jails, hospitals, nursing homes, hotels, or lodging houses.
Construction. Any or all work or operations necessary or incidental to the erection, demolition, assembling,
installing, or equipping of buildings, or any alterations and operations incidental thereto. The term "construction"
shall include land clearing, grading, excavating, and filling and shall also mean the finished product of any such
work or operations.
Construction, Start of. The excavation of or installation of foundation footings or grading other than for the
installation of materials for road construction.
Contiguous. In contact with one (1) or more sides.
Continuing Care Retirement Community (for the elderly). A housing development that is planned, designed,
and operated to provide a full-range of accommodations and services for older adults, including independent living,
congregate housing and medical care. Residents may move from one level to another as their needs change. Such
facilities may offer a guarantee of lifetime care, including health care, which is secured by contracts that require a
substantial entrance fee, as well as regular monthly maintenance fees. These types of facilities can also include a
limited amount of health care as part of the standard fee or they may charge on a pay-for-service basis. Such
facilities may offer rentals and ownership options. These facilities also include the life care community and campus
concept.
Convenience Store. Any retail establishment offering for sale prepackaged food products, household items, sundry
items, and other goods commonly associated with the same; operated primarily for the convenience of the motoring
public, walk-in shopper, or someone purchasing a few items; and having a gross floor area of less than five thousand
(5,000) square feet.
Court, Outer. An open, unoccupied space opening onto a street, alley, or yard.
Cul-de-Sac. A local street with only one (1) outlet and having an appropriate turnaround for the safe and
convenient reversal of traffic movement.
Curb. A vertical or sloping edge of a roadway.
Cut-Off. The point at which all light rays emitted by a lamp, light source, or luminaire are completely eliminated
(cut-off) at a specific angle above the ground.
Cut-Off Angle. The angle formed by a line drawn from the direction of light rays at the light source and a line
perpendicular to the ground from the light source above which no light is emitted.
Cut-Off Type Luminaire. A luminaire with elements such as shields, reflectors, or refractor panels that direct and
cut off the light at an angle that is less than ninety (90) degrees.
Day Care Center (Adult). A facility operated for the purpose of providing care, protection, and guidance to adults
during normal business hours and with no overnight facilities.
19- 9-9
Day Care Center (Child). A State licensed facility where a person, other than a relative or guardian, provides care
and supervision for four (4) or more children under seven (7) years of age, for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day
and for compensation.
dBA. The A-weighting scale of sound measurement as expressed in decibels.
DBH. (See definition of "Diameter at Breast Height.")
Decibel. A unit of measurement of the intensity (loudness) of sound. Sound level meters employed to measure the
intensity of sound are calibrated in "decibels."
Deck. A structure attached to or closely adjacent to any dwelling unit that is:
a. Designed and intended for the support of persons;
b. Made of wood and wood-like material;
c. Constructed on piers and without continuous foundation or footings; and
d. Greater than fifty (50) square feet in area.
Dedication. The transfer of property interests from private to public ownership for a public purpose. The transfer
may be of fee simple interest or of a less than fee simple interest, including an easement.
Density, Gross (GD). The quotient of the total number of dwelling units on a site divided by the base site area of a
site.
Density, Net (ND). The quotient of the total number of dwelling units divided by the net buildable site area of a
site. (Also see definition of "Site Area, Net Buildable.")
Developer. The legal or beneficial owner(s) of a lot or of any land included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase or other person(s) having enforceable proprietary interests in such
land.
Development. The carrying out of any building activity, the making of any material change in the use or
appearance of any structure or land, or the dividing of land into parcels by any person. Any manmade change to
improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, construction of or additions or substantial
improvements to buildings, other structures, or accessory uses, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation
or drilling operations, or disposition of materials. The following activities or uses shall be taken for the purposes of
these regulations to involve "development":
a. A reconstruction, alteration of, or material change in the external appearance of a structure on land
or water; or
b. A change in the intensity of use of land, such as an increase in the number of dwelling units in a
structure or on land or an increase in the floor area or number of businesses, manufacturing
establishments, or offices; or
c. Alteration of a shore or bank of a pond, river, stream, lake, or other waterway; or
d. Commencement of drilling (except to obtain soil samples), mining, or
excavation on a parcel of land; or
e. Demolition of a structure; or
19- 9-10
f. Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction, including clearing or removal of vegetation, any
significant disturbance of vegetation, or any soil manipulation; or
g. Deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste, or fill on a parcel of land.
The following operations or uses shall not be taken for the purpose of these regulations to involve
"development":
a. Work by a highway or road agency or railroad company for the maintenance of a road or railroad
track if the work is carried out on land within the boundaries of the right-of-way; or
b. Work by any utility, and other persons engaged in the distribution or transmission of gas or water,
for the purposes of inspecting, repairing, renewing, or constructing on established rights-of-way
sewers, mains, pipes, cables, utility tunnels, power lines, towers, poles, tracks, or the like.
(Exclusive of the activities requiring a Conditional Use Permit as per the requirements of this
Ordinance); or
c. The maintenance, renewal, or alteration of any structure, where only the interior or the color of the
structure or the decoration of the exterior of the structure is affected; or
d. The use of any structure or land devoted to dwelling uses for any purpose customarily incidental
to enjoyment of the dwelling; or
e. A change in the ownership or form of ownership of any parcel or structure; or
f. Work involving the landscaping of a detached dwelling; or
g. Work involving the maintenance of existing landscaped areas and existing rights-of-way such as
setbacks and other nonnatural planting areas.
"Development" includes all other activity customarily associated with it unless otherwise specified. When
appropriate to the context, "development" refers to the act of development or to the result of development within the
Village. Reference to any specific operation is not intended to mean that the operation or activity, when part of
other operations or activities, is not development. Reference to particular operations is not intended to limit the
generality of this definition.
Development, Multiple-Family Dwelling. A residential building designed for occupancy by three (3) or more
dwelling units.
Development, Rural. Agricultural, residential, recreational, and other open space development at such
concentrations and densities not requiring traditional urban services and facilities. Such rural development may be
expected to result in minimum disturbance of the land and land cover and, therefore, less impact on the natural
environment. (Also see definition for "Rural Area.")
Development, Urban. Residential, commercial, industrial, governmental, and institutional development in
sufficient concentrations or densities to require a variety and high level of traditional urban services and facilities
including but not limited to: full- or part-time municipal police and fire protection, and community administration;
additional public streets and highways; neighborhood parks and playgrounds; neighborhood schools; local libraries;
public sanitary sewer facilities, public water supply facilities, and public solid waste removal; storm sewers; mass
transit facilities; continual street maintenance; curbs, gutters, and sidewalks; street lighting; and neighborhood
convenience shopping. Such development may be expected to alter or require the altering of land and land cover
and have detrimental impact on the ground and surface waters. (Also see definition for "Urban Area.")
Diameter at Breast Height (DBH). The diameter of the trunk of a tree measured in inches at a point four and onehalf
(4.5) feet above ground line. This point of measurement is used for established and mature trees.
19- 9-11
District, Basic. A part or parts of the Village for which the regulations of this Ordinance governing the use and
location of land and buildings are uniform (such as the residential and nonresidential zoning district classifications).
District, Overlay. Overlay districts provide for the possibility of superimposing certain additional requirements
upon a basic zoning district without disturbing the requirements of the basic district. In the instance of conflicting
requirements, the more strict of the conflicting requirements shall apply.
Disturbance, Land. Any manmade change of the land surface including removing vegetative cover, excavating,
filling, and grading but not agricultural land uses such as planting, growing, cultivating, and harvesting crops;
growing and tending gardens; or harvesting trees.
Division of Land. Where the title or part thereof of land is transferred by the execution of a land contract, an
option-to-purchase, an offer-to-purchase and acceptance, a deed, a Subdivision Plat, or a Certified Survey Map.
Drip Line. The farthest distance, measured as a radius and the total area encompassed thereby, where the branches
of a tree extend from its trunk indicating the extent of the canopy of a tree.
Drive-In and Drive Through (or "Drive Thru") Establishment or Facility. Any commercial retail, personal
service, or service establishment designed or intended to enable a customer in a motor vehicle parked on or moving
through the premises to transact business with a person located within the principal structure including an
establishment or facility that by design of physical facilities or by service or packaging procedures encourages or
permits customers to receive a service or obtain a product while staying within a motor vehicle. Such
establishments include, but are not necessarily limited to, financial institutions, restaurants, and dry cleaning stores.
Driveway. A paved or unpaved area used for ingress or egress of vehicles allowing access from a street to a lot or
site, use, building, or other structure or facility.
Dwelling. A building or portion thereof, but not including a house trailer or mobile home, designed or used
exclusively for residential occupancy, including one-family dwelling units, two-family dwelling units, and multiplefamily
dwelling units, but not including hotels, motels, or boarding or lodging houses.
Dwelling, Attached. A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one (1) or more sides, floors, roofs, by a
party wall, walls, or ceiling.
Dwelling, Detached. A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot.
Dwelling, Duplex. A two-family dwelling in which the separate living quarters are arranged side by side or one
over the other.
Dwelling, Efficiency. A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room with no separate sleeping rooms.
Dwelling Group. Two (2) or more one-family, two-family, or multiple-family dwellings, or boarding or lodging
houses, located on one (1) zoning lot, but not including tourist courts or motels.
Dwelling, Multiple-Family. A building or portion thereof designed or altered for occupancy by three (3) or more
families living independently of each other.
Dwelling, One-Family. A dwelling unit designed exclusively for use and occupancy by one (1) family.
Dwelling, Row (Party-Wall). A row of two (2) to six (6) attached one-family, party-wall dwellings, not more than
two and one-half (2-1/2) stories in height, nor more than two (2) rooms in depth, measured from the building line.
Dwelling, Two-Family. A building designed or altered to provide dwelling units for occupancy by two (2) families.
19- 9-12
Dwelling Unit. One (1) or more rooms in a residential structure, or other structure properly zoned for residential
uses, which are arranged, designed, used, or intended for use by one (1) family, plus not more than four (4) lodgers,
for living or sleeping purposes, and which includes complete kitchen facilities permanently installed.
Easement. The area of land set aside or over or through which a liberty, privilege, or advantage in land, distinct
from ownership of the land, is granted to the public or some particular person, quasi-public entity (such as a
homeowners' association), or part of the public.
Easement, Conservation. A type of "Protective Covenant" the boundary lines of which are graphically depicted on
the face of a Certified Survey Map, Preliminary Plat, Final Plat and/or Condominium Plat, or filed as a separate
legal instrument used to conserve and preserve a natural resource feature protected under the provisions of this
Ordinance.
Erosion. See definition in Title 23 "Erosion Control" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code.
Essential Services. (See definition of "Services, Essential.")
Family. Two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, or a group of not more than two (2)
persons (excluding servants), who need not be related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living together and
maintaining a common household, but not including sororities, fraternities, or other similar organizations. Where
the family is related by blood, marriage, or adoption, said family may keep up to four (4) foster children in their
household and still be considered a single family.
Farm. An area used for the growing of the usual farm products such as: vegetables, fruit trees, and grain, and for
the packing or storage of the products produced on the premises; as well as for the raising thereon of the usual farm
poultry and farm animals such as horses and cattle, as secondary to crop raising, subject to distance limitations from
residential property, and not including the commercial feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other animals, the
commercial feeding of animals on open lots where no feed is raised on the premises, or the commercial feeding of
poultry broilers, or laboratory animals, such as mice, rats, rabbits, etc. Specific farm uses are further defined in
Section 19.03.0603 of this Ordinance.
Farm, Hobby. Farming activities that occur on a parcel of land less than twenty (20) acres in area that are an
accessory use to the principal residential use of the property. These include the growing of the usual farm products
such as: vegetables, fruit trees, and grain, and for the packing or storage of the products produced on the premises;
as well as for the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm animals such as horses and cattle, as an
accessory use to the principal residential use of the property, subject to distance limitations from residential
property, and not including the commercial feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other animals, the commercial
feeding of animals on open lots where no feed is raised on the premises, or the commercial feeding of poultry
broilers, or laboratory animals, such as mice, rats, rabbits, etc. The raising of farm animals such as horses, cattle,
swine, etc. not to exceed one (1) such animal per one and one-half (1.5) acre of total lot or parcel area. (Also see
Sections 19.03.0702 and 19.03.0802 of this Ordinance.)
Fence. A structure that is a barrier or is used as a boundary or means of protection or confinement.
Fence, Decorative. A fence, including gates, which is more than seventy-five (75) percent open and less than three
(3) feet in height, such as split rail fences used for ornamental purposes. For purposes of this section, chain link and
picket fences are not considered decorative fences.
Fence, Solid. A fence, including gates, which conceals from view from adjoining properties, streets, or alleys
activities conducted behind it.
Final Plat. The final map, drawing or chart on which the Subdivider's or Condominium developer's (as applicable)
plan of subdivision is presented for approval under the requirements of Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin State Statutes
as amended and Title 18 "Subdivisions" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code as amended and which, if
approved, will be submitted to the Ozaukee County Register of Deeds.
19- 9-13
Flood. See definition set forth in Title 21 "Floodplain Zoning" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code as
amended.
Flood Insurance Study. See definition set forth in Title 21 "Floodplain Zoning" of the Village of Grafton
Municipal Code as amended.
Floodlands. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the FW Floodway District, the FF Flood Fringe District, and the
GFP General Floodplain District as regulated under Title 21 "Floodplain Zoning" of the Village of Grafton
Municipal Code as amended.
Floodplains. See definition of "Floodlands."
Floodplain Fringe. See definition set forth in Title 21 "Floodplain Zoning" of the Village of Grafton Municipal
Code as amended.
Flood Profile. See definition set forth in Title 21 "Floodplain Zoning" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code as
amended.
Floodproofing. See definition set forth in Title 21 "Floodplain Zoning" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code
as amended.
Flood Protection Elevation. See definition set forth in Title 21 "Floodplain Zoning" of the Village of Grafton
Municipal Code as amended.
Floodway. See definition set forth in Title 21 "Floodplain Zoning" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code as
amended.
Floor Area, Gross. For determining the floor area ratio, the gross floor area of a building or buildings shall be the
sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of such building or buildings-- measured from the exterior
faces of exterior walls or from the centerline of party walls separating two buildings. In particular, "gross floor
area" shall include:
a. Basement space if at least one-half (0.5) of the basement story height is above the established curb
or ground level;
b. Elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor;
c. Floor space used for mechanical equipment where the structural headroom exceeds seven and onehalf
(7.5) feet; except equipment, open or enclosed, located on the roof; i.e., bulkheads, water
tanks, and cooling towers;
d. Attic floor space where the structural headroom exceeds seven and one-half (7.5) feet;
e. Interior balconies and mezzanines;
f. Enclosed porches, but not terraces and breezeways;
g. Accessory structures.
Floor Area, Gross (For Determining Requirements for Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading). The floor
area shall mean the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the buildings or portion thereof,
devoted to such use, including accessory storage areas within principal structures located within selling or working
space, such as counters, racks, or closets, and any basement floor area devoted to retailing activities, to the
production or processing of goods, or to business or professional offices. However, floor area for purposes of
measurement for off-street parking spaces shall not include: floor area devoted primarily to storage purposes
(except as otherwise noted herein); floor area devoted to off-street parking or loading facilities, including aisles,
19- 9-14
ramps, and maneuvering space, or basement floor area other than area devoted to retailing activities, to the
production or processing of goods, or to business or professional offices.
Floor Area, Ground. The lot area covered by a principal building, measured at grade from the exterior faces of the
exterior walls, but excluding open porches or terraces, garages, or carports.
Floor Area Ratio, Gross (GFAR). An intensity measured as a ratio derived by dividing the total gross floor area of
a building or structure by the base site area. Where the lot is part of a larger development and has no required
bufferyard, that lot area may be used instead of the base site area to calculate the lot's development potential. (Also
see Division 19.03.0500 of this Ordinance and definition of "Site Area, Net Buildable.")
Floor Area Ratio, Net (NFAR). An intensity measured as a ratio derived by dividing the total gross floor area of a
building or structure by the net buildable site area. (Also see Division 19.03.0500 of this Ordinance.)
Footcandle. A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of which are one (1) foot from a uniform point
source of one (1) candle.
Forest. (See definitions for "Woodland, Mature" and "Woodland, Young.")
Foster Family Home. The primary domicile of a foster parent which is for four (4) or fewer foster children which is
licensed under Section 48.62 of the Wisconsin State Statutes and amendments thereto.
Freeway. A major highway having no intersections at grade and having fully controlled access, hence, "free" from
conflicts and interruptions.
Frequency. The number of oscillations per second in a sound wave, measuring the pitch of the resulting sound.
Frontage. All the property fronting on one (1) side of a street between the nearest intersecting streets or between a
street right-of-way, waterway, or other similar barrier.
Garage, Bus. Any building used or intended to be used for the storage of one (1) or more passenger motor buses, or
motor coaches used in public transportation, including school buses.
Garage, Truck. A building that is used or intended to be used for the storage of one (1) or more motor trucks, truck
trailers, tractors, and commercial vehicles exceeding one and one-half (1.5) tons capacity.
Garage, Private. An accessory building or an accessory portion of the principal building intended for and used to
store the private passenger vehicles of family or families resident upon the premises, and in which no business,
service, or industry connected directly or indirectly with automobile vehicles is carried on; provided that not more
than one-half (0.5) of the space may be rented for the private vehicles of persons not resident on the premises,
except that all the space in a garage of one (1) or two (2) car capacity may be so rented. Such a garage shall not be
used for more than one (1) commercial vehicle and the load capacity of such vehicles shall not exceed one-half (0.5)
ton.
Garage, Public. A building other than a private garage, used for the care, incidental servicing, and sale of
automobile supplies, or where motor vehicles are parked or stored for remuneration, hire, or sale within the
structure, but not including trucks, tractors, truck-trailers, and commercial vehicles exceeding one and one-half (1.5)
tons capacity.
Gauss. A measure of magnetic flux density. It is used to compare relative strengths of magnetic fields.
Golf Course. Public, semi-public, or private grounds over which the game of golf is played, including accessory
buildings and land uses incidental thereto, and consisting of at least sixty (60) acres for each standard nine (9) hole
course, one hundred and twenty (120) acres for each standard eighteen (18) hole course, and twenty-five (25) acres
for each nine (9) hole, par three (3) course.
19- 9-15
Grade, Street. The elevation of the established street in front of the building, measured at the center of such front.
Where no street grade has been established, the Village Engineer shall establish such street grade or its equivalent
for the purpose of this Ordinance.
Greenhouse. An enclosed structure, permanent or portable, which is used primarily for the growth of plants.
Group Foster Home. Any facility operated by a person required to be licensed by the State of Wisconsin under
State Statute Section 48.62 for the care and maintenance of five (5) to eight (8) foster children.
Guest House. Living quarters within a detached accessory building on the same premises with the principal
building for use by temporary guests of the occupants of the premises. Such quarters shall have no kitchen facilities
nor be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.
Gutter. A shallow channel usually set along a curb or the pavement edge of a road for purposes of catching and
carrying off runoff water.
Height, Fence. The height of the fence shall be determined by measuring the vertical distance from the highest
immediately adjoining grade to the top of each section of the fence.
Heliport. A helistop that also includes all necessary passenger and cargo facilities, helicopter maintenance and
overhaul, fueling service, storage, tie-down areas, hangars, and other necessary buildings and open spaces.
Heliports include any of the uses of helistops.
Helistop. An area designated for the landing and taking off of helicopters for picking up or discharging passengers
or cargo, not including fueling or service facilities.
Hertz. A unit that measures frequency in all physical systems that have wave pattern. Abbreviated Hz.
High Groundwater Elevation. The highest elevation to which subsurface water rises. This may be evidenced by
the actual presence of water during wet periods of the year, or by soil mottling during drier periods. "Mottling" is a
mixture or variation of soil colors. In soils with restricted internal drainage, gray, yellow, red, and brown colors are
intermingled given a multi-colored effect.
Historic District. An area designated by the Village Board on recommendation of the Historic Preservation
Commission, that contains two (2) or more historic improvements or sites. Historic districts are designated with the
HPO Historic Preservation Overlay District zoning classification.
Historic Preservation Commission. The Historic Preservation Commission of the Village of Grafton.
Historic Site. Any parcel of land of historic significance due to a substantial value in tracing the history or
prehistory of man, or upon which a historic event has occurred, which has been designated as a historic site under
this section, or an improvement parcel, or part thereof, on which is situated a historic structure and any abutting
improvement parcel, or part thereof, used as and constituting part of the premises on which the historic structure is
situated.
Historic Structure. Any improvements which have a special character or special historic interest or value as part of
the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the Village, state or nation which has been designated as a
historic structure pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
Home Occupation. Any gainful occupation or profession engaged in by an occupant of a dwelling unit as a use that
is clearly incidental to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes. (Also see Section 19.03.0802 of this
Ordinance.)
Homeowners' Association. A Wisconsin nonprofit membership corporation which serves as an association of
homeowners within a Subdivision, Certified Survey Map, or Condominium having shared common interest
responsibilities with respect to the costs and upkeep of common private property of a Subdivision, Certified Survey
19- 9-16
Map, or Condominium. Such common property includes private recreation and open space areas within the
Subdivision, Certified Survey Map, or Condominium. For the purposes of this Ordinance, homeowners'
associations include condominium associations.
Hospital. An institution devoted primarily to the maintenance and operation of facilities for the diagnosis,
treatment, or care for not less than twenty-four (24) hours in any week of three (3) or more nonrelated individuals
suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity, or other abnormal physical conditions. The term "hospital" as used
herein does not apply to institutions operating solely for the treatment of insane persons, drug addicts, liquor addicts,
or other types of cases requiring restraint of patients, and the term "hospital" shall not be used for convalescent,
nursing, shelter, or boarding homes.
Hospital, Animal. A lot, building, structure, enclosure, or premises whereon or wherein three (3) or more dogs,
cats, or other domestic animals are kept or maintained and is operated by, or the treatment therein is under direct
supervision of, a veterinarian licensed to practice by the State of Wisconsin. A facility rendering surgical and
medical treatments to animals, having no limitation to overnight accommodations for such animals. Crematory
facilities shall not be allowed in an animal hospital. For these regulations, where an animal hospital is permitted, a
veterinary clinic or veterinary hospital shall also be permitted.
Hotel. An establishment containing lodging accommodations designed for use by transients, travelers, or temporary
guests. Facilities provided may include house cleaner service, laundering of linen used on the premises, restaurants
(located within the same structure) including the sale of alcoholic beverages, telephone, and secretarial or desk
service.
Hotel, Apartment. A hotel in which at least ninety (90) percent of the hotel accommodations are for occupancy by
the permanent guests. An apartment hotel having not less than fifty (50) guest rooms may have a dining room open
to the public that is accessible only from an inner lobby or corridor.
Householder. The occupant of a dwelling unit who is either the owner or lessee thereof.
Housing, Assisted Living. (See definition of "Housing, Congregate (for the elderly).")
Housing, Congregate (for the elderly). Specially planned, designed, and managed multi-unit rental housing for the
elderly with self-contained apartments. These retirement communities are typically designed to provide supportive
environments for the elderly and to accommodate a relatively independent lifestyle for the elderly. A limited
number of support services, such as meals, laundry, housekeeping, transportation, and social and recreational
activities, are usually provided. A full range of services to the elderly is normally not provided in this type of
elderly housing. This form of elderly housing also includes sheltered housing, enriched housing, and assisted living
housing.
Housing, Enriched. (See definition of "Housing, Congregate (for the elderly).")
Housing, Sheltered. (See definition of "Housing, Congregate (for the elderly).")
Illumination, Maximum Permitted. The maximum illumination measured in footcandles at the interior bufferyard
line at ground level.
Impact Noises. Noises whose peak values are more than six (6) dBA higher than the values indicated on a sound
level meter meeting the requirements of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI S1.4-1961) "American
Standard Specification for General Purpose Sound Level Meters," and are of a short duration. Impact noises are
generated by sources that do no operate more than one (1) minute in any one-hour period.
Impervious Surface. Impervious surfaces are those which do not absorb water. Impervious surfaces consist of all
buildings, parking areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks, and any areas of concrete or asphalt. For lumberyards or
similar uses, areas of stored lumber constitute impervious surfaces.
19- 9-17
Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR). A measure of the intensity of land use which is determined by dividing the total
area of all impervious surfaces on a site by the base site area (resulting in the gross ISR determination) or the net
buildable area (resulting in the net ISR determination).
Improvement. Any manmade immovable item which becomes a part of, is placed upon, or is affixed to real estate.
As applied to historic structures, historic sites, and historic districts, any building, structure, place, work of art or
other object constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment, including streets,
alleys, sidewalks, curbs, lighting fixtures, signs and the like.
Improvement, Public. Any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, open channel, water main, roadway, park, parkway,
public access, curb and gutter, sidewalk, pedestrianway, bicycle path, stormwater detention and retention basins,
planting strip, or other utility and/or facility for which the Village may ultimately assume the responsibility for
maintenance and operation.
Improvement, Substantial. Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds fifty (50) percent of the present equalized assessed value of the structure either before the improvement or
repair is started, or if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. The term
does not, however, include either:
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications that are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions, or
2. Any alteration of a structure or site documented as deserving preservation by the
Wisconsin State Historical Society or listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
Ordinary maintenance repairs are not considered structural repairs, modifications, or
additions; such ordinary maintenance repairs include internal and external painting,
decorating, paneling, and the replacement of doors, windows, and other nonstructural
components.
Inspector. Inspector shall mean the Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector, and/or other code or ordinance
enforcement officer of the Village.
Institution, Educational. Public, parochial, charitable, or nonprofit junior college, college, or university, other than
trade or business schools, including instructional and recreational uses, with or without living quarters, dining
rooms, restaurants, heating plants, and other incidental facilities for students, teachers, and employees.
Intermediate Care Facility. A facility designed for persons who do not require round-the-clock nursing, but who
need "preventive care" with less than continuous licensed nursing care or observation. These facilities typically
involve 24-hour service, but with physicians and nurses in supervisory roles. Such facilities typically emphasize
personal and social care. Services typically include meals, laundry, therapies, and nursing care, including catheter
and incontinence care.
Irrevocable Letter of Credit. An agreement guaranteeing payment for subdivision improvements or other
improvements to land, entered into by a bank, savings and loan, or other financial institution which is authorized to
do business in this State and which has a financial standing acceptable to the Village, and which is approved, as to
form, by the Village Attorney.
Junk. Worn-out, cast-off, or discarded or abandoned article(s), material(s), vehicle(s), automobile(s), scrap, or
machinery or parts thereof, or other waste that may or may not be used again in some form.
Junk Yard, Including Automobile Wrecking and Storage. Any lot, building, structure, enclosure, premises or
parts thereof used for the storage, keeping, or abandonment of any worn-out, cast-off, or discarded or abandoned
article, material, vehicle, automobile, or machinery or parts thereof, which is ready for destruction or sale or has
been collected or stored for salvage or conversion to some use, including scrap metal, paper, wood, cordage, or other
waste or discarded materials, articles, vehicles, automobiles, or machinery or parts thereof, or vehicles or
19- 9-18
automobiles without a valid current state registration and license plate issued to said vehicle or automobile, and to
the occupant, owner, purchaser, lessor, lessee, or tenant of any lot, building, or structure therein or thereon situated.
Kennel, Commercial. A lot, building, structure, enclosure, or premises whereon or wherein more than three (3)
dogs and cats more than six (6) months of age are maintained, boarded, bred, kept, or cared for in return for
remuneration, or are kept for sale, or are groomed, trained, or handled, for others.
Kennel, Private. A lot, building, structure, enclosure, or premises whereon or in which three (3) or fewer dogs and
cats more than six (6) months of age are maintained, boarded, bred, kept, or cared for.
Laboratory, Commercial. A place devoted to experimental study, and/or testing, and/or analyzing.
Manufacturing, assembly, or packaging of products is not included within this definition.
Lake. Any body of water two (2) acres or larger as measured by the shoreline at its maximum condition rather than
the permanent pool condition, if there is any difference.
Land Division Ordinance. Title 18 "Subdivisions" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code.
Landmark. Any improvement which has a special character or special historic interest or value as part of the
development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the Village, state, or nation and which has been designated as a
landmark pursuant to the provisions of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code.
Landowner. For the purposes of Division 19.08.0300, any person holding title to or having an interest in land.
Landscape Bufferyard. (See definition for "Bufferyard.")
Landscape Plan. (See Division 19.06.0300 of this Ordinance.)
Landscape Surface Area. Surface area of land not covered by any building or impervious surface; pervious
surface that is maintained as a natural area and left undisturbed or to support plant life.
Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR). The ratio derived by dividing the area of landscaped surface by the base site
area.
Landscaping. Living material, such as grass, groundcover, flowers, shrubs, vines, hedges, and trees; and nonliving
durable material such as rocks, pebbles, sand, mulch, wood chips or bark, walls, and fences, but not including
paving.
Land Use, Agricultural. For the purposes of Division 19.08.0300, the use of land for planting, growing,
cultivating, and harvesting of crops for human or livestock consumption and pasturing or yarding of livestock.
Land Use, Commercial. For the purposes of Division 19.08.0300, the use of land for the retail or wholesale sale of
goods or services. Also included will be manufacturing and industrial development.
Land User. Any person operating, leasing, renting, or having made other arrangements with the landowner by
which the landowner authorizes use of his or her land.
Level, Curb. The level of the established curb in front of a building or structure, measured at the center of such
front. Where no curb level has been established, it shall be deemed to be the established level of the centerline of
the street surface in front of a building or structure, measured at the centerline of such front.
Life Care Campus. (See definition of "Continuing Care Retirement Community (for the elderly).")
Life Care Community. (See definition of "Continuing Care Retirement Community (for the elderly).")
19- 9-19
Living Area. That area of a dwelling unit measured from the outside of the exterior walls; including utility rooms,
foyers, interior stairwells, hallways, closets, columns and walls and finished half-basements or finished portions of
half-basements; but excluding basements and unfinished half-basements, or unfinished portions of half-basements,
open porches, breezeways, garages, and other spaces not used frequently or during extended periods for living,
eating, or sleeping purposes. The unit of measurement of living area shall be in square feet.
Living Area, First Floor. That space used for living purposes which are not above any other space used for living
purposes. The first floor living area shall never conform to the definitions of "Half Basement" or "Basement."
Loading and Unloading Space, Off-Street. An open, hard-surfaced area of land other than a street or a public
way, the principal use of which is for the standing, loading, or unloading of motor vehicles, tractors, and trailers, to
avoid undue interference with public streets and alleys. Such space shall not be less than ten (10) feet in width,
thirty five (35) feet in length, and fourteen (14) feet in height, exclusive of access aisles and maneuvering space.
Lodge, Private. (See definition of "Club, Private.")
Lot. A parcel of land legally described as a distinct portion or piece of land of record.
Lot Area. The area contained within the exterior, or peripheral, boundaries or lot lines of a lot excluding street and
land under navigable bodies of water.
Lot, Bus. Any lot or land area used for the storage or layover of passenger buses or motor coaches.
Lot, Corner. A lot abutting two (2) or more streets at their intersection if the corner of such intersection shall have
an angle of one hundred and thirty-five (135) degrees or less, measured on the lot side.
Lot Coverage. The area of a zoning lot occupied by the principal building or buildings and accessory buildings.
Lot Depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines of a lot measured within the lot
boundaries.
Lot, Double Frontage. A lot, other than a corner lot, with frontage on more than one (1) street. Double frontage
lots shall normally be deemed to have two (2) front yards, two (2) side yards and no rear yard. Double frontage lots
shall not generally be permitted unless the lot abuts an arterial highway. Double frontage lots abutting arterial
highways should restrict direct access to the arterial highway by means of a planting buffer or another acceptable
access buffering measure.
Lot, Flag. A lot, typically not meeting minimum frontage requirements and where access to a public street is by a
narrow, private access easement, strip of land, or driveway.
Lot Frontage. The front of a lot shall be that boundary of a lot along a public street; for a corner lot the owner may
elect either street line as the front lot line.
Lot, Interior. A lot other than a corner lot.
Lot Line. A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate ownership, except that where any portion of
the lot extends to the abutting street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be the street or alley right-of-way line.
Lot Line, Front. The front property boundary line of a zoning lot.
Lot Line, Interior. A side lot line common with another lot.
Lot Line, Rear. The lot line or lot lines most nearly parallel to and most remote from the front lot line.
Lot Line, Side. A lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
19- 9-20
Lot of Record. An area of land designated as a lot on a plat of Subdivision or Certified Survey Map recorded or
registered pursuant to statute existing at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance.
Lot, Through. (See definition of "Lot, Double Frontage.")
Lot Width. The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured within the lot boundaries, or the
minimum distance between the side lot lines within the buildable area of a lot.
Lot, Zoning. (See definition of "Zoning Lot.")
Lounge. (See definition of "Tavern.")
Luminaire. A complete lighting unit consisting of a light source and all necessary mechanical, electrical, and
decorative parts.
Manufacturing. The making of anything by any agency or process.
Manufactured Home. A structure that is transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis, and
designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
includes, but is not limited to, the definition of "mobile home" as set forth in regulations governing the Mobile
Home Safety and Construction Standards Program. [24 C.F.R. 3282.7(a)]. Factory-built homes on permanent
foundations are considered buildings, and are governed by the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code.
Manufactured Home Park. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured
home spaces for rent or lease.
Manufactured Home Subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more
manufactured home lots for sale.
Master Plan. A document or series of documents prepared by the Plan Commission and duly adopted by said
Commission setting forth policies for the future development or redevelopment of the Village of Grafton pursuant to
Chapter 62.23 of the Wisconsin Statutes. The master plan shall also include neighborhood and subarea plans,
proposals for future land use, open space, streets and transportation, parks, urban redevelopment, and public
facilities. Devices for the implementation of these plans, such as zoning, official map, land division and building
line provisions, design guidelines, and capital improvement programs shall also be considered a part of the master
plan. The master plan can also be termed the "Comprehensive Plan" and/or "Comprehensive Master Plan."
Materials, Inflammable. Inflammable and combustible materials shall mean and include oils and oil lights,
sweepings from garage floors, barrels, boxes or other containers containing oil or other similar liquids, rags, clothes,
paper, shavings, paper or cardboard boxes or cartons, grease, paints, varnish, or other similar substances, any of
which are likely to be readily inflammable or combustible.
Materials, Toxic. A substance (liquid, solid, or gaseous) which, due to a deleterious property, tends to destroy life
or impair health.
Medical Health Center. An establishment where patients are admitted for special study and treatment by two (2)
or more licensed physicians and their professional associates, practicing medicine together.
Mini-Storage. A building or group of buildings in a secured controlled-access and fenced compound that contains
varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized, and controlled-access stalls or lockers for the dead storage of a
customer's goods or wares. No sales, service, or repair activities other than the rental of dead storage units are
permitted on the premises. Maximum leasable space per tenant shall be one thousand (1,000) square feet. Outdoor
storage, or the storage of junk, explosives, or inflammable materials, and other noxious or dangerous materials are
specifically prohibited.
19- 9-21
Minor Land Division. Any division of land not defined as a 'Subdivision.' Minor land divisions include the
division of land by the owner or Subdivider resulting in the creation of two (2), but not more than four (4), parcels of
building sites, any one of which is less than thirty-five (35) acres in size; or the division of a block, lot or outlot
within a recorded Subdivision Plat into not more than four (4) parcels or building sites without changing the exterior
boundaries of said block, lot, or outlot. Such minor land divisions shall be made by a Certified Survey Map.
Minor Variance. (See definition of "Variance, Minor.")
Mixed Use. A building or structure that contains two (2) or more of the following basic land use types:
commercial, office, or residential which are vertically integrated, and that are located over each other in whole or in
part. Mixed uses may be integrated horizontally if they are physically interrelated by pedestrian areas that are
uninterrupted by vehicular traffic. In horizontal integration of mixed uses, the uses may not be separated by roads or
parking areas.
Mobile Home. Any trailer as defined herein used for residential purposes.
Mobile Home Park. Any premises occupied or designed to accommodate one (1) or more families living in a
house trailer or mobile home, or the parking of one or more trailers for business or storage purposes.
Mobile Home Camp. (See definition of "Mobile Home Park")
Motel. A group of attached or detached buildings or facility containing individual sleeping or living units, designed
for or used temporarily by automobile tourists or transients, with garage attached or parking space conveniently
located to each unit, including auto courts, motels, motor lodges, or other similar type uses. Customary services
such as house cleaner service, telephone, linen, and desk service, and the use and upkeep of furniture are provided.
Motor Lodge. (See definition of "Motel.")
Municipal Code. The Municipal Code of the Village of Grafton, Ozaukee County, Wisconsin.
Municipality. An incorporated village or city or an unincorporated town.
Natural Resource Protection Plan. (See Division 19.06.0200 of this Ordinance.)
Natural Resources. Areas of steep slopes, woodlands and forests (mature and young), lakes, ponds, streams, shore
buffer, floodplains, floodlands, drainageways, wetlands, and shoreland wetlands as defined in this Ordinance.
Natural Resource Protection Standard. The proportion of the natural features of a site (excluding land occupied
by public street rights-of-way), which shall remain undeveloped and protected and is specifically designated for
natural resource protection by deed restriction, protective covenant, zoning, or a combination thereof.
Navigable Water. See definitions set forth in Title 21 "Floodplain Zoning" and Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland
Zoning" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code as amended and applicable.
Navigable Lake. (See definition of "Navigable Water")
Navigable Stream. (See definition of "Navigable Water")
Noise. (See Section 19.03.1107 of this Ordinance.)
Nonconforming Use. Any building, structure, or land lawfully occupied by a use or lawfully established at the time
of the adoption of this Ordinance or amendments hereto, which does not conform after the effective date of this
Ordinance, or amendments hereto, with the use regulations of this Ordinance.
19- 9-22
Nonconforming Building. A building or structure, or portion thereof, lawfully existing at the time of the adoption
of this Ordinance, which was designed, erected, or structurally altered after the effective date of this Ordinance for a
use that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. Said use shall be an active and
actual use of the land and/or buildings which existed prior to the effective date of this Ordinance.
Noxious Matter. Material that is capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction or can cause
detrimental effects upon the psychological, social, or economic well-being of human beings.
Nursery. A place where the primary activity is the growing of plants, flowers, trees, and shrubs for sale.
Nursery, Day. A building or portion thereof used for the daytime care of preschool-age children.
Nursery School. An institution providing day care for children from four (4) to six (6) years of age.
Nursing Home. An extended or intermediate care facility licensed or approved by the State to provide full-time
convalescent or chronic care to individuals who due to age, chronic illness, or infirmity, are unable to care for
themselves. including places of rest for those suffering bodily disorders, but not including facilities for the treatment
of injuries or for surgical care.
Obstruction. An obstacle, impediment, or hindrance.
Octave Band. A means of dividing the range of sound frequencies into octaves to classify sound according to pitch.
Octave Band Filter. An electrical frequency analyzer, designed according to standards formulated by the American
Standards Association and used with a sound level meter to take measurements in specific octave intervals
(American Standard for Sound Level Meters, A.S.A. No. 244.3-1944).
Odorous Matter. Solid, liquid or gaseous material that produces an olfactory response in a human being.
Odor Threshold Concentration. The lowest concentration of odorous matter that will produce an olfactory
response in a human being as detected by a panel of healthy observers. Odor thresholds shall be determined
according to American Society for Testing and Materials Test Method D1391-57 "Standard Method for
Measurement of Odor in Atmosphere (Dilution Method)" (Philadelphia: American Society of Testing and Material,
1957).
Office, Home. (See definition of "Home Occupation" and Section 19.05.0802 of this Ordinance.)
Official Map. That document as described by Chapter 62.23(6) of the Wisconsin Statutes as amended which shows
the location of: streets, highways, parkways, parks, playgrounds, railroad rights-of-way, waterways, and public
transit facilities in the Village of Grafton.
Official Zoning Map. (See definition of "Zoning Map.")
Open Sales Lot. Any land used or occupied for buying and selling new or secondhand passenger cars or trucks,
motor scooters, all terrain vehicles, motorcycles, boats, trailers, aircraft, monuments, snowmobiles, farm machinery
and equipment, and for the storage of same before sale.
Open Space. Any site, parcel, lot, area, or outlot of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated,
designated, or reserved for the public or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and
occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space. Land that is to be used primarily for resource
protection, agriculture, recreational purposes, or otherwise left undisturbed and specifically excluding road rights-ofway
and lots. Open space land shall not be occupied by nonrecreational buildings, roads, drives, public rights-ofway,
or off-street parking areas for nonrecreational uses. Land located within the yards or lots of residential and/or
nonresidential properties is not considered open space unless it is deed restricted for open space protection or natural
resource features protection.. Where lots are above the minimum sizes required and the excess lot area is deed
restricted to open space uses it may be counted as open space.
19- 9-23
Open Space, Common. Open space within or related to a development, neither individually owned nor dedicated
for public use but typically owned by a property owners' association, which is designed and intended for the
common use and/or enjoyment of the residents of the development, and which is accessible and usable by all
persons who occupy a principal use within the development.
Open Space, Deed Restricted. Deed restricted open space on platted "Lots" is not occupied by any principal or
accessory buildings or structures, roads, road rights-of-way, or parking areas. Deed restricted open space on platted
"Outlots" is not occupied by nonrecreational principal or accessory buildings or structures, roads, road rights-ofway,
or parking areas. The maintenance of deed restricted open space located on platted "Outlots" is by a property
owners' or homeowners' association. The maintenance of deed restricted open space on platted "Lots" is by the
individual lot owner.
Open Space, Public. An open space area conveyed or otherwise dedicated to a municipality, municipal agency,
public school district, state or county agency, or other public body for recreational or conservational uses. Any
publicly owned open area, including, but not limited to, the following: parks, playgrounds, forest preserves,
beaches, waterways, parkways, and streets.
Open Space Ratio (OSR). The number derived by dividing the open space of the site by the base site area. When
applied to natural resource protection, the open space ratio shall include the natural resource feature(s) to be
protected. Minimum requirements for open space ratios are set forth for the various zoning districts under
individual zoning district requirements Sections of this Ordinance.
Option, Development. Alternative development types within specific residential zoning districts as set forth in this
Ordinance.
Ordinary High Water Mark. See definitions set forth in Title 21 "Floodplain Zoning" and Title 22 "Shoreland-
Wetland Zoning" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code as amended.
Owner. Includes the plural as well as the singular and may mean either a natural person, individual, firm,
association, syndicate, partnership, private corporation, public or quasi-public corporation, or combination of these
having sufficient proprietary interest to seek development of land. For purposes of successive division of a parcel of
land by Certified Survey Maps, "owner" shall be taken to include any related person, firm, partnership or
corporation, to whom conveyance has been made within two (2) years of application for approval of a Certified
Survey Map. "Related" shall mean any natural person related to a transferor by blood or marriage, any person acting
in an agency or trust capacity, any partnership in which the transferor is a partner and any corporation in which the
transferor is a stockholder, officer or director, or in which related persons are stockholders, officers or directors.
Ownership, One. For this Ordinance, lots shall be considered as owned by the same person when they are owned
by the same individual or corporation; an individual and another in joint tenancy, or as tenants in common, and
either of said joint or common tenants owns other lots individually or as joint tenant or tenant in common with
another; as individual and other lots by his spouse, parent, grandparents, children, grandchildren, or the spouse of
any child or grandchild, or a brother or sister or when any of said lots are owned by an individual and other lots are
owned by a corporation in which said individual is an officer or director or controlling stockholder.
Parking Area, Private. An open, hard-surfaced area, other than a street or public way, designed, arranged, and
made available for the storage of private passenger automobiles only, of occupants of the building or buildings for
which the parking area is developed and is accessory.
Parking Area, Public. An open, hard-surfaced area, other than a street or public way, intended to be used for the
storage of passenger automobiles and commercial vehicles under one and one-half (1-1/2) tons capacity, and
available to the public, whether for compensation, free, or as an accommodation to clients or customers.
Parking Lot. A structure or premises used for the parking of vehicles, excluding parking areas accessory to
detached single-family dwellings and two-family attached dwellings. (Also see definitions of "Parking Area,
Private" and Parking Area, Public.")
19- 9-24
Parking Space, Automobile. Space within a public or private parking area of not less than one hundred and eighty
(180) square feet (9 ft. by 20 ft.), exclusive of access aisles or drives, ramps, columns, or office and work areas, for
the storage of one (1) passenger automobile or commercial vehicle less than one and one-half (1-1/2) tons capacity.
Park, Private. A privately owned outdoor recreational area.
Park, Public. A publicly owned recreational area.
Particulate Matter. For the purposes of determining air contaminations, particulate matter is any material other
than water suspended in or discharged into the atmosphere in a finely divided form as a liquid or solid capable of
being airborne or gasborne. Dust is solid particulate matter capable of being airborne or gas borne.
Party Wall. (See definition of "Wall, Party.")
Pasture. An area of grass or other vegetative cover grown for grazing animals.
Pedestrianway. A public way intended for the convenience of pedestrians only; it may also provide public right-ofway
for utilities.
Performance Standard. A criterion to control noise, odor, smoke, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and
explosive hazards, or glare or heat generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings.
Permitted Use. A use by right that is specifically authorized in a particular zoning district.
Person. The word "person" shall mean and include any natural person, firm, corporation, or partnership.
Personal Watercraft. A motorboat that uses an inboard motor powering a water jet pump or a caged propeller as
its primary source of motive power and that is designed to be operated by a person standing on, kneeling on, or
sitting astride the watercraft.
Plan Commission. The Village of Grafton Plan Commission created by the Village Board pursuant to Section
62.23 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
Plan, Development. The Ozaukee County Development Plan (including components thereof including park,
recreation, open space, and transportation plans) text and all accompanying maps, charts, explanatory material
adopted by Ozaukee County pursuant to Section 59.97 of the Wisconsin Statutes, and all amendments thereto.
Plat. The map, drawing, or chart on which the Subdivider's land division or Condominium Developer's
condominium is presented to the Village of Grafton for approval.
Playfield. An active recreation space for children and adults. These areas frequently include lighted ballfields and
other athletic fields and are the sites of organized recreational activities.
Playground. An active recreation area serving school age children typically and provide playground and playfield
equipment. Frequently these playgrounds are associated with a public elementary school or a neighborhood park.
When associated with the latter, residents are typically afforded both passive and active outdoor opportunities.
These areas generally accommodate ballfields, basketball backboards, open playfields, skating rinks in the winter,
playground equipment, and tennis courts.
Pleasure Craft, Private. Canoes, motorboats, and sailboats for private use.
Pond. All bodies of water less than two (2) acres in area as measured by the shoreline at its maximum condition
rather than the permanent pool condition, if there is any difference.
Pond, Water Quality. A manmade pond constructed to improve the water quality of an area.
19- 9-25
Porch. A roofed-over impervious structure projecting out from the wall or walls of a main structure and commonly
open to the weather in part.
Preliminary Plat. A map showing the salient features of a proposed subdivision submitted to an approving
authority for purposes of preliminary consideration pursuant to the requirements of both Chapter 236 of the
Wisconsin Statutes as amended and also the Village of Grafton Land Division Ordinance.
Principal Use. The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use.
Processing. When used in describing an industrial operation, the series of continuous actions that changes one (1)
or more raw materials into a finished product. The process may be chemical, special method, or mechanical.
Protective Covenants. Contracts entered between private parties or between private parties and public bodies,
which are a restriction on the use of all private property or platted property within a minor land division or
subdivision for the benefit of the public or property owners, and to provide mutual protection against undesirable
aspects of development that would tend to impair stability of values.
Public Way. Any public road, street, highway, walkway, drainageway, or part thereof.
Quarters, Temporary. A room or rooms on the property and intended for the temporary use of a watchman,
servant, owner, etc. These quarters shall not be used as permanent living quarters.
Queuing Space. For this Ordinance, queuing space is that on-site area required, as to the number of cars that must
be accommodated, while awaiting ingress or egress to specified business or service establishments.
Recreation, Active. Recreational facilities oriented to competitive activities including, but not necessarily limited
to, baseball, softball, soccer, football, tennis, basketball, playground or playfield, ice skating area, picnicking, and
swimming.
Recreation, Passive. Recreational uses, areas, or activities oriented to noncompetitive activities that require no
special equipment. Passive recreation areas are generally maintained by mowing. Bicycle riding, hiking, and birdwatching
are examples of passive recreation activities.
Register of Deeds. Ozaukee County Register of Deeds.
Residential Care Facility (for the elderly). A facility designed primarily for elderly residents with no serious
health problems but who nonetheless have chronic or debilitating conditions requiring assistance with daily
activities. Services usually provided include staff-supervised meals, housekeeping and personal care, medication
supervision, and social activities. These facilities may have private and/or shared sleeping rooms. Such facilities
are generally licensed by the State and must meet design and operating standards, including minimum staff
requirements. This also includes personal care and domiciliary care for the elderly.
Restaurant. Any land, building, or part thereof, other than a boarding house, where meals are provided for
compensation, including a cafe, cafeteria, coffee shop, lunch room, tearoom, and dining room; and including the
serving of alcoholic beverages when served with and incidental to the serving of meals.
Restaurant, Fast Food. An establishment whose principal business is the sale of food and/or beverages in a readyto-
consume state for consumption as follows:
1. Within the restaurant building;
2. Within a motor vehicle parked on the premises; or
3. Off the premises as either carry-out orders or orders using a drive through facility.
19- 9-26
The principal method of operation includes the serving of food and/or beverages in paper, plastic, or other
disposable containers.
Rest Home. (See definition of "Nursing Home.")
Ringelmann Chart. A chart described in the U. S. Bureau of Mines Information Circular 7718, and on which are
illustrated graduated shades of grey for use in estimating the light-obscuring capacity of smoke.
Ringelmann Number. The number of the area on the Ringelmann Chart that coincides most nearly with the visual
density of smoke emission.
Roofline. The top or bottom edge of a roof or building parapet, excluding any cupolas, pylons, chimneys, or other
minor projections.
Runoff. The rainfall, snowmelt, discharge pumping, or irrigation water flowing over the ground surface.
Rural Area. Those areas of the Village of Grafton not within a delineated sanitary sewer service area in
conformance with an adopted area wide water quality management plan.
Sanitarium. (See definition of "Hospital.")
Screening. A method of visually shielding or obscuring an abutting or nearby structure or use from another by
fencing, walls, earthen berms, or densely planted vegetation.
Seat. Furniture upon which to sit, in the case of attached seating having a linear measurement not less than twentytwo
(22) inches across the surface used for sitting; intended for use in determining off-street parking requirements.
Services, Essential. Services provided by public and private utilities, necessary for the exercise of the principal use
or service of the principal structure. These services include underground, surface, or overhead gas, electrical, steam,
water, sanitary sewerage, storm water drainage, and communications facilities such as antennas and/or antenna
structures less than fifty (50) feet in height, wires, mains, drains, vaults, culverts, laterals, sewers, pipes, catch
basins, water storage tanks, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, pumps, lift stations,
and hydrants.
Setback. Those minimum street, front, rear, and/or side yards required by this Ordinance.
Setback Line, Base. The ultimate street line as established by the Comprehensive Plan of the Village, or
component thereof, and/or a highway width ordinance of Ozaukee County or by an Official Map of the Village. On
all such streets the base setback line shall be located at a distance from the centerline equal to one-half of such
established width. On all other streets, the base setback line shall be thirty (30) feet from the centerline of such
street or sixty (60) feet from the center point of a cul-de-sac, unless specifically designated otherwise by the Village
Board. The base setback line of frontage roads shall be located at a distance from the centerline equal to one-half of
the right-of-way of said frontage road. All setback lines shall be parallel to and measured at right angles to the
centerline of the street or highway. All front yard building setbacks shall be measured from the base setback lines.
Setback Line, Building. A line parallel to the lot or parcel boundary line or an abutting public street right-of-way
line at a distance from it, regulated by the various yard requirements established under this Ordinance.
Shelter, Emergency. Public or private enclosures designed to protect people from aerial, radiological, biological,
or chemical warfare, fire, flood, windstorm, riots, and invasions.
Shopping Center. A group of two (2) or more commercial establishments or tenants that is planned, developed,
constructed, owned, and managed as a unit with customer and employee parking provided on-site.
Shoreland. See definition set forth in Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the Village of Grafton Municipal
Code as amended.
19- 9-27
SIC. Standard Industrial Classification from the 1987 (or latest edition) manual published by the Executive Office
of the President, Office of Management and Budget.
Sidewalk. A paved path provided for pedestrian use and usually at the side of a road within a public street right-ofway
but physically separated by distance from the road pavement.
Site. For the purposes of Division 19.08.0300 of this Ordinance, the entire area included in the legal description of
the land on which the land disturbing or land development activity is proposed in the Construction Site Erosion
Control Permit application.
Site Area, Base. (See Division 19.03.0500 of this Ordinance.)
Site Area, Net Buildable. The entire land area within the boundaries of a site, less the area of all land required or
proposed for public use, open space, or natural resource preservation or protection.
Site Capacity Analysis. A calculation of buildable site area, taking into account its resource protection land, open
space, and other lands. (Also see Division 19.03.0500 of this Ordinance.)
Site, Landmark. Any parcel of land of historic significance due to substantial value in tracing the history of
aboriginal man, or upon which a historic event has occurred, and, which has been designated as a landmark site
under the provisions of this Ordinance, or a parcel of land, or part thereof, on which is situated a landmark and any
abutting parcel, or part thereof, used as and constituting part of the premises on which the landmark is situated.
Site Plan. (See Division 19.06.0100 of this Ordinance.)
Skilled Care Nursing Facility. For the purposes of this definition, "skilled care" is defined by a full-range of 24-
hour direct medical, nursing, and other health services. Registered nurses, licensed practical nurses, and nurses'
aides typically provide services prescribed by a resident’s physician. Such facilities are for those older adults who
may need health supervision but not hospitalization. The emphasis of such facilities is on nursing care, but
restorative physical, occupational, speech, and respiratory therapies may also be provided. The care may also
include specialized nursing services, such as intravenous feedings or medication, tube feeding, injected medication,
daily wound care, rehabilitation services, and monitoring of unstable conditions.
Slope. The degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent or degrees.
Slope, Steep. Three categories of steep slopes are defined herein for use in this Ordinance. These categories are
based upon the relative degree of the steepness of the slope as follows: twenty (20) to thirty (30) percent inclusive,
and greater than thirty (30) percent. No land area shall be considered a steep slope unless the steep slope area has at
least a ten (10) foot vertical drop and has a minimum area of five thousand (5,000) square feet. (Ord. 010, Series
2002, Part 23)
Smoke. Small gas borne particles other than water that form a visible plume in air.
Smoke Units. The number obtained by multiplying the smoke density in Ringelmann Numbers by the time of
emission in minutes. For this chart, a Ringelmann Density reading is made at least once every minute during
observation; each reading is then multiplied by the time in minutes during which it is observed; and the various
products are added to give the total number of "smoke units" observed during the total period under observation.
Soil Mapping Unit Lines. The boundaries of soils shown on the operational soil survey maps prepared by the
United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service for the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional
Planning Commission as published in the Soil Survey of Ozaukee County, Wisconsin dated September 1970.
Sound Level Meter. An instrument standardized by the American Standards Association for measurement of
intensity of sound.
19- 9-28
Stable, Breeding, Boarding, Training. A use in which equines are kept primarily for breeding, boarding, training,
and/or giving lessons, but in no event for rent or hire to the public.
Stable, Private. Any building that is on a lot on which a dwelling is located which is designed, arranged, used, or
intended to be used for housing horses for the private use of occupants of the dwelling.
Stable, Public. A use or on which equines are kept for sale or hire to the public. Breeding, boarding, or training of
equines may also be conducted.
Stand, Roadside. A farm building used or intended to be used solely by the owner or tenant of the farm on which
such building is located, for the sale of the farm products raised on said farm.
Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor above it, or
if there is no floor above, then the space between the floor and the ceiling above it. Any portion of a story exceeding
fourteen (14) feet in height shall be considered as an additional story for each fourteen (14) feet or fraction thereof.
Story, Half. A half story is that portion of a building under a gable, hip, or mansard roof, the wall plates of which
on at least two (2) opposite exterior walls are not more than four and one-half (4.5) feet above the finished floor of
each story. For one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and multiple-family dwellings less than three (3)
stories in height, a half-story in a sloping room shall not be counted as a story.
Stream. A course of running water, either perennial or intermittent, flowing in a channel.
Street. A public way, other than an alley, which affords a primary means of access to abutting property.
Street, Arterial. A federal-, state-, or county-marked route normally having four (4) lanes for traffic and some form
of median marker or may also be a Village-designated "arterial street" in the adopted Village of Grafton
Comprehensive Plan or component thereof, or on the Official Map Parking may be banned. A street used, or
intended to be used, primarily for fast or heavy through traffic providing for the expeditious movement of through
traffic into, out of, and within the community. Arterial streets shall include freeways and expressways and also
standard arterial streets, highways, and parkways. Arterial streets shall be located to minimize the penetration of
such streets through existing and proposed residential areas. Arterial streets shall be designed to convey an average
daily traffic (ADT) of three thousand (3,000) and greater.
Street, Collector. A street used, or intended to be used, to carry traffic from minor streets to the system of arterial
streets including principal entrance streets to residential developments and/or activity/employment centers.
Collector streets shall be designed to convey an average daily traffic (ADT) of between five hundred (500) and three
thousand (3,000).
Street, Frontage. A minor street auxiliary to and located on the side of an arterial street for control of access and
for service to the abutting development.
Street Line. A line separating a lot, piece, or parcel of land from a street.
Street, Minor. A street used, or intended to be used, primarily for access to abutting properties. Residential minor
streets designed as either looped or through streets shall be designed so that no section conveys an average daily
traffic (ADT) greater than five hundred (500). Residential minor land access streets designed as permanent cul-desac
streets shall be designed so that no section conveys an average daily traffic (ADT) greater than two hundred fifty
(250).
Streetscape. Those features of either the manmade or natural environments that abut, face, or are a part of a public
street right-of-way including landscaping (materials and plants), street furniture, building facades, and utilities and
facilities that are visible to the public such as fire hydrants, storm sewer grates, sidewalk and street paving, etc.
Structural Alterations. (See definition of "Structural Repairs.")
19- 9-29
Structural Repairs. Any change in the supporting members of a structure, such as foundations, bearing walls,
columns, beams, and girders; any work that would convert an existing building or existing structure into a new or
substantially different building or structure; work that would affect the structural quality of a building or structure;
and improvements that would contribute to the longevity or permanence of a building or structure.
Structure. Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground, including buildings, towers,
masts, poles, booms, signs, decorations, carports, machinery, retaining walls, equipment, fences, walls, etc. A sign,
billboard, or other advertising medium, detached or projecting, shall be construed to be a structure.
Structure, Nonconforming. Any structure that does not conform to the regulations of this Ordinance prescribing
the maximum floor area ratio, required yards, coverage, height and setbacks, minimum required spacing between
structures on a single lot, or minimum required usable open space for the district in which such structure is located.
Subdivision. The division of a lot, parcel, or tract of land by the owners thereof, or their agents, meeting the
requirements of Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin and Title 18 "Subdivisions" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code
as amended for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development where the act of division creates five
(5) or more parcels or building sites or one and one-half (1.5) acres each or less in area; or where the act of division
creates five (5) or more parcels or building sites or one and one-half (1.5) acres each or less in area by successive
division within a period of five (5) years.
Subdivision, Conventional. A residential subdivision that does not provide a designated amount of open space as
set forth under the requirements of Division 19.03.0200 of this Ordinance for an "Open Space Subdivision."
Subdivision, Open Space. A residential subdivision that provides a designated amount of open space as set forth
under the requirements of Division 19.03.0200 and Section 19.03.0702(A) of this Ordinance.
Subdivision Ordinance. Title 18 "Subdivisions" of the Village of Grafton Municipal Code.
Surety Bond. A bond guaranteeing performance of a contract or obligation through forfeiture of the bond if said
contract or obligation is unfulfilled.
Tavern. A building where liquors are sold to be consumed on the premises, but not including restaurants, where the
principal business is serving food.
Terminal, Motor Freight. A building in which freight, brought to said building by motor truck, is assembled and
sorted for routing in intrastate and interstate shipment by motor truck.
Theater. (See definition of "Auditorium.")
Throat Length. The distance measured along the center line of an access drive between the street right-of-way line
and an off-street parking lot or loading area.”
Totlot. A park or recreational area less than five (5) acres in area equipped with children play equipment and play
apparatus.
Tourist Court. (See definition of "Motel.")
Tourist Home. A dwelling in which accommodations are provided or offered for transient guests.
Toxic and Noxious Matter. Any solid, liquid, or gaseous matter, including but not limited to, gases, vapors, dusts,
fumes, and mists, containing properties which by chemical means are inherently harmful and likely to destroy life or
impair health, or capable of causing injury to the well-being of persons or damage to property.
Trailer Park. (See definition of "Mobile Home Park.")
Trailer House. (See definition of "Mobile Home.")
19- 9-30
Trailer. A vehicle without motor power used or adaptable for living, sleeping, hauling, business, or storage
purposes, having no foundation other than wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, horses, or skirting, which does not meet
building code requirements, and has been or reasonably may be equipped with wheels or other devices for
transporting the structure from place to place. The term "trailer" shall include "camp car" and "house car." A
permanent foundation shall not change its character unless the entire structure is erected according to prevailing
Village codes and ordinances.
Trailer Sales Area. An open area, other than a street, used for the display or sale of new or used trailers, and where
no repair work is done except minor incidental repair of trailers to be displayed and sold on the premises.
Tree. Any self-supporting, woody plant with its root system, growing upon the earth usually with one (1) trunk, or
a multi-stemmed trunk system, supporting a definitely formed crown.
Tree, Canopy. A tree whose leaves would occupy the upper level of a forest in a natural ecological situation. This
type of tree is often called a shade trees.
Tree, Street. A tree in a public place, street, special easement, or right-of-way adjoining a street.
Tree, Understory. A tree whose leaves would occupy the lower level of a forest in a natural ecological situation.
This type of tree is often called an ornamental tree.
Trip. A single or one-way vehicle movement to or from a property.
Truck Parking Area. Any land used or intended to be used for the storage or parking of trucks, trailers, tractors,
and including commercial vehicles, while not loading or unloading, which exceed one and one-half (1-1/2) tons in
capacity.
Truck Parking Yard. (See definition of "Truck Parking Area.")
Use. The purpose for which land or a building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied
or maintained, let, or leased.
Use, Accessory. (See definition of "Accessory Structure or Use.")
Urban Area. A delineated sanitary sewer service area in conformance with an adopted area wide water quality
management plan.
Use, Conditional. (See definition of "Conditional Use.")
Use, Nonconforming. (See definition of "Nonconforming Use.")
Use, Permitted. (See definition of "Permitted Use")
Use, Principal. The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use.
Utilities. Public and private facilities, such as water wells, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water mains, water and
sewage pumping stations, water storage tanks, water purification facilities, power and communication transmission
lines, electrical power stations, and substations, static transformer stations, telephone and telegraph exchanges,
microwave radio relays, gas regulation stations, wastewater treatment plants, and municipal incinerators
Utility, Public. Any person, firm, corporation, or municipal department duly authorized to furnish under public
regulation to the public, electricity, gas, steam, telephone, transportation, or water.
Variance, Minor. A variance from the terms and provisions of the Building Code and Zoning Ordinance that may
be granted only as to accessory buildings of one hundred and fifty (150) square feet or less in area, decks, and
fences.
19- 9-31
Vehicle, Commercial. Any vehicle more than six thousand (6,000) pounds empty weight.
Veterinary Clinic. (See definition of "Hospital, Animal.")
Veterinary Hospital. (See definition of "Hospital, Animal.")
Vibration. Ground transmitted oscillations. The periodic displacement or oscillation of the earth.
Vibrations, Impact. Discrete impulses that do not exceed sixty (60) per minute.
Vibrations, Steady-State. Vibrations that are continuous, or vibrations in discrete impulses more frequent than
sixty (60) per minute.
Village Administrator. The Village Administrator of the Village of Grafton, Ozaukee County, Wisconsin.
Village Attorney. The Village Attorney of the Village of Grafton, Ozaukee County, Wisconsin.
Village Board. The Village Board of the Village of Grafton, Ozaukee County, Wisconsin.
Village Clerk. The Village Clerk of the Village of Grafton, Ozaukee County, Wisconsin. For application purposes,
the term "Village Clerk" may include other Village Board authorized agent(s) and/or the Village Clerk's designee.
Village Engineer. The Village Engineer of the Village of Grafton, Ozaukee County, Wisconsin.
Village Planner. The Village Planner of the Village of Grafton, Ozaukee County, Wisconsin.
Village President. The Village President of the Village of Grafton, Ozaukee County, Wisconsin.
Vision Clearance. All unoccupied triangular space at the street corner of a corner lot, which is bounded by the
street lines and a setback line, connecting points specified by measurement from the corner on each street line.
Wall, Common. (See definition of "Wall, Party.")
Wall, Party. A wall containing no opening that extends from the elevation of a building footing or footings to the
elevation of the outer surface of the roof or above, which separates contiguous buildings but is in joint use for each
building.
Watercourse. A permanent or intermittent stream channel.
Watercraft, Personal. (See definition of "Personal Watercraft.")
Wetland. An area where water is at, near or above the land surface long enough to be capable of supporting aquatic
or hydrophytic vegetation, and which has soils indicative or wet conditions. (Ord. 021, Series 2001, Part 6)
Wetland, Shoreland. See definition in Title 22 "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning" of the Village of Grafton Municipal
Code.
Wisconsin Administrative Code. The rules of administrative agencies having rule-making authority in Wisconsin,
published in a loose-leaf, continual revision system as directed by Section 35.93 and Chapter 227 of the Wisconsin
Statutes, including subsequent amendments to those rules.
Woodland, Mature. An area or stand of trees whose total combined canopy covers an area of one (1) acre or more
and at least fifty (50) percent of which is composed of canopies of trees having a diameter at breast height (DBH) of
at least ten (10) inches; or any grove consisting of eight (8) or more individual trees having a DBH of at least twelve
(12) inches whose combined canopies cover at least fifty (50) percent of the area encompassed by the grove.
However, no trees grown for commercial purposes should be considered a mature woodland.
19- 9-32
Woodland, Young. An area or stand of trees whose total combined canopy covers an area of one-half (0.50) acre or
more and at least fifty (50) percent of which is composed of canopies of trees having a diameter at breast height
(DBH) of at least three (3) inches. However, no trees grown for commercial purposes shall be considered a young
woodland.
Yard. An open space on the same zoning lot with a principal building or group of buildings, which is unoccupied
and unobstructed from its lowest level upward, except as otherwise permitted in this ordinance, which extends along
a lot line and at right angles thereto to a depth or width specified in the yard regulations for the district in which the
zoning lot is located.
Yard, Front. A yard extending along the full length of the front lot line between the side lot lines. That yard which
is obviously the front due to the prevailing custom of the other buildings in the area or in the Village. Where such
front yard is not obviously evident to the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator shall determine the front
yard.
Yard, Rear. A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line between the side lot lines. The depth of the
rear yard shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and a line parallel thereto through the
nearest roofed or enclosed portion of the principal structure, excluding uncovered stairs and patios. On a corner lot,
the rear yard shall be that yard directly opposite the front yard.
Yard, Shore. A yard extending across the full width or depth of a lot, the depth of which shall be the minimum
horizontal distance between a line intersecting both side lot lines at the same angle and containing the point of the
100-year recurrence interval floodplain or ordinary high water mark of a pond, stream, lake, or wetland nearest the
principal structure and a line parallel thereto containing the point of the principal structure nearest the 100-year
recurrence interval floodplain or high water line.
Yard, Side. A yard extending along a side lot line from the front yard to the rear yard of the lot or parcel. The
width of the side yard shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the side lot or parcel line and a line parallel
thereto through the nearest roofed or enclosed portion of the principal structure, excluding uncovered stairs and
patios.
Yard, Street. A yard extending the full width of a lot in that area of a lot located between a lot line abutting a street
right-of-way and a building line. Corner lots shall have two (2) such yards.
Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator of the Village of Grafton, Ozaukee County, Wisconsin.
Zoning Board of Appeals. Reference to "Zoning Board of Appeals" shall refer to the Board of Zoning Appeals of
the Village of Grafton, Ozaukee County, Wisconsin.
Zoning District. As defined by the Village of Grafton Zoning Ordinance and its accompanying maps as amended.
Zoning Lot. A single tract of land located within a single block that (at the time of filing for a building permit) is
designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership
or control. Therefore, a "zoning lot" may or may not coincide with a lot of record.
Zoning Map. The map or maps incorporated into this Ordinance as a part hereof, designating and delineating
boundaries of zoning districts.
Zoning Permit. The permit required by this Ordinance before the erection, reconstruction, enlargement, or moving
of any building or structure, or use of a structure, land, or water where such erection or use complies with all
provisions of this Ordinance.
Village of Grafton Zoning Ordinance
PART 10: ADOPTION AND EFFECTIVE DATE
DIVISION 19.10.0100 ADOPTION AND EFFECTIVE DATE
SECTION 19.10.0101 PUBLIC HEARINGS
The Village of Grafton Village Board held a public hearing on this proposed Zoning Ordinance for the Village of
Grafton pursuant to the requirements of Sections 62.23(7) of the Wisconsin Statutes on March 9, 2000.
SECTION 19.10.0102 PLAN COMMISSION RECOMMENDATION
The Plan Commission recommended to the Village Board the adoption of this Zoning Ordinance at its meeting held
on March 28, 2000.
SECTION 19.10.0103 VILLAGE BOARD APPROVAL
The Village Board of the Village of Grafton concurred with the recommendations of the Plan Commission and
proceeded to adopt the Zoning Ordinance at a meeting held on April 3, 2000.
SECTION 19.10.0104 EFFECTIVE DATE
This Zoning Ordinance shall take effect upon passage and adoption by the Village Board and the filing of proof of
posting or publication in the Office of the Village Clerk.
Date of Posting: April ____, 2000.
Dates of Public
Hearing Notice
Publication: February 14, 2000.
February 21, 2000.
Effective Date: April ____, 2000.
Village President: ______________________________________
Village President, Village of Grafton, WI
ATTESTED:
___________________________________
Village Clerk
Table 19.03.0602 Permitted and Conditional Uses in Residential Districts
TYPE OF USE R-RE R-E R-1 R-S R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 R-6 MFR-1 MFR-2 PUD A-1 A-2 A-3
Accessory uses (see Division 19.03.0800) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Adult Family Home P P P P P P P P P P P P
Agricultural Crop Production (Cash Grain SIC No. 11 Only) P P P P P P P P P P P P (See Table 19.03.0603)
Bed and Breakfast Establishments C C C C C C
Bicycle Trails (non-motorized) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Boat Access Sites (noncommercial) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Class 1 Collocations (for mobile services) C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Class 2 Collocations (for mobile services) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Community living arrangement (serving 8 or fewer persons) P P P P P P P P P P P P
Community living arrangement (serving 9 to 15 persons) C C C C C C C C C P P C
Community living arrangement (serving 16 or more persons) C C C
Cross Country Ski Trails P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Day care facilities in a single-family dwelling structure serving a
maximum of eight (8) children P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Essential Services P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Existing dwelling not accessory to farm (on 2-acre lot, 150' min.
lot width) P
Foster family home P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Hiking Trails P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Historic Monuments or Sites P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Hobby Farms P
Home occupations (See Division 19.03.0800) P P P P P P P P P C C C
Housing, Congregate (for the elderly)
Ice Skating (Outdoor noncommercial) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Institutional residential facility C C C C
Jogging Trails P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Lands and buildings used for agricultural purposes C C (See Table 19.03.0603)
Multiple-family dwellings and apartments P C P
Multiple-family attached dwellings (townhouses) not exceeding
six (6) dwelling units per structure C P C P
Nature Areas (not including individual platted residential lots) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Nature Trails P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
One (1) single-family farm dwelling (farmstead) P P P
One-family detached dwellings P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Parks, Private (as an Accessory Use Only and Only When
Included as a Part of an Approved Subdivision or PUD) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Picnicking (as an Accessory Use Only, noncommercial only) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Private Clubhouses (as an Accessory Use Only) C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Private boathouses (with no living quarters) P P P P P P
Private stable (for use by residents of the zoning lot & guests) C C P P P
Required off-street parking (see Division 19.05.0200) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Riding/Equestrian Trails P P P P P P
Roadside stand for sale of agricultural products C C C
Row dwellings not greater than six (6) attached dwelling units C C C P
Snowmobile and Motorized Vehicle Trails (on land)
Second single-family D.U. or Existing Farm-Related Accessory
Structure (to carry on permitted farm use, with min. A-1 Dist. lot
size & setbacks) C
Swimming Pools (Outdoor, noncommercial only as an
Accessory Use Only) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Temporary roadside stand for sale of agricultural products P P P
Tennis Courts (Outdoor, as an Accessory Use Only) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Tot Lots (as an Acessory Use Only) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Tourist Rooming House (6 or fewer consecutive days) C C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Tourist Rooming House (7-29 consecutive days) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Two-family attached dwellings P P P P P P
Wildlife Sanctuaries (not including individual platted residential
lots) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
(Permitted Use = P, Conditional Use = C, Not Permitted = Blank)
Table 19.03.0603 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES IN THE NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
(continued)
SIC # STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION TITLE C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 O BP M-1 PID I PR A-1 A-2 A-3 HPO (a)
A. AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY, AND FISHING
1 AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION--CROPS
11 CASH GRAINS
111 Wheat P P P
112 Rice P P P
115 Corn P P P
116 Soybeans P P P
119 Cash grain, not elsewhere classified P P P
13 FIELD CROPS, EXCEPT CASH GRAINS
131 Cotton P P P
132 Tobacco P P P
133 Sugarcane and sugar beets P P P
134 Irish Potatoes P P P
139 Field crops, except cash grains, not elsewhere classified P P P
16 VEGETABLES AND MELONS
161 Vegetables and melons P P P
17 FRUITS AND TREE NUTS
171 Berry crops P P P
172 Grapes P P P
173 Tree nuts P P P
174 Citrus fruits P P P
175 Deciduous tree fruits P P P
179 Fruits and tree nuts, not elsewhere classified P P P
18 HORTICULTURAL SPECIALTIES
181 Ornamental nursery products C C C P P P
182 Food crops grown under cover C C C P P P
19 GENERAL FARMS, PRIMARILY CROP
191 General farms, primarily crop P P P
2 AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION--LIVESTOCK
21 LIVESTOCK, EXCEPT DAIRY AND POULTRY
211 Beef cattle feedlots C C C
212 Beef cattle, except feedlots C C C
213 Hogs C C C
214 Sheep and goats C C C
219 General livestock, not elsewhere classified C C C
24 DAIRY FARMS
241 Dairy farms C C C
25 POULTRY AND EGGS
251 Broiler, fryer, and roaster chickens C C C
252 Chicken eggs C C C
253 Turkeys and turkey eggs C C C
254 Poultry hatcheries C C C
259 Poultry and eggs, not elsewhere classified C C C
27 ANIMAL SPECIALTIES
271 Fur-bearing animals and rabbits C C C
272 Horses and other equines C C C
273 Animal aquaculture C C C
279 Animal specialties, not elsewhere classified C C C
29 GENERAL FARMS, PRIMARILY ANIMAL
291 General farms, primarily animal C C C
7 AGRICULTURAL SERVICES
71 SOIL PREPARATION SERVICES
711 Soil preparation services
72 CROP SERVICES
721 Crop planting and protecting
722 Crop harvesting C C C
723 Crop preparation services for market
724 Cotton ginning
74 VETERINARY SERVICES
(Permitted Use = P, Conditional Use = C, Not Permitted = Blank) Updated: January 2017
Table 19.03.0603 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES IN THE NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
(continued)
SIC # STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION TITLE C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 O BP M-1 PID I PR A-1 A-2 A-3 HPO (a)
741 Veterinary services for livestock C C C
742 Veterinary services, specialties, small animal veterinary clinics C C C C C C C C C
75 ANIMAL SERVICES, EXCEPT VETERINARY
751 Livestock services, except veterinary
752 Animal specialty services, dog day care, indoor overnight C C C C C C
boarding, dog training and pet grooming
76 FARM LABOR AND MANAGEMENT SERVICES
761 Farm labor contractors C C
762 Farm management services C C
78 LANDSCAPE AND HORTICULTURAL SERVICES
781 Landscape counseling and Planning P P C P P P P C C C
782 Lawn and garden services C C C C C C C
783 Ornamental shrub and tree services C C C C C C C
8 FORESTRY
81 TIMBER TRACTS
811 Timber tracts P P P
83 FOREST PRODUCTS
831 Forest products P P P P P
85 FORESTRY SERVICES
851 Forestry services P
9 FISHING, HUNTING, AND TRAPPING
91 COMMERCIAL FISHING
912 Finfish P
913 Shellfish P
919 Miscellaneous marine products
92 FISH HATCHERIES AND PRESERVES
921 Fish hatcheries and preserves P C C C
97 HUNTING, TRAPPING, GAME PROPAGATION
971 Hunting, trapping, game propagation
B. MINING
10 METAL MINING
101 IRON ORES
1011 Iron ores
102 COPPER ORES
1021 Copper ores
103 LEAD AND ZINC ORES
1031 Lead and zinc ores
104 GOLD AND SILVER ORES
1041 Gold ores
1044 Silver ores
106 FERROALLOY ORES, EXCEPT VANADIUM
1061 Ferroally ores, except vanadium
108 METAL MINING SERVICES
1081 Metal mining services
109 MISCELLANEOUS METAL ORES
1094 Uranium-radium-vanadium ores
1099 Metal ores, not elsewhere classified
12 COAL MINING
122 BITUMINOUS COAL AND LIGNITE MINING
1221 Bituminous coal and lignite--surface
1222 Bituminous coal-underground
123 ANTHRACITE MINING
1231 Anthracite mining
124 COAL MINING SERVICES
1241 Coal minimg services
13 OIL AND GAS EXTRACTION
(Permitted Use = P, Conditional Use = C, Not Permitted = Blank) Updated: January 2017
Table 19.03.0603 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES IN THE NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
(continued)
SIC # STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION TITLE C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 O BP M-1 PID I PR A-1 A-2 A-3 HPO (a)
131 CRUDE PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS
1311 Crude petroleum and natural gas
132 NATURAL GAS LIQUIDS
1321 Natural gas liquids
138 OIL AND GAS FIELD SERVICES
1381 Drilling oil and gas wells
1382 Oil and gas exploration services
1389 Oil and gas field services, not elsewhere classified
14 NONMETALLIC MINERALS, EXCEPT FUELS
141 DIMENSION STONE
1411 Dimension stone
142 CRUSHED AND BROKEN STONE
1422 Crushed and broken limestone
1423 Crushed and broken granite
1429 Crushed and broken stone, not elsewhere classified
144 SAND AND GRAVEL
1442 Construction sand and gravel
1446 Industrial sand
145 CLAY, CERAMIC, & REFRACTORY MINERALS
1455 Kaolin and ball clay
1459 Clay and related minerals, not elsewhere classified
147 CHEMICAL AND FERTILIZER MINERALS
1474 Potash, soda, and borate minerals
1475 Phosphate rock
1479 Chemical and fertilizer mining, not elsewhere classified
148 NONMETALLIC MINERALS SERVICES
1481 Nonmetallic mineral services
149 MISCELLANEOUS NONMETALLIC MINERALS
1499 Miscellaneous nonmetallic minerals
C. CONSTRUCTION
15 GENERAL BUILDING CONTRACTORS
152 RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
1521 Single-family housing construction C C
1522 Residential construction, not elsewhere classified C C
153 OPERATIVE BUILDERS
1531 Operative builders C C
154 NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
1541 Industrial buildings and warehouses C C
1542 Nonresidential construction, not elsewhere classified C C
16 HEAVY CONSTRUCTION, EXCEPT BUILDING
161 HIGHWAY AND STREET CONSTRUCTION
1611 Highway and street construction C
162 HEAVY CONSTRUCTION, EXCEPT HIGHWAY
1622 Bridge, tunnel, & elevated highway C
1623 Water, sewer, and utility lines C
1629 Heavy construction, not elsewhere classified C
17 SPECIAL TRADE CONTRACTORS
171 PLUMBING, HEATING, AIR-CONDITIONING
1711 Plumbing, heating, air conditioning C C C C
172 PAINTING AND PAPER HANGING
1721 Painting and paper hanging C C C C
173 ELECTRICAL WORK
1731 Electrical work C C C
174 MASONRY, STONEWORK, AND PLASTERING
1741 Masonry and other stonework C C C
1742 Plastering, drywall, and insulation C C C
(Permitted Use = P, Conditional Use = C, Not Permitted = Blank) Updated: January 2017
Table 19.03.0603 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES IN THE NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
(continued)
SIC # STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION TITLE C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 O BP M-1 PID I PR A-1 A-2 A-3 HPO (a)
1743 Terrazzo, tile, marble, mosaic work C C C
175 CARPENTRY AND FLOOR WORK
1751 Carpentry work C C C
1752 Floor laying and floor work, not elsewhere classified C C C C C
176 ROOFING, SIDING, AND SHEET METAL WORK
1761 Roofing, siding, and sheet metal work C C C
177 CONCRETE WORK
1771 Concrete work C C
178 WATER WELL DRILLING
1781 Water well drilling
179 MISCELLANEOUS SPECIAL TRADE CONTRACTORS
1791 Structural steel erection
1793 Glass and glazing work C C C C C
1794 Excavation work
1795 Wrecking and demolition work
1796 Installing building equipment, not elsewhere classified
1799 Special trade contractors, not elsewhere classified
D. MANUFACTURING
20 FOOD AND KINDRED PRODUCTS
201 MEAT PRODUCTS
2011 Meat packing plants
2013 Sausages and other prepared meats
2015 Poultry slaughtering and processing
202 DAIRY PRODUCTS
2021 Creamery butter C C
2022 Cheese, natural and processed C C
2023 Dry, condensed, evaporated products C C
2024 Ice cream and frozen desserts C C
2026 Fluid milk C C C C
203 PRESERVED FRUITS AND VEGETABLES
2032 Canned specialties C C
2033 Canned fruits and vegetables C C
2034 Dehydrated fruits, vegetables, soups C C
2035 Pickles, sauces, and salad dressings C C
2037 Frozen fruits and vegetables C C
2038 Frozen specialties, not elsewhere classified C C
204 GRAIN MILL PRODUCTS
2041 Flour and other grain mill products C C
2043 Cereal breakfast foods C C
2044 Rice milling C C
2045 Prepared flour mixes and doughs C C
2046 Wet corn milling C C
2047 Dog and cat food
2048 Prepared feeds, not elsewhere classified C C
205 BAKERY PRODUCTS
2051 Bread, cake, and related products C C
2052 Cookies and crackers C C
2053 Frozen bakery products, except bread C C
206 SUGAR AND CONFECTIONERY PRODUCTS
2061 Raw cane sugar
2062 Cane sugar refining
2063 Beet sugar
2064 Candy & other confectionery product C C
2066 Chocolate and cocoa products C C
2067 Chewing gum C C
2068 Salted and roasted nuts and seeds C C
207 FATS AND OILS
2074 Cottonseed oil mills
2075 Soybean oil mills
2076 Vegetable oil mills, not elsewhere classified
(Permitted Use = P, Conditional Use = C, Not Permitted = Blank) Updated: January 2017
Table 19.03.0603 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES IN THE NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
(continued)
SIC # STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION TITLE C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 O BP M-1 PID I PR A-1 A-2 A-3 HPO (a)
2077 Animal and marine fats and oils
2079 Edible fats and oils, not elsewhere classified
208 BEVERAGES
2082 Malt beverages
2083 Malt
2084 Wines, brandy, and brandy spirits C C
2085 Distilled and blended liquors C C
2086 Bottled and canned soft drinks C C
2087 Flavoring extracts and syrups, not elsewhere classified C C
209 MISCELLANEOUS FOOD AND KINDRED PRODUCTS
2091 Canned and cured fish and sea foods
2092 Fresh or frozen prepared fish
2095 Roasted coffee C C
2096 Potato chips and similar snacks C C
2097 Manufactured ice C C
2098 Macaroni and spaghetti C C
2099 Food preparations, not elsewhere classified C C
21 TOBACCO PRODUCTS
211 CIGARETTES
2111 Cigarettes
212 CIGARS
2121 Cigard
213 CHEWING AND SMOKING TOBACCO
2131 Chewing and smoking tobacco
214 TOBACCO STEMMING AND REDRYING
2141 Tobacco stemming and redrying
22 TEXTILE MILL PRODUCTS
221 BROADWOVEN FABRIC MILLS, COTTON
2211 Broadwoven fabric mills, cotton C C
222 BROADWOVEN FABRIC MILLS, MANMADE
2221 Broadwoven fabric mills, manmade C C
223 BROADWOVEN FABRIC MILLS, WOOL
2231 Broadwoven fabric mills, wool C C
224 NARROW FABRIC MILLS
2241 Narrow fabric mills C C
225 KNITTING MILLS
2251 Women's hosiery, except socks C C
2252 Hosiery, not elsewhere classified C C
2253 Knit outerwear mills C C
2254 Knit underwear mills C C
2257 Weft knit fabric mills C C
2258 Lace & warp knit fabric mills C C
2259 Knitting mills, not elsewhere classified C C
226 TEXTILE FINISHING, EXCEPT WOOL
2261 Finishing plants, cotton
2262 Finishing plants, manmade
2269 Finishing plants, not elsewhere classified
227 CARPETS AND RUGS
2273 Carpets and rugs C C
228 YARN AND THREAD MILLS
2281 Yarn spinning mills C C
2282 Throwing and winding mills C C
2284 Thread mills C C
229 MISCELLANEOUS TEXTILE GOODS
2295 Coated fabrics, not rubberized C C
2296 Tire cord and fabrics
2297 Nonwoven fabrics C C
2298 Cordage and twine
2299 Textile goods, not elsewhere classified C C
23 APPAREL AND OTHER TEXTILE PRODUCTS
(Permitted Use = P, Conditional Use = C, Not Permitted = Blank) Updated: January 2017
Table 19.03.0603 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES IN THE NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
(continued)
SIC # STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION TITLE C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 O BP M-1 PID I PR A-1 A-2 A-3 HPO (a)
231 MEN'S AND BOYS' SUITS AND COATS
2311 Men's and boy's suits and coats P P
232 MEN'S AND BOYS' FURNISHINGS
2321 Men's and boys' shirts P P
2322 Men's and boys' underwear & nightwear P P
2323 Men's and boys' neckwear P P
2325 Men's and boys' trousers and slacks P P
2326 Men's and boys' work clothing P P
2329 Men's and boys' clothing, not elsewhere classified C C
233 WOMEN'S AND MISSES' OUTERWEAR
2331 Women's & misses' blouses & shirts P P
2335 Women's, juniors', & misses' dresses P P
2337 Women's and misses' suits and coats P P
2339 Women's and misses' outerwear, not elsewhere classified C C
234 WOMEN'S AND CHILDREN'S UNDERGARMENTS
2341 Women's and children's underwear P P
2342 Bras, girdles, and allied garments P P
235 HATS, CAPS, AND MILLINERY
2353 Hats, caps and millinery C C
236 GIRLS' AND CHILDREN'S OUTERWEAR
2361 Girls' & children's dresses, blouses P P
2369 Girls' and children's outerwear, not elsewhere classified P P
237 FUR GOODS
2371 Fur goods C C
238 MISCELLANEOUS APPAREL AND ACCESSORIES
2381 Fabric dress and work gloves P P
2384 Robes and dressing gowns P P
2385 Waterproof outerwear P P
2386 Leather and sheep-lined clothing P P
2387 Apparel belts P P
2389 Apparel and accessories, not elsewhere classified C C
239 MISCELLANEOUS FABRICATED TEXTILE PRODUCTS
2391 Curtains and draperies P P
2392 Housefurnishings, not elsewhere classified P P
2393 Textile bags P P
2394 Canvas and related products P P
2395 Pleating and stitching C C
2396 Automotive and apparel trimmings C C
2397 Schiffli machine embroideries P P
2399 Fabricated textile products, not elsewhere classified
24 LUMBER AND WOOD PRODUCTS
241 LOGGING
2411 Logging
242 SAWMILLS AND PLANING MILLS
2421 Sawmills and planing mills, general
2426 Hardwood dimension & flooring mills
2429 Special product sawmills, not elsewhere classified
243 MILLWORK, PLYWOOD & STRUCTURAL MEMBERS
2431 Millwork C C
2434 Wood kitchen cabinets C C
2435 Hardwood veneer and plywood
2436 Softwood veneer and plywood
2439 Structural wood members, not elsewhere classified
244 WOOD CONTAINERS
2441 Nailed wood boxes and shook
2448 Wood pallets and skids
2449 Wood containers, not elsewhere classified
245 WOOD BUILDINGS AND MOBILE HOMES
2451 Mobile homes
2452 Prefabricated wood buildings
249 MISCELLANEOUS WOOD PRODUCTS
2491 Wood preserving
(Permitted Use = P, Conditional Use = C, Not Permitted = Blank) Updated: January 2017
Table 19.03.0603 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES IN THE NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
(continued)
SIC # STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION TITLE C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 O BP M-1 PID I PR A-1 A-2 A-3 HPO (a)
2493 Reconstituted wood products
2499 Wood products, not elsewhere classified
25 FURNITURE AND FIXTURES
251 HOUSEHOLD FURNITURE
2511 Wood household furniture C C
2512 Upholstered household furniture C C
2514 Metal household furniture C C
2515 Mattresses and bedsprings C C
2517 Wood TV and radio cabinets C C C
2519 Household furniture, not elsewhere classified
252 OFFICE FURNITURE
2521 Wood Office Furniture C C
2522 Office furniture, except wood C C
253 PUBLIC BUILDING & RELATED FURNITURE
2531 Public building & related furniture
254 PARTITIONS AND FIXTURES
2541 Wood partitions and fixtures C C
2542 Partitions and fixtures, except wood C C
259 MISCELLANEOUS FURNITURE AND FIXTURES
2591 Drapery hardware & blinds & shades C C
2599 Furniture and fixtures, not elsewhere classified
26 PAPER AND ALLIED PRODUCTS
261 PULP MILLS
2611 Pulp mills
262 PAPER MILLS
2621 Paper mills
263 PAPERBOARD MILLS
2631 Paperboard mills
265 PAPERBOARD CONTAINERS AND BOXES
2652 Setup paperboard boxes C C
2653 Corrugated and solid fiber boxes C C
2655 Fiber cans, drums & similar products C C
2656 Sanitary food containers C C
2657 Folding paperboard boxes C C
267 MISCELLANEOUS CONVERTED PAPER PRODUCTS
2671 Paper coated & laminated, packaging C C
2672 Paper coated and laminated, not elsewhere classified C C
2673 Bags: plastics, laminated, & coated C C
2674 Bags: uncoated paper & multiwall C C
2675 Die-cut paper and board C C
2676 Sanitary paper products C C
2677 Envelopes (manufacturing) C C C
2678 Stationery products (manufacturing) C C C
2679 Converted paper products, not elsewhere classified
27 PRINTING AND PUBLISHING
271 NEWSPAPERS
2711 Newspapers C C C P
272 PERIODICALS
2721 Periodicals C C P
273 BOOKS
2731 Book publishing C C P
2732 Book printing C C
274 MISCELLANEOUS PUBLISHING
2741 Miscellaneous publishing C C C
275 COMMERCIAL PRINTING
2752 Commercial printing, lithographic C C C C C C C
2754 Commercial printing, gravure C C
2759 Commercial printing, not elsewhere classified C C P
276 MANIFOLD BUSINESS FORMS
2761 Manifold business forms C C P
(Permitted Use = P, Conditional Use = C, Not Permitted = Blank) Updated: January 2017
Table 19.03.0603 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES IN THE NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
(continued)
SIC # STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION TITLE C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 O BP M-1 PID I PR A-1 A-2 A-3 HPO (a)
277 GREETING CARDS
2771 Greeting cards C C P
278 BLANK BOOKS AND BOOKBINDING
2782 Blankbooks and looseleaf binders C C P
2789 Bookbinding and related work C C P
279 PRINTING TRADE SERVICES
2791 Typesetting P C C P
2796 Platemaking services C C P
28 CHEMICALS AND ALLIED PRODUCTS
281 INDUSTRIAL INORGANIC CHEMICALS
2812 Alkalies and chlorine
2813 Industrial gases
2816 Inorganic pigments
2819 Industrial inorganic chemicals, not elsewhere classified
282 PLASTICS MATERIALS AND SYNTHETICS
2821 Plastics materials and resins
2822 Synthetic rubber
2823 Cellulosic manmade fibers
2824 Organic fibers, noncellulosic
283 DRUGS
2833 Medicinals and botanicals C C C
2834 Pharmaceutical preparations C P P
2835 Diagnostic substances
2836 Biological products except diagnostic
284 SOAP, CLEANERS, AND TOILET GOODS
2841 Soap and other detergents
2842 Polishes and sanitation goods
2843 Surface active agents
2844 Toilet preparations
285 PAINTS AND ALLIED PRODUCTS
2851 Paints and allied products
286 INDUSTRIAL ORGANIC CHEMICALS
2861 Gum and wood chemicals
2865 Cyclic crudes and intermediates
2869 Industrial organic chemicals, not elsewhere classified
287 AGRICULTURAL CHEMICALS
2873 Nitrogenous fertilizers
2874 Phosphatic fertilizers
2875 Fertilizers, mixing only
2879 Agricultural chemicals, not elsewhere classified
289 MISCELLANEOUS CHEMICAL PRODUCTS
2891 Adhesives and sealants
2892 Explosives
2893 Printing ink
2895 Carbon black
2899 Chemical preparations, not elsewhere classified
29 PETROLEUM AND COAL PRODUCTS
291 PETROLEUM REFINING
2911 Petroleum refining
295 ASPHALT PAVING AND ROOFING MATERIALS
2951 Asphalt paving mixtures and blocks
2952 Asphalt felts and coatings
299 MISCELLANEOUS PETROLEUM AND COAL PRODUCTS
2992 Lubricating oils and greases
2999 Petroleum and coal products, not elsewhere classified
30 RUBBER AND MISCELLANEOUS PLASTICS PRODUCTS
301 TIRES AND INNER TUBES
3011 Tires and inner tubes
302 RUBBER AND PLASTICS FOOTWEAR
3021 Rubber and plastics footwear
(Permitted Use = P, Conditional Use = C, Not Permitted = Blank) Updated: January 2017
Table 19.03.0603 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES IN THE NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
(continued)
SIC # STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION TITLE C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 O BP M-1 PID I PR A-1 A-2 A-3 HPO (a)
305 HOSE & BELTING & GASKETS & PACKING
3052 Rubber & plastics hose & belting
3053 Gaskets, packing and sealing devices
306 FABRICATED RUBBER PRODUCTS, NOT ELSEWHERE CLASSIFIED
3061 Mechanical rubber goods
3069 Fabricated rubber products , not elsewhere classified
308 MISCELLANEOUS PLASTICS PRODUCTS, NOT ELSEWHERE CLASSIFIED
3081 Unsupported plastics film & sheet
3082 Unsupported plastics profile shapes
3083 Laminated plastics plate & sheet
3084 Plastics pipe
3085 Plastics bottles
3086 Plastics foam products C
3087 Custom compound purchased resins
3088 Plastics plumbing fixtures
3089 Plastics products, not elsewhere classified C C C
31 LEATHER AND LEATHER PRODUCTS
311 LEATHER TANNING AND FINISHING
3111 Leather tanning and finishing
313 FOOTWEAR CUT STOCK
3131 Footwest cut stock C C C
314 FOOTWEAR, EXCEPT RUBBER
3142 House slippers C P P
3143 Men's footwear, except athletic C P P
3144 Women's footwear, except athletic C P P
3149 Footwear, except rubber, not elsewhere classified C P P
315 LEATHER GLOVES AND MITTENS
3151 Leather gloves and mittens C C C
316 LUGGAGE
3161 Luggage C P P
317 HANDBAGS AND PERSONAL LEATHER GOODS
3171 Women's handbags and purses C P P
3172 Personal leather goods, not elsewhere classified C C C
319 LEATHER GOODS, NOT ELSEWHERE CLASSIFIED
3199 Leather goods, not elsewhere classified C C C
32 STONE, CLAY, AND GLASS PRODUCTS
321 FLAT GLASS
3211 Flat glass
322 GLASS AND GLASSWARE, PRESSED OR BLOWN
3221 Glass containers
3229 Pressed and blown glass, not elsewhere classified
323 PRODUCTS OF PURCHASED GLASS
3231 Products of purchased glass
324 CEMENT, HYDRAULIC
3241 Cement, hydraulic
325 STRUCTURAL CLAY PRODUCTS
3251 Brick and structural clay tile
3253 Ceramic wall and floor tile
3255 Clay refractories
3259 Structural clay products, not elsewhere classified
326 POTTERY AND RELATED PRODUCTS
3261 Vitreous plumbing fixtures
3262 Vitreous china table & kitchenware
3263 Semivitreous table & kitchenware
3264 Porcelain electrical supplies
3269 Pottery products, not elsewhere classified
327 CONCRETE, GYPSUM, AND PLASTER PRODUCTS
3271 Concrete block and brick
3272 Concrete products, not elsewhere classified
3273 Ready-mixed concrete
3274 Lime
(Permitted Use = P, Conditional Use = C, Not Permitted = Blank) Updated: January 2017
Table 19.03.0603 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES IN THE NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
(continued)
SIC # STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION TITLE C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 O BP M-1 PID I PR A-1 A-2 A-3 HPO (a)
3275 Gypsum products
328 CUT STONE AND STONE PRODUCTS
3281 Cut stone and stone products
329 MISCELLANEOUS NONMETALLIC MINERAL PRODUCTS
3291 Abrasive products
3292 Asbestos products
3295 Minerals, ground or treated
3296 Mineral wool
3297 Nonclay refractories
3299 Nonmetallic mineral products, not elsewhere classified
33 PRIMARY METAL INDUSTRIES
331 BLAST FURNACE AND BASIC STEEL PRODUCTS
3312 Blast furnaces and steel mills
3313 Electrometallurgical products
3315 Steel wire and related products
3316 Cold finishing of steel shapes
3317 Steel pipe and tubes
332 IRON AND STEEL FOUNDRIES
3321 Gray and ductile iron foundries C
3322 Malleable iron foundries C
3324 Steel investment foundries
3325 Steel foundries, not elsewhere classified
333 PRIMARY NONFERROUS METALS
3331 Primary copper
3334 Primary aluminum
3339 Primary nonferrous metals, not elsewhere classified
334 SECONDARY NONFERROUS METALS
3341 Secondary nonferrous metals
335 NONFERROUS ROLLING AND DRAWING
3351 Copper rolling and drawing
3353 Aluminum sheet, plate, and foil
3354 Aluminum extruded products
3355 Aluminum rolling and drawing, not elsewhere classified
3356 Nonferrous rolling and drawing, not elsewhere classified
3357 Nonferrous wiredrawing & insulating
336 NONFERROUS FOUNDRIES (CASTINGS)
3363 Aluminum die-castings C
3364 Nonferrous die-casting except aluminum
3365 Aluminum foundries
3366 Copper foundries
3369 Nonferrous foundries, not elsewhere classified
339 MISCELLANEOUS PRIMARY METAL PRODUCTS
3398 Metal heat treating
3399 Primary metal products, not elsewhere classified
34 FABRICATED METAL PRODUCTS
341 METAL CANS AND SHIPPING CONTAINERS
3411 Metal cans
3412 Metal barrels, drums, and pails
342 CUTLERY, HANDTOOLS, AND HARDWARE
3421 Cutlery C C C
3423 Hand and edge tools, not elsewhere classified C C C
3425 Saw blades and handsaws C C C
3429 Hardware, not elsewhere classified C C C
343 PLUMBING AND HEATING, EXCEPT ELECTRIC
3431 Metal sanitary ware
3432 Plumbing fixture fittings and trim C C C
3433 Heating equipment, except electric
344 FABRICATED STRUCTURAL METAL PRODUCTS
3441 Fabricated structural metal C C
3442 Metal doors, sash, and trim
3443 Fabricated plate work (boiler shops) C C
(Permitted Use = P, Conditional Use = C, Not Permitted = Blank) Updated: January 2017
Table 19.03.0603 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES IN THE NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
(continued)
SIC # STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION TITLE C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 O BP M-1 PID I PR A-1 A-2 A-3 HPO (a)
3444 Sheet metal work C C
3446 Architectural metal work C C C
3448 Prefabricated metal buildings
3449 Miscellaneous metal work
345 SCREW MACHINE PRODUCTS, BOLTS, ETC.
3451 Screw machine products C C
3452 Bolts, nuts, rivets, and washers C C C
346 METAL FORGINGS AND STAMPINGS
3462 Iron and steel forgings
3463 Nonferrous forgings
3465 Automotive stampings C C
3466 Crowns and closures
3469 Metal stampings, not elsewhere classified C C
347 METAL SERVICES, NOT ELSEWHERE CLASSIFIED
3471 Plating and polishing
3479 Metal coating and allied services C C
348 ORDNANCE AND ACCESSORIES, NOT ELSEWHERE CLASSIFIED
3482 Small arms ammunition
3483 Ammunition, except for small arms, not elsewhere classified
3484 Small arms
3489 Ordnance and accessories, not elsewhere classified
349 MISCELLANEOUS FABRICATED METAL PRODUCTS
3491 Industrial valves
3492 Fluid power valves & hose fittings
3493 Steel springs, except wire
3494 Valves and pipe fittings, not elsewhere classified
3495 Wire springs C C
3496 Miscellaneous fabricated wire products C C
3497 Metal foil and leaf
3498 Fabricated pipe and fittings C C
3499 Fabricated metal products, not elsewhere classified C C
35 INDUSTRIAL MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT
351 ENGINES AND TURBINES
3511 Turbines and turbine generator sets
3519 Internal combustion engines, not elsewhere classified
352 FARM AND GARDEN MACHINERY
3523 Farm machinery and equipment C C
3524 Lawn and garden equipment
353 CONSTRUCTION AND RELATED MACHINERY
3531 Construction machinery C C
3532 Mining machinery
3533 Oil and gas field machinery
3534 Elevators and moving stairways
3535 Conveyors and conveying equipment
3536 Hoists, cranes, and monorails
3537 Industrial trucks and tractors
354 METALWORKING MACHINERY
3541 Machine tools, metal cutting types P P
3542 Machine tools, metal forming types P P
3543 Industrial patterns P P
3544 Special dies, tools, jigs & fixtures P P
3545 Machine tool accessories P P
3546 Power-driven handtools P P
3547 Rolling mill machinery
3548 Welding apparatus
3549 Metalworking machinery, not elsewhere classified
355 SPECIAL INDUSTRY MACHINERY
3552 Textile machinery P P
3553 Woodworking machinery
3554 Paper industries machinery
3555 Printing trades machinery P P
3556 Food products machinery
(Permitted Use = P, Conditional Use = C, Not Permitted = Blank) Updated: January 2017
Table 19.03.0603 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES IN THE NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
(continued)
SIC # STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION TITLE C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 O BP M-1 PID I PR A-1 A-2 A-3 HPO (a)
3559 Special industry machinery, not elsewhere classified P P
356 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL MACHINERY
3561 Pumps and pumping equipment
3562 Ball and roller bearings C C
3563 Air and gas compressors
3564 Blowers and fans P P
3565 Packaging machinery
3566 Speed changers, drives, and gears
3567 Industrial furnaces and ovens
3568 Power transmission equipment, not elsewhere classified
3569 General industrial machinery, not elsewhere classified P P
357 COMPUTER AND OFFICE EQUIPMENT
3571 Electronic computers C P P
3572 Computer storage devices C P P
3575 Computer terminals C P P
3577 Computer peripheral equipment, not elsewhere classified C P P
3578 Calculating and accounting equipment C P P
3579 Office machines, not elsewhere classified C P P
358 REFRIGERATION AND SERVICE MACHINERY
3581 Automatic vending machines
3582 Commercial laundry equipment
3585 Refrigeration and heating equipment
3586 Measuring and dispensing pumps
3589 Service industry machinery, not elsewhere classified
359 INDUSTRIAL MACHINERY, NOT ELSEWHERE CLASSIFIED
3592 Carburetors, pistons, rings, valves
3593 Fluid power cylinders & actuators
3594 Fluid power pumps and motors
3596 Scales and balances, except laboratory
3599 Industrial machinery, not elsehwere classified C C
36 ELECTRONIC & OTHER ELECTRIC EQUIPMENT
361 ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION EQUIPMENT
3612 Transformers, except electronic C C
3613 Switchgear and switchboard apparatus C C
362 ELECTRICAL INDUSTRIAL APPARATUS
3621 Motors and generators P P
3624 Carbon and graphite products
3625 Relays and industrial controls C C
3629 Electrical industrial apparatus, not elsewhere classified
363 HOUSEHOLD APPLIANCES
3631 Household cooking equipment
3632 Household refrigerators and freezers
3633 Household laundry equipment
3634 Electric housewares and fans P P
3635 Household vacuum cleaners P P
3639 Household appliances, not elsewhere classified
364 ELECTRIC LIGHTING AND WIRING EQUIPMENT
3641 Electric lamps (manufacturing) C P P
3643 Current-carrying wiring devices P P
3644 Noncurrent-carrying wiring devices
3645 Residential lighting fixtures (manufacturing) C P P
3646 Commercial lighting fixtures (manufacturing) C P P
3647 Vehicular lighting equipment P P
3648 Lighting equipment, not elsewhere classified P P
365 HOUSEHOLD AUDIO AND VIDEO EQUIPMENT
3651 Household audio and video equipment C P P
3652 Prerecorded records and tapes C P P
366 COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT
3661 Telephone and telegraph apparatus C P P
3663 Radio & TV communications equipment C P P
3669 Communications equipment, not elsewhere classified C P P
367 ELECTRONIC COMPONENTS AND ACCESSORIES
(Permitted Use = P, Conditional Use = C, Not Permitted = Blank) Updated: January 2017
Table 19.03.0603 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES IN THE NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
(continued)
SIC # STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION TITLE C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 O BP M-1 PID I PR A-1 A-2 A-3 HPO (a)
3671 Electron tubes
3672 Printed circuit boards C P P
3674 Semiconductors and related devices C P P
3675 Electronic capacitors C P P
3676 Electronic resistors C P P
3677 Electronic coils and transformers
3678 Electronic connectors C P P
3679 Electronic components, not elsewhere classified C P P
369 MISCELLANEOUS ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT & SUPPLIES
3691 Storage batteries
3692 Primary batteries, dry and wet
3694 Engine electrical equipment C P P
3695 Magnetic and optical recording media C P P
3699 Electrical equipment & supplies, not elsewhere classified C P P
37 TRANSPORTATION EQUIPMENT
371 MOTOR VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT
3711 Motor vehicles and car bodies
3713 Truck and bus bodies
3714 Motor vehicle parts and accessories P P
3715 Truck trailers
3716 Motor homes
372 AIRCRAFT AND PARTS
3721 Aircraft
3724 Aircraft engines and engine parts
3728 Aircraft parts and equipment, not elsewhere classified
373 SHIP AND BOAT BUILDING AND REPAIRING
3731 Ship building and repairing
3732 Boat building and repairing
374 RAILROAD EQUIPMENT
3743 Railroad equipment
375 MOTORCYCLES, BICYCLES, AND PARTS
3751 Motorcycles, bicycles and parts C C
376 GUIDED MISSILES, SPACE VEHICLES, PARTS
3761 Guided missiles and space vehicles
3764 Space propulsion units and parts
3769 Space vehicle equipment, not elsewhere classified
379 MISCELLANEOUS TRANSPORTATION EQUIPMENT
3792 Travel trailers and campers
3795 Tanks and tank components
3799 Transportation equipment, not elsewhere classified
38 INSTRUMENTS AND RELATED PRODUCTS
381 SEARCH AND NAVIGATION EQUIPMENT C
3812 Search and navigation equipment C P P
382 MEASURING AND CONTROLLING DEVICES
3821 Laboratory apparatus and furniture P P
3822 Environmental controls C P P
3823 Process control instruments C P P
3824 Fluid meters and counting devices C P P
3825 Instruments to measure electricity C P P
3826 Analytical instruments C P P
3827 Optical instruments and lenses C C C
3829 Measuring & controlling devices, not elsewhere classified C C C
384 MEDICAL INSTRUMENTS AND SUPPLIES
3841 Surgical and medical instruments C C C
3842 Surgical appliances and supplies C C C
3843 Dental equipment and supplies C C C
3844 X-ray apparatus and tubes C C C
3845 Electromedical equipment C P P
385 OPHTHALMIC GOODS
3851 Ophthalmic goods P C P P
386 PHOTOGRAPHIC EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES
(Permitted Use = P, Conditional Use = C, Not Permitted = Blank) Updated: January 2017
Table 19.03.0603 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES IN THE NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
(continued)
SIC # STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION TITLE C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 O BP M-1 PID I PR A-1 A-2 A-3 HPO (a)
3861 Photographic equipment and supplies C P P
387 WATCHES, CLOCKS, WATCHCASES & PARTS
3873 Watches, clocks, watchcases & parts C P P
39 MISCELLANEOUS MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES
391 JEWELRY, SILVERWARE, AND PLATED WARE
3911 Jewelry, precious metal C P C C P P
3914 Silverware and plated ware C P P
3915 Jewelers' materials & lapidary work C P P
393 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS
3931 Musical instruments C P P
394 TOYS AND SPORTING GOODS
3942 Dolls and stuffed toys C P P
3944 Games, toys, and children's vehicles C P P
3949 Sporting and athletic goods, not elsewhere classified C P P
395 PENS, PENCILS, OFFICE & ART SUPPLIES
3951 Pens and mechanical pencils C P P
3952 Lead pencils and art goods C P P
3953 Marking devices
3955 Carbon paper and inked ribbons
396 COSTUME JEWELRY AND NOTIONS
3961 Costume jewelry C P P
3965 Fasteners, buttons, needles, & pins C P P
399 MISCELLANEOUS MANUFACTURES
3991 Brooms and brushes C P P
3993 Signs and advertising specialities C C C
3995 Burial caskets
3996 Hard surface floor coverings, not elsewhere classified
3999 Manufacturing industries, not elsewhere classified C C C
E. TRANSPORTATION AND PUBLIC UTILITIES
40 RAILROAD TRANSPORTATION
401 RAILROADS
4011 Railroads, line-haul operating
4013 Switching and terminal services
41 LOCAL AND INTERURBAN PASSENGER TRANSIT
411 LOCAL AND SUBURBAN TRANSPORTATION
4111 Local and suburban transit P C C
4119 Local passenger transportation C
412 TAXICABS
4121 Taxicabs C C
413 INTERCITY AND RURAL BUS TRANSPORTATION
4131 Intercity & rural bus transportation P C C C C
414 BUS CHARTER SERVICE
4141 Local bus charter service P C C C C
4142 Bus charter service, except local P C C C C
415 SCHOOL BUSES
4151 School buses C C
417 BUS TERMINAL AND SERVICE FACILITIES
4173 Bus terminal and service facilities C C C
42 TRUCKING AND WAREHOUSING
421 TRUCKING & COURIER SERVICES, EXCEPT AIR
4212 Local trucking, without storage C C
4213 Trucking, except local
4214 Local trucking with storage C C
4215 Courier services, except by air P C C
422 PUBLIC WAREHOUSING AND STORAGE
4221 Farm product warehousing and storage C C
4222 Refrigerated warehousing and storage P P C C
(Permitted Use = P, Conditional Use = C, Not Permitted = Blank) Updated: January 2017
Table 19.03.0603 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES IN THE NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
(continued)
SIC # STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION TITLE C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 O BP M-1 PID I PR A-1 A-2 A-3 HPO (a)
4225 General warehousing and storage C C C C
4226 Special warehousing and storage, not elsewhere classified C C
423 TRUCKING TERMINAL FACILITIES
4231 Trucking terminal facilities C C
43 U.S. POSTAL SERVICE
431 U.S. POSTAL SERVICE
4311 U.S. Postal Service C C C C C C C C
44 WATER TRANSPORTATION
441 DEEP SEA FOREIGN TRANSPORTATION OF FREIGHT
4412 Deep sea foreign transportation of freight
442 DEEP SEA DOMESTIC TRANSPORTATION OF FREIGHT
4424 Deep sea domestic transportation of freight
443 FREIGHT TRANSPORTATION ON THE GREAT LAKES
4432 Freight transportation on the Great Lakes
444 WATER TRANSPORTATION OF FREIGHT, NOT ELSEWHERE CLASSIFIED
4449 Water transportation of freight, not elsewhere classified
448 WATER TRANSPORTATION OF PASSENGERS
4481 Deep sea passenger transportation, except ferry
4482 Ferries
4489 Water passenger transportation, not elsewhere classified
449 WATER TRANSPORTATION SERVICES
4491 Marine cargo handling
4492 Towing and tugboat service
4493 Marinas
4499 Water transportation services, not elsewhere classified
45 TRANSPORTATION BY AIR
451 AIR TRANSPORTATION, SCHEDULED
4512 Air transportation, scheduled
4513 Air courier services
452 AIR TRANSPORTATION, NONSCHEDULED
4522 Air transportation, nonscheduled
458 AIRPORTS, FLYING FIELDS, & SERVICES
4581 Airports, flying fields, & services
46 PIPELINES, EXCEPT NATURAL GAS
461 PIPELINES, EXCEPT NATURAL GAS
4612 Crude petroleum pipelines
4613 Refined petroleum pipelines
4619 Pipelines, not elsewhere classified
47 TRANSPORTATION SERVICES
472 PASSENGER TRANSPORTATION ARRANGEMENT
4724 Travel agencies P P P C P P
4725 Tour operators P P P C P P
4729 Passenger transport arrangement, not elsewhere classified P P P C P P
473 FREIGHT TRANSPORTATION ARRANGEMENT
4731 Freight transportation arrangement
474 RENTAL OF RAILROAD CARS
4741 Rental of railroad cars
478 MISCELLANEOUS TRANSPORTATION SERVICES
4783 Packing and crating C P P
4785 Inspection & fixed facilities
4789 Transportation services, not elsewhere classified
48 COMMUNICATIONS
481 TELEPHONE COMMUNICATIONS
4812 Radiotelephone communications (New Installations) C C C C C C C C C C C
4812 Radiotelephone communications (Installations on existing towers) P P P P P P P P P P
4813 Telephone communications, except radio C C C C C C C C C C C
482 TELEGRAPH & OTHER COMMUNICATIONS
(Permitted Use = P, Conditional Use = C, Not Permitted = Blank) Updated: January 2017
Table 19.03.0603 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES IN THE NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
(continued)
SIC # STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION TITLE C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 O BP M-1 PID I PR A-1 A-2 A-3 HPO (a)
4822 Telegraph and other communications C C C C C C C C C C C
483 RADIO AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING
4832 Radio broadcasting stations C C C C C
4833 Television broadcasting stations C C C C C
484 CABLE AND OTHER PAY TV SERVICES
4841 Cable and other pay TV services C C C C C C C C
489 COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES, NOT ELSEWHERE CLASSIFIED
4899 Communication services, not elsewhere classified C C C
49 ELECTRIC, GAS, AND SANITARY SERVICES
491 ELECTRIC SERVICES
4911 Electric services C C C C C C C
492 GAS PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION
4922 Natural gas transmission C C C
4923 Gas transmission and distribution C C C
4924 Natural gas distribution
4925 Gas production and/or distribution
493 COMBINATION UTILITY SERVICES
4931 Electric and other services combined
4932 Gas and other services combined
4939 Combination utilities, not elsewhere classified
494 WATER SUPPLY
4941 Water supply C C
495 SANITARY SERVICES
4952 Sewerage systems C C
4953 Refuse systems
4959 Sanitary services, not elsewhere classified C
496 STEAM AND AIR-CONDITIONING SUPPLY
4961 Steam and air-conditioning supply P P
497 IRRIGATION SYSTEMS
4971 Irrigation systems P P
F. WHOLESALE TRADE
50 WHOLESALE TRADE--DURABLE GOODS
501 MOTOR VEHICLES, PARTS, AND SUPPLIES
5012 Automobiles and other motor vehicles
5013 Motor vehicle supplies and new parts P P
5014 Tires and tubes P P
5015 Motor vehicle parts, used
502 FURNITURE AND HOMEFURNISHINGS
5021 Furniture P P
5023 Homefurnishings P P
503 LUMBER AND CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS
5031 Lumber, plywood, and millwork C C
5032 Brick, stone, & related materials C C C
5033 Roofing, siding, & insulation C C C
5039 Construction materials, not elsewhere classified C C C
504 PROFESSIONAL & COMMERCIAL EQUIPMENT
5043 Photographic equipment and supplies C C P P
5044 Office equipment C C P P
5045 Computers, peripherals & software C C P P
5046 Commercial equipment, not elsewhere classified C C P P
5047 Medical and hospital equipment C C P P
5048 Ophthalmic goods C C P P
5049 Professional equipment, not elsewhere classified C C P P
505 METALS AND MINERALS, EXCEPT PETROLEUM
5051 Metals service centers and offices
5052 Coal and other minerals and ores
506 ELECTRICAL GOODS
5063 Electrical apparatus and equipment C C P P
5064 Electrical appliances, TV & radios C C P P
(Permitted Use = P, Conditional Use = C, Not Permitted = Blank) Updated: January 2017
Table 19.03.0603 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES IN THE NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
(continued)
SIC # STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION TITLE C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 O BP M-1 PID I PR A-1 A-2 A-3 HPO (a)
5065 Electronic parts and equipment C C P P
507 HARDWARE, PLUMBING & HEATING EQUIPMENT
5072 Hardware C C P P
5074 Plumbing & hydronic heating supplies C C P P
5075 Warm air heating & air-conditioning C C P P
5078 Refrigeration equipment and supplies C C P P
508 MACHINERY, EQUIPMENT, AND SUPPLIES
5082 Construction and mining machinery C C
5083 Farm and garden machinery C C C
5084 Industrial machinery and equipment C C C
5085 Industrial supplies C C C
5087 Service establishment equipment C P P
5088 Transportation equipment & supplies C C
509 MISCELLANEOUS DURABLE GOODS
5091 Sporting & recreational goods C C C C
5092 Toys and hobby goods and supplies C C C C
5093 Scrap and waste materials
5094 Jewelry & precious stones C C P P
5099 Durable goods, not elsewhere classified C C C C
51 WHOLESALE TRADE-NONDURABLE GOODS
511 PAPER AND PAPER PRODUCTS
5111 Printing and writing paper C C P P
5112 Stationery and office supplies C C P P
5113 Industrial & personal service paper C C P P
512 DRUGS, PROPRIETARIES, AND SUNDRIES
5122 Drugs, proprietaries, and sundries C C P P
513 APPAREL, PIECE GOODS, AND NOTIONS
5131 Piece goods & notions C C P P
5136 Men's and boys' clothing C C P P
5137 Women's and children's clothing C C P P
5139 Footwear C C P P
514 GROCERIES AND RELATED PRODUCTS
5141 Groceries, general line C C P P
5142 Packaged frozen foods C C P P
5143 Dairy products, except dried or canned C C P P C C
5144 Poultry and poultry products C
5145 Confectionery C C C
5146 Fish and sea foods C
5147 Meats and meat products C C C
5148 Fresh fruits and vegetables C C C
5149 Groceries and related products, not elsewhere classified C C C
515 FARM-PRODUCT RAW MATERIALS
5153 Grain and field beans
5154 Livestock
5159 Farm-product raw materials, not elsewhere classified
516 CHEMICALS AND ALLIED PRODUCTS
5162 Plastics materials & basic shapes P P
5169 Chemicals & allied products, not elsewhere classified
517 PETROLEUM AND PETROLEUM PRODUCTS
5171 Petroleum bulk stations & terminals
5172 Petroleum products, not elsewhere classified
518 BEER, WINE, AND DISTILLED BEVERAGES
5181 Beer and ale C C C
5182 Wine and distilled beverages C C C
519 MISCELLANEOUS NONDURABLE GOODS
5191 Farm supplies P P C C
5192 Books, periodicals, & newspapers P P P
5193 Flowers & florists' supplies (wholesaling) P C C C C C
5194 Tobacco and tobacco products P P P
5198 Paints, varnishes, and supplies P P P
5199 Nondurable goods, not elsewhere classified P P
(Permitted Use = P, Conditional Use = C, Not Permitted = Blank) Updated: January 2017
Table 19.03.0603 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES IN THE NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
(continued)
SIC # STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION TITLE C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 O BP M-1 PID I PR A-1 A-2 A-3 HPO (a)
G. RETAIL TRADE
52 BUILDING MATERIALS & GARDEN SUPPLIES
521 LUMBER AND OTHER BUILDING MATERIALS
5211 Lumber and other building materials C C C P
523 PAINT, GLASS, AND WALLPAPER STORES
5231 Paint, glass and wallpaper stores P P P
525 HARDWARE STORES
5251 Hardware stores P P P C P
526 RETAIL NURSERIES AND GARDEN STORES
5261 Retail nurseries and garden stroes C C C C
527 MOBILE HOME DEALERS
5271 Mobile home dealers
53 GENERAL MERCHANDISE STORES
531 DEPARTMENT STORES
5311 Department stores P P C
533 VARIETY STORES
5331 Variety stores P P P C
539 MISCELLANEOUS GENERAL MERCHANDISE STORES
5399 Miscellaneous general mechandise stores P P P
54 FOOD STORES
541 GROCERY STORES
5411 Grocery stores P P P C
542 MEAT AND FISH MARKETS
5421 Meat and fish markets P P P C
543 FRUIT AND VEGETABLE MARKETS
5431 Fruit and vegetable markets P P P P P P P
544 CANDY, NUT AND CONFECTIONERY STORES
5441 Candy, nut and confectionery stores P P P P C
545 DAIRY PRODUCTS STORES
5451 Dairy products stores P P P P C
546 RETAIL BAKERIES
5461 Retail bakeries P P P P C
549 MISCELLANEOUS FOOD STORES
5499 Miscellaneous food stores C C C C
55 AUTOMOTIVE DEALERS & SERVICE STATIONS
551 NEW AND USED CAR DEALERS
5511 New and used car dealers C C C
552 USED CAR DEALERS
5521 Used car dealers C
553 AUTO AND HOME SUPPLY STORES
5531 Auto and home supply stores C P C
554 GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS
5541 Gasoline service stations C C
555 BOAT DEALERS
5551 Boat dealers C C
556 RECREATIONAL VEHICLE DEALERS
5561 Recreational vehicle dealers C
557 MOTORCYCLE DEALERS
5571 Motorcycle dealers C P C
559 AUTOMOTIVE DEALERS, NOT ELSEWHERE CLASSIFIED
5599 Automotive dealers, not elsewhere classified C C C
56 APPAREL AND ACCESSORY STORES
561 MEN'S & BOYS' CLOTHING STORES
5611 Men's and boy's clothing stores P P P P
562 WOMEN'S CLOTHING STORES
5621 Women's clothing stores P P P P
563 WOMEN'S ACCESSORY & SPECIALTY STORES
(Permitted Use = P, Conditional Use = C, Not Permitted = Blank) Updated: January 2017
Table 19.03.0603 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES IN THE NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
(continued)
SIC # STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION TITLE C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 O BP M-1 PID I PR A-1 A-2 A-3 HPO (a)
5632 Women's accessory & specialty stores P P P P
564 CHILDREN'S AND INFANTS' WEAR STORES
5641 Children's and infants's wear stores P P P P
565 FAMILY CLOTHING STORES
5651 Family clothing stores P P P P
566 SHOE STORES
5661 Shoe stores P P P P
569 MISCELLANEOUS APPAREL & ACCESSORY STORES
5699 Miscellaneous apparel & accessory stores P P P P
57 FURNITURE AND HOMEFURNISHINGS STORES
571 FURNITURE AND HOMEFURNISHINGS STORES
5712 Furniture stores P P C
5713 Floor covering stores P P C
5714 Drapery and upholstery stores P P C
5719 Miscellaneous homefurnishings stores P P C
572 HOUSEHOLD APPLIANCE STORES
5722 Household appliance stores C P C
573 RADIO, TELEVISION, & COMPUTER STORES
5731 Radio, TV, & electronic stores P P P C
5734 Computer and software stores P P P P
5735 Record & prerecorded tape stores P P P P
5736 Musical instrument stores P P P P
58 EATING AND DRINKING PLACES
581 EATING AND DRINKING PLACES
5812 Eating places (without drive through facilities) P P P C C C C
5812 Eating places (with drive through facilities) C C
5812 Coffee Shops (with drive through facilities) C C C
5813 Drinking places (without drive through facilities) C C C C
5813 Drinking places (with drive through facilities) C C
59 MISCELLANEOUS RETAIL
591 DRUG STORES AND PROPRIETARY STORES
5912 Drug stores and proprietary stores (without drive through facilities) P P P P C
5912 Drug stores and proprietary stores (with drive trough facilities) C C C C C
592 LIQUOR STORES
5921 Liquor stores C P P
593 USED MERCHANDISE STORES
5932 Used merchandise stores C C P C
594 MISCELLANEOUS SHOPPING GOODS STORES
5941 Sporting goods and bicycle shops C P P P C
5942 Book stores P P P P C
5943 Stationery stores P P P P C C
5944 Jewelry stores P P P P
5945 Hobby, toy, and game shops P P P P C
5946 Camera & photographic supply stores P P P P
5947 Gift, novelty, and souvenir shops P P P P C
5948 Luggage and leather goods stores P P P
5949 Sewing, needlework, and piece goods P P P P
596 NONSTORE RETAILERS
5961 Catalog and mail-order houses P P C C C
5962 Merchandising machine operators C C C
5963 Direct selling establishments C C C
598 Fuel Dealers
5983 Fuel oil dealers C C
5984 Liquefied petroleum gas dealers C C
5989 Fuel dealers, not elsewhere classified C C
599 RETAIL STORES, NOT ELSEWHERE CLASSIFIED
5992 Florists P P P P C C
5993 Tobacco stores and stands P P P C
5994 News dealers and newsstands P P P P C C P
(Permitted Use = P, Conditional Use = C, Not Permitted = Blank) Updated: January 2017
Table 19.03.0603 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES IN THE NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
(continued)
SIC # STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION TITLE C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 O BP M-1 PID I PR A-1 A-2 A-3 HPO (a)
5995 Optical goods stores P P P P
5999 Miscellaneous retail stores, not elsewhere classified C C C C
H. FINANCE, INSURANCE, AND REAL ESTATE
60 DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS
601 CENTRAL RESERVE DEPOSITORIES
6011 Federal reserve banks P P C C C C C
6019 Central reserve depository, not elsewhere classified
602 COMMERCIAL BANKS (without drive through facilities)
6021 National commercial banks (without drive through facilities) P P C P C C C
6022 State commercial banks (without drive through facilities) P P C P C C C
6029 Commercial banks, not elsewhere classified (without drive through facilitiPes) P C P C C C
603 SAVINGS INSTITUTIONS (without drive through facilities)
6035 Federal savings institutions (without drive through facilities) P P C P C C C
6036 Savings institutions, except federal (without drive through facilities) P P C P C C C
606 CREDIT UNIONS (without drive through facilities)
6061 Federal credit unions (without drive through facilities) P P C P C
6062 State credit unions (without drive through facilities) P P C P C
602 COMMERCIAL BANKS (with drive through facilities)
6021 National commercial banks (with drive through facilities) C C C C C C
6022 State commercial banks (with drive through facilities) C C C C C C
6029 Commercial banks, not elsewhere classified (with drive through facilities)C C C C C C
603 SAVINGS INSTITUTIONS (with drive through facilities)
6035 Federal savings institutions (with drive through facilities) C C C C C C
6036 Savings institutions, except federal (with drive through facilities) C C C C C C
606 CREDIT UNIONS (with drive through facilities)
6061 Federal credit unions (with drive through facilities) C C C C
6062 State credit unions (with drive through facilities) C C C C
608 FOREIGN BANK & BRANCHES & AGENCIES
6081 Foreign bank & branches & agencies P C
6082 Foreign trade & international banks P C
609 FUNCTIONS CLOSELY RELATED TO BANKING
6091 Nondeposit trust facilities P C
6099 Functions related to deposit banking P P P P C
61 NONDEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS
611 FEDERAL & FEDERAL-SPONSORED CREDIT
6111 Federal & federal-sponsored credit P P P P P
614 PERSONAL CREDIT INSTITUTIONS
6141 Personal credit institutions P P P P P
615 BUSINESS CREDIT INSTITUTIONS
6153 Short-term business credit P P P P P
6159 Miscellaneous business credit institutions P P P P P
616 MORTGAGE BANKERS AND BROKERS
6162 Mortgage bankers and correspondents P P P P P
6163 Loan brokers P P P P P
62 SECURITY AND COMMODITY BROKERS
621 SECURITY BROKERS AND DEALERS
6211 Security broakers and dealers P P P P
622 COMMODITY CONTRACTS BROKERS, DEALERS
6221 Commodity contracts brokers, dealers P P P P
623 SECURITY AND COMMODITY EXCHANGES
6231 Security and commodity exchanges P P P P
628 SECURITY AND COMMODITY SERVICES
6282 Investment advice P P P P P
6289 Security & commodity services, not elsewhere classified P P P P
63 INSURANCE CARRIERS
631 LIFE INSURANCE
6311 Life insurance P P P P P P
(Permitted Use = P, Conditional Use = C, Not Permitted = Blank) Updated: January 2017
Table 19.03.0603 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES IN THE NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
(continued)
SIC # STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION TITLE C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 O BP M-1 PID I PR A-1 A-2 A-3 HPO (a)
632 MEDICAL SERVICE AND HEALTH INSURANCE
6321 Accident and health insurance P P P P P P
6324 Hospital and medical service plans P P P P P P
633 FIRE, MARINE, AND CASUALTY INSURANCE
6331 Fire, marine, and casualty insurance P P P P P P
635 SURETY INSURANCE
6351 Surety insurance P P P P P P
636 TITLE INSURANCE
6361 Title insurance P P P P P P
637 PENSION, HEALTH, AND WELFARE FUNDS
6371 Pension, health, and welfare funds P P P P P P
639 INSURANCE CARRIERS, NOT ELSEWHERE CLASSIFIED
6399 Insurance carriers, not elsewhere classified P P P P P P
64 INSURANCE AGENTS, BROKERS, & SERVICE
641 INSURANCE AGENTS, BROKERS, & SERVICE
6411 Insurance agents, brokers, & service P P P P P P
65 REAL ESTATE (OFFICES OF)
651 REAL ESTATE OPERATORS AND LESSORS
6512 Nonresidential building operators C C C P P C
6513 Apartment building operators C C C P P C
6514 Dwelling operators, except apartments P P C
6515 Mobile home site operators
6517 Railroad property lessors
6519 Real property lessors, not elsewhere classified C C C
653 REAL ESTATE AGENTS AND MANAGERS
6531 Real estate agents and managers C C P P
654 TITLE ABSTRACT OFFICES
6541 Title abstract offices C C P P
655 SUBDIVIDERS AND DEVELOPERS
6552 Subdividers and developers, not elsewhere classified C C P P C
6553 Cemetery subdividers and developers P P C C
67 HOLDING AND OTHER INVESTMENT OFFICES
671 HOLDING OFFICES
6712 Bank holding companies P P
6719 Holding companies, not elsewhere classified P P
672 INVESTMENT OFFICES
6722 Management investment, open-end P P
6726 Investment offices, not elsewhere classified P P
673 TRUSTS
6732 Educational, religious, etc. trusts P P
6733 Trusts, not elsewhere classified P P
679 MISCELLANEOUS INVESTING
6792 Oil royalty traders P P
6794 Patent owners and lessors P P P
6798 Real estate investment trusts P P
6799 Investors, not elsewhere classified P P
I. SERVICES
70 HOTELS AND OTHER LODGING PLACES
701 HOTELS AND MOTELS
7011 Hotels and motels C C C C C
702 ROOMING AND BOARDING HOUSES
7021 Rooming and boarding houses
703 CAMPS AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS
7032 Sporting and recreational camps C C C
7033 Trailer parks and campsites
704 MEMBERSHIP-BASIS ORGANIZATION HOTELS
7041 Membership-basis organization hotels
(Permitted Use = P, Conditional Use = C, Not Permitted = Blank) Updated: January 2017
Table 19.03.0603 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES IN THE NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
(continued)
SIC # STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION TITLE C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 O BP M-1 PID I PR A-1 A-2 A-3 HPO (a)
72 PERSONAL SERVICES
721 LAUNDRY, CLEANING, & GARMENT SERVICES
7211 Power laundries, family & commercial
7212 Garment pressing & cleaners' agents P P P P C C C
7213 Linen supply C P P
7215 Coin-operated laundries and cleaning C C C C
7216 Drycleaning plants, except rug C C
7217 Carpet and upholstery cleaning C C
7218 Industrial launderers
7219 Laundry and garment services, not elsewhere classified C P C C C
722 PHOTOGRAPHIC STUDIOS, PORTRAIT
7221 Photographic studios, portrait P P P P C C C
723 BEAUTY SHOPS
7231 Beauty shops P P P P C C C C P
724 BARBER SHOPS
7241 Barber shops P P P P C C C C P
725 SHOE REPAIR AND SHOESHINE PARLORS
7251 Shoe repair and shoeshine parlors P P P P C C C C P
726 FUNERAL SERVICE AND CREMATORIES
7261 Funeral service and crematories C C C C
729 MISCELLANEOUS PERSONAL SERVICES
7291 Tax return preparation services P P P P P C
7299 Miscellaneous personal services, not elsewhere classified C P C C C
73 BUSINESS SERVICES
731 ADVERTISING
7311 Advertising agencies P P
7312 Outdoor advertising services P P
7313 Radio, TV, publisher representatives P P
7319 Advertising, not elsewhere classified P P
732 CREDIT REPORTING AND COLLECTION
7322 Adjustment & collection services P P
7323 Credit reporting services P P
733 MAILING, REPRODUCTION, STENOGRAPHIC
7331 Direct mail advertising services P P C
7334 Photocopying & duplicating services P P P P P P P
7335 Commercial photography C P C P P C C
7336 Commercial art and graphic design P P P C
7338 Secretarial & court reporting P P
734 SERVICES TO BUILDINGS
7342 Disinfecting & pest control services C C C
7349 Building maintenance services, not elsewhere classified C C
735 MISCELLANEOUS EQUIPMENT RENTAL & LEASING
7352 Medical equipment rental P P P C C P
7353 Heavy construction equipment rental
7359 Equipment Rental & leasing, not elsewhere classified C C C C C C
736 PERSONNEL SUPPLY SERVICES
7361 Employment agencies P P P C C
7363 Help supply services P P P P
737 COMPUTER AND DATA PROCESSING SERVICES
7371 Computer programming services P P P P P
7372 Prepackaged software P P P P P
7373 Computer integrated systems design P P P P P
7374 Data processing and preparation P P P P P
7375 Information retrieval services P P P P P
7376 Computer facilities management P P P P P
7377 Computer rental & leasing P P P P C P P
7378 Computer maintenance & repair C P C P P P P
7379 Computer related services, not elsewhere classified P P P P P
738 MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS SERVICES
7381 Detective & armored car services C C
7382 Security systems services P C C C P P
(Permitted Use = P, Conditional Use = C, Not Permitted = Blank) Updated: January 2017
Table 19.03.0603 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES IN THE NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
(continued)
SIC # STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION TITLE C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 O BP M-1 PID I PR A-1 A-2 A-3 HPO (a)
7383 News syndicates P C C P P
7384 Photofinishing laboratories C C C C P P
7389 Business services, not elsewhere classified P C C C C
75 AUTO REPAIR, SERVICES, AND PARKING
751 AUTOMOTIVE RENTALS, NO DRIVERS
7513 Truck rental and leasing, no drivers C C C
7514 Passenger car rental C C C
7515 Passenger car leasing C C C
7519 Utility trailer rental C C C
752 AUTOMOBILE PARKING
7521 Automobile parking C C C C C
753 AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR SHOPS
7532 Top & body repair & paint shops C C
7533 Auto exhaust system repair shops C C
7534 Tire retreading and repair shops C C
7536 Automotive glass replacement shops C C
7537 Automotive transmission repair shops C C
7538 General automotive repair shops C C C
7539 Automotive repair shops, not elsewhere classified C C
754 AUTOMOTIVE SERVICES, EXCEPT REPAIR
7542 Carwashes C C C C
7549 Automotive services, not elsewhere classified C C C C
76 MISCELLANEOUS REPAIR SERVICES
762 ELECTRICAL REPAIR SHOPS
7622 Radio and television repair P P P P P P
7623 Refrigeration service and repair P P
7629 Electrical repair shops, not elsewhere classified C P P
763 WATCH, CLOCK, AND JEWELRY REPAIR
7631 Watch, clock and jewelry repair P P P P
764 REUPHOLSTERY AND FURNITURE REPAIR
7641 Reupholstery and furniture repair P P
769 MISCELLANEOUS REPAIR SHOPS
7692 Welding repair P P
7694 Armature rewinding shops C P P
7699 Repair services, not elsewhere classified C P C C
78 MOTION PICTURES
781 MOTION PICTURE PRODUCTION & SERVICES
7812 Motion picture & video production C C C C C
7819 Services allied to motion pictures P C
782 MOTION PICTURE DISTRIBUTION & SERVICES
7822 Motion picture and tape distribution P C P P
7829 Motion picture distribution services P C P P
783 MOTION PICTURE THEATERS
7832 Motion picture theaters, except drive-in C C C
7833 Drive-in motion picture theaters
784 VIDEO TAPE RENTAL
7841 Video tape rental P P P C
79 AMUSEMENT & RECREATION SERVICES
791 DANCE STUDIOS, SCHOOLS, AND HALLS
7911 Dance studios, schools, and halls C P C C
792 PRODUCERS, ORCHESTRAS, ENTERTAINERS
7922 Theatrical producers and services P C C C C
7929 Entertainers & entertainment groups C C C C
793 BOWLING CENTERS
7933 Bowling centers C P C C
794 COMMERCIAL SPORTS
7941 Sports clubs, managers, & promoters C C C
7948 Racing, including track operation
799 MISCELLANEOUS AMUSEMENT, RECREATION SERVICES
(Permitted Use = P, Conditional Use = C, Not Permitted = Blank) Updated: January 2017
Table 19.03.0603 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES IN THE NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
(continued)
SIC # STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION TITLE C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 O BP M-1 PID I PR A-1 A-2 A-3 HPO (a)
7991 Physical fitness facilities C P C C C C C C C C
7992 Public golf courses C C C
7993 Coin-operated amusement devices C C P C C
7996 Amusement parks C C
7997 Membership sports & recreation clubs C C C
7999 Amusement and recreation, not elsewhere classified C C C C
80 HEALTH SERVICES
801 OFFICES & CLINICS OF MEDICAL DOCTORS
8011 Offices & clinics of medical doctors C C P P P P
802 OFFICES AND CLINICS OF DENTISTS
8021 Offices and clinics of dentists C C P C P P P
803 OFFICES OF OSTEOPATHIC PHYSICIANS
8031 Offices of osteopathic physicians C C P P P P
804 OFFICES OF OTHER HEALTH PRACTITIONERS
8041 Offices and clinics of chiropractors C C P P P P
8042 Offices and clinics of optometrists C C P P P P
8043 Offices and clinics of podiatrists C C P P P P
8049 Offices of health practitioners, not elsewhere classified C C P C P P C P
805 NURSING AND PERSONAL CARE FACILITIES
8051 Skilled nursing care facilities C
8052 Intermediate care facilities C
8059 Nursing and personal care, not elsewhere classified C
806 HOSPITALS
8062 General medical & surgical hospitals P
8063 Psychiatric hospitals C
8069 Specialty hospitals except psychiatric C
807 MEDICAL AND DENTAL LABORATORIES
8071 Medical laboratories C C C C
8072 Dental laboratories C C C C C C
808 HOME HEALTH CARE SERVICES
8082 Home healthcare services P P P P
809 HEALTH AND ALLIED SERVICES, NOT ELSEWHERE CLASSIFIED
8092 Kidney dialysis centers C C C C
8093 Specialty outpatient clinics, not elsewhere classified C C C C
8099 Health and allied services, not elsewhere classified C C C C
81 LEGAL SERVICES
811 LEGAL SERVICES
8111 Legal services C P P P
82 EDUCATIONAL SERVICES
821 ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY SCHOOLS
8211 Elementary and secondary schools P
822 COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES
8221 Colleges and universities P
8222 Junior colleges P
823 LIBRARIES
8231 Libraries P
824 VOCATIONAL SCHOOLS
8243 Data processing schools P C P P
8244 Business and secretarial schools P C P C C P
8249 Vocational schools, not elsewhere classified P C C C C
829 SCHOOLS & EDUCATIONAL SERVICES, NOT ELSEWHERE CLASSIFIED
8299 Schools & educational services, not elsewhere classified C C C C C C C C
83 SOCIAL SERVICES
832 INDIVIDUAL AND FAMILY SERVICES
8322 Individual and family services C P C C C C
833 JOB TRAINING AND RELATED SERVICES
8331 Job training and related services P C P C C
835 Job training and related services
(Permitted Use = P, Conditional Use = C, Not Permitted = Blank) Updated: January 2017
Table 19.03.0603 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES IN THE NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
(continued)
SIC # STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION TITLE C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 O BP M-1 PID I PR A-1 A-2 A-3 HPO (a)
8351 Child day care services C C C C C C C C C C
836 RESIDENTIAL CARE
8361 Residential care C C
839 SOCIAL SERVICES, NOT ELSEWHERE CLASSIFIED
8399 Social services, not elsewhere classified P P P C C P
84 MUSEUMS, BOTANICAL, ZOOLOGICAL GARDENS
841 MUSEUMS AND ART GALLERIES
8412 Museums and art galleries P P P
842 BOTANICAL AND ZOOLOGICAL GARDENS
8422 Botanical and zoological gardens C C P
86 MEMBERSHIP ORGANIZATIONS
861 BUSINESS ASSOCIATIONS
8611 Business associations P P P P
862 PROFESSIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
8621 Professional organizations P P P P
863 LABOR ORGANIZATIONS
8631 Labor organizations P P P P
864 CIVIC AND SOCIAL ASSOCIATIONS
8641 Civic and social associations P P P P
865 POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS
8651 Political organizations P P P P
866 RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATIONS
8661 Regigious organizations P P P P
869 MEMBERSHIP ORGANIZATIONS, NOT ELSEWHERE CLASSIFIED
8699 Membership organizations, not elsewhere classified C P P C C C
87 ENGINEERING & MANAGEMENT SERVICES
871 ENGINEERING & ARCHITECTURAL SERVICES
8711 Engineering services C C C P P C
8712 Architectural services C C C P P C
8713 Surveying services C C C P P C
872 ACCOUNTING, AUDITING, & BOOKKEEPING
8721 Accounting, auditing & bookkeeping C C C P P
873 RESEARCH AND TESTING SERVICES
8731 Commercial physical research C C C C
8732 Commercial nonphysical research C C C C
8733 Noncommercial research organizations C C C C
8734 Testing laboratories C C
874 MANAGEMENT AND PUBLIC RELATIONS
8741 Management services C C C P P C
8742 Management consulting services C C C P P C
8743 Public relations services C C C P P
8744 Facilities support services C P P
8748 Business consulting, not elsewhere classified C C C P P C
88 PRIVATE HOUSEHOLDS
881 PRIVATE HOUSEHOLDS
8811 Private households P P P
89 SERVICES, not elsewhere classified
899 SERVICES, NOT ELSEWHERE CLASSIFIED
8999 Services, not elsewhere classified C C C C
J. PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION
91 EXECUTIVE, LEGISLATIVE, AND GENERAL
911 EXECUTIVE OFFICES
9111 Executive offices P
912 LEGISLATIVE BODIES
9121 Legislative bodies P
(Permitted Use = P, Conditional Use = C, Not Permitted = Blank) Updated: January 2017
Table 19.03.0603 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES IN THE NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
(continued)
SIC # STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION TITLE C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 O BP M-1 PID I PR A-1 A-2 A-3 HPO (a)
913 EXECUTIVE AND LEGISLATIVE COMBINED
9131 Executive and legislative combined P
919 GENERAL GOVERNMENT, NOT ELSEWHERE CLASSIFIED
9199 General government, not elsewhere classified P
92 JUSTICE, PUBLIC ORDER, AND SAFETY
921 COURTS
9211 Courts P
922 PUBLIC ORDER AND SAFETY
9221 Police protection P
9222 Legal counsel and prosecution P
9223 Correctional institutions
9224 Fire protection P
9229 Public order and safety, not elsewhere classified P
93 FINANCE, TAXATION, & MONETARY POLICY
931 FINANCE, TAXATION, & MONETARY POLICY
9311 Finance, taxation, & monetary policy P P P
94 ADMINISTRATION OF HUMAN RESOURCES
941 ADMINISTRATION OF EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS
9411 Administration of educational programs P C P
943 ADMINISTRATION OF PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS
9431 Administration of public health programs P C P
944 ADMINISTRATION OF SOCIAL & MANPOWER PROGRAMS
9441 Administration of social & manpower programs P C C P
945 ADMINISTRATION OF VETERANS' AFFAIRS
9451 Administration of veterans' affairs P C P
95 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY AND HOUSING
951 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY
9511 Air, water, & solid waste management P C P
9512 Land, mineral, wildlife conservation P C P
953 HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
9531 Housing programs P C P
9532 Urban and community development P C P
96 ADMINISTRATION OF ECONOMIC PROGRAMS
961 ADMINISTRATION OF GENERAL ECONOMIC PROGRAMS
9611 Administration of general exonomic programs P C P
962 REGULATION, ADMINISTRATION OF TRANSPORTATION
9621 Regulation, administration of transportation P C P
963 REGULATION, ADMINISTRATION OF UTILITIES
9631 Regulation, administration of utilities P P
964 REGULATION OF AGRICULTURAL MARKETING
9641 Regulation of agricultural marketing P C P
965 REGULATION MISCELLANEOUS COMMERCIAL SECTORS
9651 Regulation of miscellaneous commercial sectors P C P
966 SPACE RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY
9661 Space research and technology P C P
97 NATIONAL SECURITY AND INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
971 NATIONAL SECURITY
9711 National security P C P
972 INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
9721 International affairs P C P
K. NONCLASSIFIABLE ESTABLISHMENTS
99 NONCLASSIFIABLE ESTABLISHMENTS
999 Nonclassifiable Establishment
9999 Nonclassifiable establishments
(Permitted Use = P, Conditional Use = C, Not Permitted = Blank) Updated: January 2017
Table 19.03.0603 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES IN THE NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
(continued)
SIC # STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION TITLE C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 O BP M-1 PID I PR A-1 A-2 A-3 HPO (a)
OTHER USES NOT CLASSIFIED UNDER SIC CODE
C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 O BP M-1 PID I PR A-1 A-2 A-3 HPO (a)
Assembly Places (Indoor, for less than 100 persons) P P P
Assembly Places (Indoor, for more than 100 persons) C C P C
Athletic Fields P P C P
Automated Teller Machines (ATM) C C C C C C C
Band Shells (Indoor and Outdoor) C C C
Bed and Breakfast Establishments C C C C
Boat Access Sites P
Boat Rental Sites P
Botanical Gardens P
Cabins or Cottages (rental) C
Campgrounds (Rental, for Recreational Vehicles) C
Camps C
Cemeteries P
Class 1 Collocation (for mobile services) C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Class 2 Collocation (for mobile services) P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Columbarium (Indoor) P
Columbarium (Outdoor) C
Continuing Care Retirement Community (for the elderly) P
Convenience Stores (without the dispensing of gasoline) P P C C
Convenience Stores (with the dispensing of gasoline) C
Drive through facilities not elsewhere classified C C C C C C C
Essential Services P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Fairgrounds C
Firearm Ranges (Indoor) C C
Firearm Ranges (Outdoor) C
Golf Driving Ranges C
Gymnasiums C C
Historic Monuments or Sites P P C P P P P P P P P P
Housing, Congregate (for the elderly) P
Ice Skating (Indoor) C C C
Ice Skating (Outdoor) P P
Intermediate Care Facility
Landfill/Disposal Uses
Marinas C
Multiple-Family Residential (above 1st floor only) P C
Nature Areas P P C P P P P P P P P P
Outdoor Sales, Display, and/or Storage as Either an Accessory UseC C C C C C
or a Principal Use
Parks, Private C C C
Parks, Public P P P
Picnicking P P
Playfields P P
Playgrounds P P
Private Clubhouses C
Racquetball Courts (Indoor) C C
Racquetball Courts (Outdoor) P P
Recycling facilities, municipally operated C C
Residential Care Facility (for the elderly) P
Residential Uses Accessory to Churches or Other Places of Worship P
Resorts C
Retail and Commercial Service Buildings In Excess of 20,000 SquaCre FeCet In ACrea C C P P
Skilled Care Nursing Facility P
Swimming Pools (Indoor) P P P
Swimming Pools (Outdoor) P P
Tennis Courts (Indoor) C C
Tennis Courts (Outdoor) P P
Tot Lots P P
Vending Machines (Outdoor Only) C C C C C C C C
Wildlife Sanctuaries P P C P P P P P P P P P
(Permitted Use = P, Conditional Use = C, Not Permitted = Blank) Updated: January 2017
Table 19.03.0603 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES IN THE NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
(continued)
SIC # STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION TITLE C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 O BP M-1 PID I PR A-1 A-2 A-3 HPO (a)
(a) In the HPO Historic Preservation Overlay District, uses are as per the underlying zoning district.
(b) Where proposed uses in the C-1, C-2, C-3, CBD, or O districts function primarily as retail or office
entites, even though thre is an off-site component contradictory to uses defined as permitted or
conditional in one of the zoning districts stated above, the Director of Planning and the Building
Inspector, if jointly agreed upon, may have the discretion to define such uses as permitted or
conditional if the use meets the intent of the particular zoning district it proposes to locate within.
(Permitted Use = P, Conditional Use = C, Not Permitted = Blank) Updated: January 2017
i
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TITLE 19 / ZONING
PART 1: INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................ 1-1
DIVISION 19.01.0100 INTRODUCTION ................................................................................. 1-1
SECTION 19.01.0101 AUTHORITY ........................................................................................ 1-1
SECTION 19.01.0102 SHORT TITLE ..................................................................................... 1-1
SECTION 19.01.0103 PURPOSE AND INTENT ..................................................................... 1-1
SECTION 19.01.0104 OTHER LAWS AND REGULATIONS .................................................. 1-1
SECTION 19.01.0105 INTERPRETATION ............................................................................. 1-1
SECTION 19.01.0106 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY ..................................... 1-1
SECTION 19.01.0107 PERMITS ISSUED AND APPROVED PRIOR TO
THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE ……………1-2
SECTION 19.01.0108 PENDING APPLICATIONS ................................................................. 1-2
SECTION 19.01.0109 REPEAL .............................................................................................. 1-3
PART 2: GENERAL PROVISIONS ........................................................................................... 2-1
DIVISION 19.02.0100 GENERAL PROVISIONS ................................................................... 2-1
SECTION 19.02.0101 JURISDICTION ................................................................................... 2-1
SECTION 19.02.0102 COMPLIANCE ..................................................................................... 2-1
DIVISION 19.02.0200 GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS ..................................................... 2-2
SECTION 19.02.0201 USE AND BULK REGULATIONS ........................................................ 2-2
SECTION 19.02.0202 LOT COVERAGE ................................................................................ 2-2
SECTION 19.02.0203 YARDS, GENERAL ............................................................................. 2-3
SECTION 19.02.0204 ACCESS TO PUBLIC STREETS ......................................................... 2-4
SECTION 19.02.0205 LOT AREA AND DIMENSION ............................................................. 2-4
SECTION 19.02.0206 NUMBER OF BUILDINGS ON A ZONING LOT ................................... 2-4
SECTION 19.02.0207 REDUCTION OR JOINT USE ............................................................. 2-4
SECTION 19.02.0208 REZONING OF PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC AREAS ......................... 2-4
SECTION 19.02.0209 HAZARD PREVENTION PERFORMANCE STANDARDS................... 2-4
SECTION 19.02.0210 EXISTING CONDITIONAL USES ........................................................ 2-5
SECTION 19.02.0211 VIOLATIONS ....................................................................................... 2-5
SECTION 19.02.0212 MUNICIPALITIES AND STATE AGENCIES REGULATED.................. 2-5
DIVISION 19.02.0300 OFFICIAL MAP ................................................................................... 2-5
SECTION 19.02.0301 INTENT ............................................................................................... 2-5
SECTION 19.02.0302 AUTHORITY ........................................................................................ 2-5
SECTION 19.02.0303 OFFICIAL MAP .................................................................................... 2-5
SECTION 19.02.0304 CHANGES AND ADDITIONS .............................................................. 2-5
SECTION 19.02.0305 BUILDING PERMITS ........................................................................... 2-6
SECTION 19.02.0306 MUNICIPAL IMPROVEMENTS ........................................................... 2-6
SECTION 19.02.0307 APPEALS ............................................................................................ 2-6
SECTION 19.02.0308 CERTIFIED COPY OF MAP ................................................................ 2-6
SECTION 19.02.0309 MAP TO BE FILED WITH REGISTER OF DEEDS .............................. 2-6
SECTION 19.02.0310 ENFORCEMENT ................................................................................. 2-6
SECTION 19.02.0311 PENALTIES ......................................................................................... 2-7
ii
PART 3: ZONING DISTRICTS: DISTRICT ESTABLISHMENT,
DIMENSIONAL, AND USE REGULATIONS .............................................................. 3-1
DIVISION 19.03.0100 ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAPS ....................................................... 3-1
SECTION 19.03.0101 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS ..................................................... 3-1
SECTION 19.03.0102 ZONING DISTRICT MAPS .................................................................. 3-2
SECTION 19.03.0103 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.................................................................... 3-2
SECTION 19.03.0104 ZONING OF STREETS, ALLEYS, PUBLIC-WAYS,
WATERWAYS, AND RAILROAD RIGHTS-OF-WAY ........................... 3-2
SECTION 19.03.0105 ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND ............................................................ 3-2
DIVISION 19.03.0200 RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS .................................................. 3-3
SECTION 19.03.0201 R-RE RURAL ESTATE SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT ... 3-4
SECTION 19.03.0202 R-E ESTATE SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT .................. 3-6
SECTION 19.03.0203 R-1 SUBURBAN ESTATE SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICT ............................................................................................ 3-8
SECTION 19.03.0204 R-S SUBURBAN SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT .......... 3-10
SECTION 19.03.0205 R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT ............................... 3-12
SECTION 19.03.0206 R-3 URBAN SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT .................. 3-14
SECTION 19.03.0207 R-4 DUPLEX/TOWNHOUSE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT .................... 3-16
SECTION 19.03.0208 R-5 SUBURBAN TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT ............... 3-18
SECTION 19.03.0209 R-6 URBAN TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT ....................... 3-20
SECTION 19.03.0210 MFR-1 MEDIUM DENSITY MULTIPLE-FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT .................................................................. 3-22
SECTION 19.03.0211 MFR-2 LOW DENSITY MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICT .......................................................................................... 3-24
DIVISION 19.03.0300 NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS ........................................ 3-26
SECTION 19.03.0301 CBD CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT ............................................. 3-26
SECTION 19.03.0302 C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT .................................. 3-33
SECTION 19.03.0303 C-2 COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT .......................................... 3-35
SECTION 19.03.0304 C-3 COMMERCIAL SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT ....................... 3-37
SECTION 19.03.0304A C-3 COMMERCIAL SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT ELEVENTH
AVENUE AND GREEN BAY ROAD OVERLAY ................................. 3-39
SECTION 19.03.0305 C-4 FREEWAY INTERCHANGE BUSINESS DISTRICT ................... 3-40
SECTION 19.03.0306 O OFFICE DISTRICT ........................................................................ 3-42
SECTION 19.03.0307 BP BUSINESS PARK DISTRICT ....................................................... 3-44
SECTION 19.03.0308 M-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT ............................................................. 3-46
SECTION 19.03.0309 PID PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT ........................................... 3-48
SECTION 19.03.0310 I INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT ............................................................ 3-50
SECTION 19.03.0311 PR PARK AND RECREATION DISTRICT ......................................... 3-52
SECTION 19.03.0312 A-1 PRIME AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT ........................................... 3-54
SECTION 19.03.0313 A-2 AGRICULTURE DISTRICT ......................................................... 3-56
SECTION 19.03.0314 A-3 AGRICULTURAL HOLDING DISTRICT ...................................... 3-58
SECTION 19.03.0315 HPO HISTORIC PRESERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT ................. 3-60
iii
DIVISION 19.03.0400 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS ................................ 3-60
SECTION 19.03.0401 INTENT OF THE PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
DISTRICTS ....................................................................................... 3-60
SECTION 19.03.0402 CONSISTENCY OF THE PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
WITH THE ADOPTED COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ............................. 3-60
SECTION 19.03.0403 MINIMUM AREA AND USE REQUIREMENTS AND
OTHER STANDARDS ....................................................................... 3-61
SECTION 19.03.0404 PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
PROCEDURES ................................................................................. 3-61
DIVISION 19.03.0500 SITE INTENSITY AND CAPACITY CALCULATIONS ...................... 3-62
SECTION 19.03.0501 SITE INTENSITY AND CAPACITY CALCULATIONS FOR
RESIDENTIAL AND NONRESIDENTIAL USES REQUIRED ............ 3-62
SECTION 19.03.0502 CALCULATION OF BASE SITE AREA .............................................. 3-62
SECTION 19.03.0503 CALCULATION OF THE AREA OF NATURAL RESOURCES TO
BE PROTECTED ............................................................................... 3-62
SECTION 19.03.0504 CALCULATION OF SITE INTENSITY AND CAPACITY
FOR RESIDENTIAL USES ................................................................ 3-65
SECTION 19.03.0505 CALCULATION OF SITE INTENSITY AND CAPACITY
FOR NONRESIDENTIAL USES ........................................................ 3-66
DIVISION 19.03.0600 ZONING DISTRICT USES AND USE REGULATIONS ..................... 3-67
SECTION 19.03.0601 PURPOSE ......................................................................................... 3-67
SECTION 19.03.0602 TABLE OF PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL
USES IN ALL RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS .......................... 3-67
SECTION 19.03.0603 TABLE OF PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES IN ALL
NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS ......................................... 3-69
SECTION 19.03.0604 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES IN THE FW FLOODWAY,
FF FLOOD FRINGE, AND GFP GENERAL FLOODPLAIN
ZONING DISTRICTS ......................................................................... 3-95
SECTION 19.03.0605 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES IN SHORELAND
WETLAND AND WETLAND AREAS ................................................. 3-95
SECTION 19.03.0606 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES IN THE HPO HISTORIC
PRESERVATION OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT ............................. 3-96
SECTION 19.03.0607 USES NOT SPECIFICALLY PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS ............... 3-927
DIVISION 19.03.0700 CONDITIONAL USE STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS ............... 3-97
SECTION 19.03.0701 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR CONDITIONAL USES ...................... 3-97
SECTION 19.03.0702 DETAILED STANDARDS FOR CONDITIONAL USES
IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS ........................................................... 3-99
SECTION 19.03.0703 DETAILED STANDARDS FOR CONDITIONAL USES IN
NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS...................................................... 3-101
DIVISION 19.03.0800 ACCESSORY AND TEMPORARY USE STANDARDS AND
REGULATIONS .............................................................................. 3-117
SECTION 19.03.0801 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY USES ...................... 3-117
SECTION 19.03.0802 DETAILED STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY USES
IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS ......................................................... 3-118
SECTION 19.03.0803 DETAILED STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY USES
IN NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS ................................................. 3-122
iv
SECTION 19.03.0804 DETAILED STANDARDS FOR TEMPORARY USES ...................... 3-125
DIVISION 19.03.0900 MODIFICATIONS ............................................................................ 3-129
SECTION 19.03.0901 HEIGHT ........................................................................................... 3-129
SECTION 19.03.0902 YARDS ............................................................................................ 3-129
SECTION 19.03.0903 ADDITIONS AND AVERAGE STREET YARDS .............................. 3-131
SECTION 19.03.0904 CORNER LOTS ............................................................................... 3-132
SECTION 19.03.0905 DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS ........................................................... 3-132
SECTION 19.03.0906 FLOODWAY LANDS ELIGIBLE FOR MEETING
AREA REQUIREMENTS ................................................................. 3-132
SECTION 19.03.0907 DEED RESTRICTED AND PRESERVED NATURAL RESOURCE
PROTECTION AND OPEN SPACE LANDS ELIGIBLE
FOR MEETING AREA REQUIREMENTS ........................................ 3-132
SECTION 19.03.0908 NOISE ............................................................................................. 3-132
DIVISION 19.03.1000 NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES,
AND USES ...................................................................................... 3-133
SECTION 19.03.1001 EXISTING NONCONFORMING USES ............................................ 3-133
SECTION 19.03.1002 EXISTING NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES ............................. 3-133
SECTION 19.03.1003 EXISTING SUBSTANDARD LOTS .................................................. 3-133
SECTION 19.03.1004 CONTINUANCE OF USE ................................................................ 3-134
SECTION 19.03.1005 DISCONTINUANCE OF USE .......................................................... 3-134
SECTION 19.03.1006 REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS ....................................................... 3-135
SECTION 19.03.1007 DAMAGE AND DESTRUCTION ...................................................... 3-135
SECTION 19.03.1008 ADDITIONS AND ENLARGEMENTS .............................................. 3-135
SECTION 19.03.1009 CHANGES AND SUBSTITUTIONS ................................................. 3-136
SECTION 19.03.1010 EXEMPTED BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND USES ................... 3-136
SECTION 19.03.1011 FLOODLAND NONCONFORMING USES ....................................... 3-136
SECTION 19.03.1012 SHORELAND AND WETLAND NONCONFORMING USES ............ 3-136
DIVISION 19.03.1100 HAZARD PREVENTION PERFORMANCE STANDARDS .............. 3-137
SECTION 19.03.1101 COMPLIANCE IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS ................................... 3-137
SECTION 19.03.1102 AIR POLLUTION, CONTAMINANTS, AND SMOKE ........................ 3-137
SECTION 19.03.1103 FIRE AND EXPLOSIVE HAZARDS ................................................. 3-138
SECTION 19.03.1104 GLARE ............................................................................................ 3-139
SECTION 19.03.1105 HEAT AND HUMIDITY .................................................................... 3-139
SECTION 19.03.1106 WATER QUALITY PROTECTION ................................................... 3-139
SECTION 19.03.1107 NOISE ............................................................................................. 3-140
SECTION 19.03.1108 ODOR ............................................................................................. 3-140
SECTION 19.03.1109 RADIOACTIVITY ............................................................................. 3-140
SECTION 19.03.1110 CHEMICAL, ASBESTOS, AND OTHER HAZARDOUS MATERIAL
STORAGE ....................................................................................... 3-140
SECTION 19.03.1111 DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE ........................................ 3-141
PART 4: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION ..................................................................... 4-1
DIVISION 19.04.0100 NATURAL RESOURCES .................................................................... 4-1
SECTION 19.04.0101 NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION STANDARDS ........................ 4-1
SECTION 19.04.0102 NATURAL RESOURCE FEATURES DETERMINATION ..................... 4-1
SECTION 19.04.0103 NATURAL RESOURCE FEATURES MITIGATION ............................. 4-5
v
PART 5: DESIGN STANDARDS............................................................................................... 5-1
DIVISION 19.05.0100 DESIGN STANDARDS ....................................................................... 5-1
SECTION 19.05.0101 ACCESS TO PUBLIC STREETS ......................................................... 5-1
SECTION 19.05.0102 EASEMENTS ...................................................................................... 5-4
SECTION 19.05.0103 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN .............................................. 5-4
SECTION 19.05.0104 BUILDING, PARKING LOT, CIRCULATION DRIVE, AND LOADING
AREA SETBACK REQUIREMENTS ALONG ARTERIAL
STREETS AND HIGHWAYS ............................................................... 5-4
DIVISION 19.05.0200 TRAFFIC, OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING, AND
HIGHWAY ACCESS ........................................................................... 5-5
SECTION 19.05.0201 TRAFFIC VISIBILITY ........................................................................... 5-5
SECTION 19.05.0202 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS ........................................ 5-5
SECTION 19.05.0203 OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE AND ON-SITE
QUEUING REQUIREMENTS FOR USE TYPES ................................. 5-8
SECTION 19.05.0204 OFF-STREET PARKING LOT DESIGN ............................................. 5-23
SECTION 19.05.0205 OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS ...................................... 5-24
SECTION 19.05.0206 OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE DESIGN ........................................ 5-25
SECTION 19.05.0207 DRIVEWAYS ..................................................................................... 5-25
SECTION 19.05.0208 HIGHWAY ACCESS .......................................................................... 5-26
SECTION 19.05.0209 MINIMUM PERMITTED THROAT LENGTH ...................................... 5-26
SECTION 19.05.0210 AREA CIRCULATION PLAN REQUIRED .......................................... 5-26
DIVISION 19.05.0300 LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS ...... 5-26
SECTION 19.05.0301 LANDSCPE AND BUFFER DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS .......... 5-26
SECTION 19.05.0314 MITIGATION OF MINIMUM REQUIRED LANDSCAPE SURFACE
RATIO (LSR) IN NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS ............................. 5-40
DIVISION 19.05.0400 LIGHTING ......................................................................................... 5-41
SECTION 19.05.0401 EXTERIOR LIGHTING STANDARDS ................................................ 5-41
SECTION 19.05.0402 EXTERIOR LIGHTING PLAN REQUIRED ......................................... 5-44
SECTION 19.05.0403 EXTERIOR LIGHTING FOR SPECIFIED OUTDOOR
RECREATIONAL USES .................................................................... 5-44
SECTION 19.05.0404 STREET LIGHTING........................................................................... 5-45
SECTION 19.05.0405 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS ........................................................... 5-45
SECTION 19.05.0406 LIGHT MEASUREMENT ................................................................... 5-45
PART 6: REQUIRED PLANS .................................................................................................... 6-1
DIVISION 19.06.0100 SITE PLAN .......................................................................................... 6-1
SECTION 19.06.0101 GENERAL ........................................................................................... 6-1
SECTION 19.06.0102 PRINCIPLES AND STANDARDS OF REVIEW ................................... 6-1
SECTION 19.06.0103 APPLICATIONS FOR SITE PLAN REVIEW ........................................ 6-3
SECTION 19.06.0104 SITE PLAN REVIEW AND FINDINGS ................................................. 6-7
SECTION 19.06.0105 FINANCIAL SURETIES REQUIRED ................................................... 6-9
SECTION 19.06.0106 SITE PLAN APPEAL ........................................................................... 6-9
vi
DIVISION 19.06.0200 NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION PLAN ................................. 6-10
SECTION 19.06.0201 NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION PLAN REQUIREMENTS ..... 6-10
DIVISION 19.06.0300 LANDSCAPE PLAN .......................................................................... 6-11
SECTION 19.06.0301 GENERAL ......................................................................................... 6-11
DIVISION 19.06.0400 ARCHITECTURAL PLANS ............................................................... 6-12
SECTION 19.06.0401 GENERAL ......................................................................................... 6-12
SECTION 19.06.0402 PRINCIPLES AND STANDARDS OF REVIEW ................................. 6-12
SECTION 19.06.0403 APPLICATIONS FOR ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW .......................... 6-16
SECTION 19.06.0404 ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW 6-17
PART 7: PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION .................................................................. 7-1
DIVISION 19.07.0100 ZONING PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION ............................ 7-1
SECTION 19.07.0101 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR DESIGNATED ........................................ 7-1
SECTION 19.07.0102 APPLICATIONS FOR ZONING PERMIT ............................................. 7-1
SECTION 19.07.0103 APPLICATIONS FOR CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT .......................... 7-3
SECTION 19.07.0104 APPLICATIONS FOR CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY .................... 7-4
SECTION 19.07.0105 APPLICATIONS FOR SITE PLAN REVIEW ........................................ 7-5
SECTION 19.07.0106 APPLICATIONS FOR ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW ............................ 7-5
SECTION 19.07.0107 APPLICATIONS FOR ZONING APPEAL ............................................. 7-5
SECTION 19.07.0108 APPLICATIONS FOR ZONING VARIANCE ........................................ 7-6
SECTION 19.07.0109 APPLICATIONS FOR MINOR ZONING VARIANCE............................ 7-6
SECTION 19.07.0110 APPLICATIONS FOR ZONING INTERPRETATION............................ 7-7
SECTION 19.07.0111 APPLICATIONS FOR CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS ........ 7-7
SECTION 19.07.0112 OTHER REQUIRED PERMITS ........................................................... 7-8
DIVISION 19.07.0200 ZONING ORDINANCE TEXT AND ZONING MAP CHANGES AND
AMENDMENTS ................................................................................... 7-8
SECTION 19.07.0201 AUTHORITY ........................................................................................ 7-8
SECTION 19.07.0202 INITIATION .......................................................................................... 7-8
SECTION 19.07.0203 PETITIONS ......................................................................................... 7-8
SECTION 19.07.0204 REVIEWS AND RECOMMENDATIONS .............................................. 7-9
SECTION 19.07.0205 PUBLIC HEARINGS ............................................................................ 7-9
SECTION 19.07.0206 VILLAGE BOARD'S ACTION............................................................. 7-10
SECTION 19.07.0207 FLOODLAND DISTRICT BOUNDARY CHANGES ............................ 7-10
SECTION 19.07.0208 SHORELAND AND WETLAND DISTRICT
BOUNDARY CHANGES .................................................................... 7-10
SECTION 19.07.0209 PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
PROCEDURES ................................................................................. 7-10
SECTION 19.07.0210 HISTORIC STRUCTURES AND HISTORIC SITES
AND HPO HISTORIC PRESERVATION OVERLAY
DISTRICT DESIGNATION AND PROCEDURES .............................. 7-17
SECTION 19.07.0211 PROTEST ......................................................................................... 7-19
SECTION 19.07.0212 SUCCESSIVE APPLICATIONS FOR CONDITIONAL USE
PERMITS, ZONING DISTRICT CHANGE, OR AMENDMENT
TO THE ZONING REGULATIONS .................................................... 7-20
vii
DIVISION 19.07.0300 ZONING ADMINISTRATIVE FEES ................................................... 7-20
SECTION 19.07.0301 ADMINISTRATIVE FEES .................................................................. 7-20
DIVISION 19.07.0400 VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND REMEDIES ................................... 7-21
SECTION 19.07.0401 VIOLATIONS ..................................................................................... 7-21
SECTION 19.07.0402 PENALTIES AND REMEDIES ........................................................... 7-21
PART 8: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS ......................................................... 8-1
DIVISION 19.08.0100 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS ......................................................... 8-1
SECTION 19.08.0101 ESTABLISHMENT ............................................................................... 8-1
SECTION 19.08.0102 MEMBERSHIP .................................................................................... 8-1
SECTION 19.08.0103 ORGANIZATION ................................................................................. 8-1
SECTION 19.08.0104 POWERS ............................................................................................ 8-2
SECTION 19.08.0105 APPEALS AND APPLICATIONS ......................................................... 8-2
SECTION 19.08.0106 VARIANCES ........................................................................................ 8-3
SECTION 19.08.0107 INTERPRETATIONS ........................................................................... 8-4
SECTION 19.08.0108 PUBLIC HEARINGS ............................................................................ 8-6
SECTION 19.08.0109 FINDINGS ........................................................................................... 8-6
SECTION 19.08.0110 DECISION ........................................................................................... 8-7
SECTION 19.08.0111 REVIEW BY COURT OF RECORD ..................................................... 8-7
SECTION 19.08.0112 COMPENSATION ............................................................................... 8-7
PART 9: DEFINITIONS ............................................................................................................ 9-1
DIVISION 19.09.0100 DEFINITIONS ...................................................................................... 9-1
SECTION 19.09.0101 GENERAL DEFINITIONS .................................................................... 9-1
SECTION 19.09.0102 ABBREVIATIONS AND SYMBOLS ..................................................... 9-1
SECTION 19.09.0103 SPECIFIC WORDS AND PHRASES ................................................... 9-2
PART 10: ADOPTION AND EFFECTIVE DATE ....................................................................... 10-1
DIVISION 19.10.0100 ADOPTION AND EFFECTIVE DATE ................................................ 10-1
SECTION 19.10.0101 PUBLIC HEARINGS .......................................................................... 10-1
SECTION 19.10.0102 PLAN COMMISSION RECOMMENDATION ..................................... 10-1
SECTION 19.10.0103 VILLAGE BOARD APPROVAL .......................................................... 10-1
SECTION 19.10.0104 EFFECTIVE DATE ............................................................................ 10-1