Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Construction
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as §§ 18.01 and 18.02(1) of the 1997 Code]
§ 1-1. Rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code, the following rules shall be observed unless
such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
ordinance:
§ 1-2. Conflicting provisions.
If the provisions of the different chapters of this Code conflict with or
contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to all
matters and questions arising out of the subject matter of such chapter.
A. Wisconsin Statutes. The term "Wisconsin Statutes" and its abbreviation
as "Wis. Stats." shall mean the Wisconsin Statutes as of the adoption of
this Code, as amended or renumbered from time to time. [Amended
12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
B. Gender; singular and plural. Every word in this Code and in any
ordinance importing the masculine gender may extend and be applied
to females as well as males, and every word importing the singular
number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things as
well as to one person or thing, provided that these rules of construction
shall not be applied to any provision which shall contain any express
language excluding such construction or when the subject matter or
context of such provision may be repugnant thereto.
C. Person. The word "person" extends and applies to natural persons,
firms, corporations, associations, partnerships or other bodies politic
and all entities of any kind capable of being sued, unless plainly
inapplicable.
D. Acts of agents. When a provision requires an act to be done which may
by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such
requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an
authorized agent.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:3

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
§ 1-3. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to § 66.0103, Wis. Stats., the ordinances of the Town of Grand
Chute of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Town Board of the
Town of Grand Chute, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters
and sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 535,
together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted as the "Code of the Town of Grand Chute," hereinafter referred to
as the "Code."
§ 1-4. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-5. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of the ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of the
Code by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances
and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall
date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinances.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code has been filed in the office of the Town Clerk and shall
remain there for use and examination by the public for at least two weeks,
in accordance with § 66.0103, Wis. Stats., and until final action is taken on
this ordinance, and, if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be
certified to by the Town Clerk, and such certified copy shall remain on file
in the office of said Town Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to
examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Town Board
to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such
Code so that reference to the "Code of the Town of Grand Chute" shall be
understood and intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments
or supplements. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or
supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be inserted
in the Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:5
§ 1-8. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Town of Grand Chute, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required by law, a notice of the adoption of this
ordinance. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be maintained in the office
of the Clerk for inspection by the public at all times during regular office
hours. The publication of notice of the enactment of this ordinance, coupled
with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the public,
shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-9. Code to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk, or someone authorized and directed
by the Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the Code required
to be filed in the Clerk's office for use by the public. All changes in said
Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this
codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code shall,
when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes
or new ordinances are included as supplements to said Code.
§ 1-10. Sale of Code.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk or an authorized agent of the Clerk upon the payment of a fee to
be set by the Town Board. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures for
the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-11. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Town of
Grand Chute to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a forfeiture
of not more than $500.
§ 1-12. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be
deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or
parts thereof. If any provision of this Code or the application thereof to any
person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this Code and the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected thereby.
§ 1-8 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 1-13
1:6
§ 1-13. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-14. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adoption Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-15. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-14 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to October 18, 2011.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the Town's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
§ 1-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7
§ 1-16. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
§ 1-17. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as required
by law.
J. The annexation, attachment, detachment or dedication of property or
approval of preliminary or final subdivision plats.
K. Ordinances providing for local improvements or assessing taxes or
special assessments therefor.
L. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
N. Any ordinances adopting or amending a zoning map or otherwise
rezoning property.
O. Any charter ordinances.
P. Water, sewer and electric rates, rules and regulations.
Q. Uniform Forfeitures/Uniform Bond Schedules and any amendments
thereto.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Town.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for publication as the Code
of the Town of Grand Chute, no changes in the meaning or intent of
such ordinances have been made, except as provided for in Subsection
C hereof. Certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive
changes were made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the
intention of the Town Board that all such changes be adopted as part of
the Code as if the ordinances had been previously formally amended to
read as such.
B. The amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A attached
hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become effective
upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter and section number
references are to the ordinances as they have been renumbered and
appear in the Code.)1
1. Editor’s Note: In accordance with § 1-16B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: “Amended (added, deleted) 12-20-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-30.” Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in
the Town offices.
§ 1-15 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 1-17
1:8
ARTICLE III
General Penalty
[Adopted 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-35]
§ 1-18. General penalty.
§ 1-19. Use of citations.
A. Except where a penalty is provided elsewhere in this Code, or
specifically established by the Town Board, any person who shall violate
any of the provisions of this Code shall, upon conviction of such
violation, be subject to a penalty, which shall be as follows:
(1) First offense. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
Code shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $25 nor
more than $500 together with the costs of prosecution, and in
default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution, shall
be imprisoned in the County Jail until such forfeiture and costs are
paid or when there is appropriate credit for time served.
(2) Second and subsequent offenses. Any person found guilty of
violating any provision of this Code who shall previously have been
convicted of a violation of the same provision shall, upon conviction
thereof, forfeit not less than $50 nor more than $1,000 for each
such offense, together with costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of such forfeiture and costs, shall be imprisoned in the
County Jail until such forfeiture and costs of prosecution are paid
or when there is appropriate credit for time served.
B. In certain circumstances, the Town Board may elect to adopt a specific
penalty outside the general penalty parameters established in § 1-3A.
Penalties differing from those prescribed by § 1-3A, shall, upon
adoption, be recorded in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedule
maintained by the Town of Grand Chute Clerk of Court.
C. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall
constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Code shall preclude the
Town from taking or maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or
remove a violation of this Code.
D. Whenever any person fails to pay any forfeiture and costs of
prosecution upon the order of the court for violation of any ordinance of
the Town, the court may, in lieu of ordering imprisonment of the
defendant, or after the defendant has been released from custody, issue
an execution against the property of the defendant for the forfeiture
and costs.
A. Authorization for use of citations. Pursuant to § 66.0113, Wis. Stats.,
the Town hereby elects to use the citation method of enforcement of
ordinances, including those for which a statutory counterpart exists.
§ 1-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-19
1:9
B. Contents of citations. The form of the citation shall contain the
following information:
(1) The name, address, date of birth, and physical description of the
alleged violator;
(2) The factual allegations describing the alleged violation;
(3) The date, time, and place of the offense;
(4) The section of the Code or ordinance violated;
(5) A designation of the offense in such manner as can be readily
understood by a person making a reasonable effort to do so;
(6) The time at which the alleged violator may appear in court;
(7) A statement which in essence informs the alleged violator that:
(a) A cash deposit based on the schedule established by § 1-4 may
be made, which shall be delivered or mailed to the Town of
Grand Chute Clerk of Court prior to the time of the scheduled
court appearance.
(b) If a cash deposit is made, no appearance in court is necessary
unless he or she is subsequently summoned.
(c) If a cash deposit is made and the alleged violator does not
appear in court, he or she will be deemed to have entered a
plea of no contest and submitted to a forfeiture and a penalty
assessment imposed by § 165.87, Wis. Stats., and court costs
as imposed by § 800.10, Wis. Stats., not to exceed the amount
of the deposit, or will be summoned into court if the court does
not accept the plea of no contest.
(d) If no cash deposit is made and the alleged violator does not
appear in court at the time specified, the court may issue a
summons or a warrant for the defendant's arrest, consider the
nonappearance to be a plea of no contest and enter judgment,
or commence an action to collect the forfeiture.
(e) If the court finds that the violation involves an ordinance that
prohibits conduct that is the same or similar to conduct
prohibited by state statute punishable by fine or imprisonment
or both, and that the violation resulted in damage to the
property of or physical injury to a person other than the alleged
violator, the court may summon the alleged violator into court
to determine if restitution shall be ordered.
(8) A direction that if the alleged violator elects to make a cash deposit,
the statement which accompanies the citation shall be signed to
indicate that the statement required under Subsection B(7) has
been read and shall be sent or delivered with the cash deposit;
§ 1-19 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 1-19
1:10
§ 1-20. Schedule of deposits.
(9) Such other information as may be deemed necessary.
C. Officials authorized to issue citations. Citations authorized under this
section may be issued by any law enforcement officer and by the
following designated Town officials with respect to sections of the Code
which are directly related to the official's area of responsibility. The
officials granted authority to issue citations under this Section may
delegate the authority to other Town employees, provided such
delegation is authorized by the Town Board.
(1) Building Inspector.
(2) Fire Inspector or Fire Chief.
(3) Code Enforcement Officer.
(4) Director of Public Works.
(5) Weed Commissioner.
D. Violator's options; procedures on default. Section 66.0113(3), Wis.
Stats., relating to a violator's options and procedures on default, is
hereby adopted and incorporated by reference.
E. Citation procedure not exclusive.
(1) Adoption of the citation method of enforcement of ordinances does
not preclude the Town Board from adopting any other ordinance or
providing for the enforcement of any other law or ordinance
relating to the same or other matters.
(2) The issuance of a citation under this section shall not preclude the
Town or any authorized officer from proceeding under any other
ordinance or law or by any other enforcement method to enforce
any ordinance, regulation, or order.
A. The schedule of deposits for the various ordinances for which a citation
may be issued shall be listed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond
Schedule, which shall be established by the Municipal Judge and
submitted to the Town Board for approval pursuant to § 28-6 of this
code.
B. Deposits shall be made in cash, money order, or certified check to the
Town of Grand Chute Clerk of Court, who shall provide a receipt
therefor.
§ 1-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-20
1:11
Chapter 16
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
§ 16-1. Park Commission.
§ 16-2. Plan Commission.
§ 16-3. Board of Review. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30;
6-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10]
The annual Board of Review shall be composed and governed by the
provisions of §§ 70.46 and 70.47, Wis. Stats.
§ 16-3.1. Alternative forms of sworn testimony at Board of Review
hearings. [Added 6-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10]
A. The Town Park Commission shall consist of seven members appointed
by the Town Board of Supervisors in writing and filed with the Town
Clerk. The term of each member shall be for seven years. Initial
appointments and annual appointments thereafter shall be staggered
so that in each year a new appointment of one member shall be made by
the Town Board of Supervisors. Each Commissioner shall take and file
the official oath. (Section 60.66, Wis. Stats.)
B. Compensation of members of the Town Park Commission shall be set by
the Town Board annually and once set shall remain in such amount until
amended or changed by the Town Board. Compensation so established
for the Town Park Commission shall be established as of April 1 of each
year and shall continue in effect until April 1 of the following year
unless amended or changed by the Town Board. Amendments in the
amount of compensation shall be paid to reimburse members for
attendance at meetings of the Park Commission and not for labor and
services performed at the request of the Park Commission.
A. The Town Board of Supervisors shall appoint the members of the Town
Plan Commission. The Town Plan Commission shall consist of seven
members, five citizen members with staggered three-year terms and
two Town Board members. The Town Board of Supervisors may also
appoint one alternate member to the Plan Commission with a threeyear
term. The alternate member may participate as a voting member
at any Town Plan Commission meeting in which one or more of the
appointed members are absent. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-30; 8-19-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-10]
B. Compensation for Town Plan Commission members shall be set
annually by the Town Board to be effective with the term of Town Plan
Commission members and once set shall remain in such amount until
amended or changed by the Town Board.
A. Procedures.
§ 1-20 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 16-3.1
1:12
§ 16-4. Board of Police and Fire Commissioners. [Amended
12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
(1) In order for a property owner or property owner's representative to
submit a request to testify by phone or submit a sworn written
statement, he or she must first comply with the following
procedures:
(a) The legal requirement to provide notice of intent to appear at
BOR must be satisfied; and
(b) An objection form for real property assessment (PA-115A) must
be completed and submitted to the BOR as required by law.
(2) After the two requirements outlined above have been met, a
request to testify by telephone or submit a sworn written statement
at Board of Review (Form PA-814) may be submitted to the Town
Clerk. Such requests must be submitted in time to be considered by
the Board at the first meeting of the BOR.
B. Criteria to be considered. The Board may consider any or all of the
following factors when deciding whether to grant or deny the request:
(1) The requester's stated reason(s) for the request as indicated on the
PA-814.
(2) Fairness to the parties.
(3) Ability of the requester to procure in person oral testimony and any
due diligence exhibited by the requester in procuring such
testimony.
(4) Ability to cross examine the person providing the testimony.
(5) The BOR's technical capacity to honor the request.
(6) Any other factors that the Board deems pertinent to deciding the
request.
A. The Board of Police and Fire Commissioners shall consist of five
persons, three of whom shall constitute a quorum. The Town
Chairperson shall annually, between the last Monday of April and the
first Monday of May, appoint in writing, to be filed with the Secretary of
the Board, one member for a term of five years, subject to confirmation
by the Town Board. Residency in the Town of Grand Chute shall be a
requirement for appointment to the Board and for continued
membership on the Board.
B. The Board shall keep a record of its proceedings. The Board of Police
and Fire Commissioners shall have the power and authority prescribed
under § 62.13(2) to (5) and (7) to (12), Wis. Stats. Specifically excluded
are the provisions of § 62.13(6), Wis. Stats., titled "Optional powers of
board."
§ 16-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-4
1:13
§ 16-5. Ad hoc committees.
§ 16-6. Joint Review Board. [Added 3-21-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-03]
Chapter 28
COURT, MUNICIPAL
§ 28-1. Court established.
The Municipal Court for the Town of Grand Chute is established pursuant to
Ch. 755, Wis. Stats.
§ 28-2. Municipal Judge.
C. The Board of Police and Fire Commissioners shall appoint the Police
Chief and Fire Chief.
D. The Board of Police and Fire Commissioners shall adopt all current
Police and Fire Department policies, procedures, rules and regulations.
E. Compensation for members of the Board of Police and Fire
Commissioners shall be set annually by the Town Board to be effective
with the term of members of the Board of Police and Fire
Commissioners and once set shall remain in such amount until
amended or changed by the Town Board.
A. The Town Chairperson, subject to final confirmation of the Town Board
of Supervisors, shall make appointments to ad hoc committees. The
Town Board of Supervisors shall approve all changes to ad hoc
committees.
B. Compensation for ad hoc committee members shall be set annually by
the Town Board to be effective with the term of members of ad hoc
committees and once set shall remain in such amount until amended or
changed by the Town Board.
A. The Joint Review Board shall be composed and governed by the
provisions of § 66.1105 (4m), Wis. Stats.
B. Joint Review Board members shall serve concurrent two-year terms
without compensation.
A. Office created. Pursuant to § 755.01, Wis. Stats., there is created the
office of Municipal Judge for the Town of Grand Chute.
(1) Municipal Judge qualifications. The Municipal Judge, and all
candidates for the position of Municipal Judge, shall be licensed to
practice law in the State of Wisconsin, and be a qualified elector of
the Town of Grand Chute. In cases requiring substitution of the
Town’s Municipal Judge, the substitute judge need only meet the
§ 16-4 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 28-2
1:14
§ 28-3. Court hours, location and procedure.
§ 28-4. Collection and return of forfeitures. [Amended 12-20-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-30]
The Municipal Judge shall collect all forfeitures, penalty assessments, fees
and taxable costs in any action or proceeding before him and shall pay
over such moneys to the Town Treasurer within 30 days after receipt of the
money by the Municipal Court. At such time the Municipal Judge shall also
report to the Town Treasurer the title, nature of offenses and total number
of judgments imposed in actions and proceedings in which such moneys
were collected.
§ 28-5. Contempt of court. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-30]
qualifications of the municipality in which that judge has been
elected. [Added 11-15-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-27]
B. Election; term. The Municipal Judge shall be elected for a four-year
term in accordance with § 110-1 of this Code. Midterm vacancies in the
office of Municipal Judge shall be filled pursuant to § 800.06, Wis. Stats.
[Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30; 12-20-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-42]
C. Salary. The Municipal Judge shall receive a salary set by the Town
Board. No salary shall be paid to the Judge for any time during his term
for which he has not executed and filed his/her official bond and oath as
required by Subsection D of this section. [Amended 12-20-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-30]
D. Bond; oath. The Municipal Judge shall execute and file with the Clerk of
the Courts for Outagamie County the oath prescribed by § 757.02, Wis.
Stats., and a bond in the penal sum of $10,000.
E. Jurisdiction. The Municipal Judge shall have jurisdiction as provided by
law and § 755.045, Wis. Stats., and exclusive jurisdiction of violations of
Town ordinances, resolutions and bylaws.
A. Hours. The Municipal Court for the Town shall be open as determined
by order of the Municipal Judge.
B. Location. The Municipal Judge shall keep his office and hold court at the
Grand Chute Town Hall located at 1900 Grand Chute Boulevard, Grand
Chute, Wisconsin. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
C. Procedure. The procedure in Municipal Court for the Town shall be as
provided by this section and state law, including, without limitation
because of enumeration, Chs. 800 and 755 and §§ 23.66 to 23.99,
778.14, 778.15, 778.18 and 345.20 to 345.53, Wis. Stats.
§ 28-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-5
1:15
§ 28-6. Stipulations and deposits.
A. In this section, "contempt of court" means any of the following
intentional acts:
(1) Misconduct in the presence of the court that interferes with the
court proceeding or with the administration of justice, or that
impairs the respect due the court.
(2) Refusal of a witness to appear without reasonable excuse.
B. The Municipal Judge may impose a forfeiture in an amount as
prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules for a
contempt of court.
C. For a contempt of court described in Subsection A(1), the Municipal
Judge may impose imprisonment in the county jail for not more than
seven days and impose a forfeiture. These penalties shall be imposed
immediately after the contempt of court has occurred and only under
the following conditions:
(1) For the purpose of preserving order in the court and protecting the
authority and dignity of the court.
(2) After allowing the person who committed the contempt of court an
opportunity to address the court.
D. For a contempt of court described in Subsection A(2), the Municipal
Judge may do any of the following:
(1) Issue a warrant to bring the witness before the court for the
contempt and to testify.
(2) In addition to ordering the witness to pay a forfeiture under
Subsection B, the Judge may order the witness to pay all costs of
the witness's apprehension.
A. Deposit schedule to be established. The Municipal Judge shall establish
and submit to the Town Board for approval, in accordance with
§ 800.037, Wis. Stats., a schedule of deposits for violations of Town
ordinances, resolutions and bylaws, except traffic regulations, which
are governed by § 345.26, Wis. Stats., and boating violations governed
by §§ 23.66 and 23.67, Wis. Stats. When approved by the Board, such
deposit schedule shall be posted in the office of the Municipal Court
Clerk. [Amended 8-17-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-10; 12-20-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-30]
B. Stipulation and deposit in lieu of court appearance. Persons cited for
violations of Town ordinances, resolutions or bylaws for which a deposit
has been established under this section shall be permitted to make a
stipulation of no contest and a deposit in lieu of court appearance as
provided in §§ 800.03, 800.04 and 800.09, Wis. Stats.
§ 28-5 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 28-6
1:16
Chapter 40
ELECTIONS
C. Traffic and boating deposits. The deposit schedule established by the
Wisconsin Judicial Conference and the procedures set forth in Chs. 23
and 345, Wis. Stats., shall apply to stipulations and deposits for
violations of traffic regulations enacted in accordance with § 345.27,
Wis. Stats., and boating regulations enacted in accordance with
§ 30.77, Wis. Stats. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
D. When not permitted. Stipulations and deposits shall not be permitted
after initial appearance or in cases of contempt under § 28-5.
§ 28-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-6
1:17

ARTICLE I
Municipal Board of Absentee Ballot Canvassers
[Adopted 1-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01]
§ 40-1. Adoption of state statute.
Wisconsin State Statute § 7.52, abbreviated Wis. Stats., is hereby adopted
in its entirety by reference, as amended or renumbered from time to time,
including but not limited to the specific provisions set forth in detail under
§ 40-2 below.
§ 40-2. Board procedures.
A. Central canvassing of absentee ballots. Pursuant to §§ 7.52 and
7.53(2m), Wis. Stats., the Town Board of the Town of Grand Chute
hereby creates a Municipal Board of Absentee Canvassers and
authorizes the centralized counting of absentee ballots on election
days, in accordance with all procedures prescribed by § 7.52.
B. The Municipal Board of Absentee Canvassers shall be composed of the
Municipal Clerk, or a qualified elector of the municipality designated by
the Clerk, and two other qualified electors of the municipality appointed
by the Clerk for a term of two years, commencing on January 1 of each
even-numbered year. The Clerk may appoint additional inspectors
under § 7.52(1)(b), Wis. Stats., to assist the Municipal Board of
Absentee Canvassers in canvassing absentee ballots under this section.
C. The Town of Grand Chute declares that, in lieu of canvassing absentee
ballots at polling places under § 6.88, Wis. Stats., the Municipal Board
of Absentee Canvassers shall canvass all absentee ballots at all
elections held in the municipality, at Appleton Alliance Church, 2693
Grand Chute Boulevard, Appleton, WI 54913, or such other location
designated by the Clerk and set forth in the notice of meeting under
Subsection D below.
D. At every election held in the Town following enactment of this article,
the Municipal Board of Absentee Canvassers shall, any time after the
opening of the polls and before 10:00 p.m. on election day, publically
convene to count the absentee ballots for the Town.
E. The Municipal Clerk shall give at least 48 hours' notice of any meeting
of the Municipal Board of Absentee Canvassers under § 7.52(1)(a), Wis.
Stats.
F. The Municipal Clerk, no later than the closing hour of the polls, shall
post at his or her office and on the Town's website, and shall make
available to any person upon request, a statement of the number of
absentee ballots that the Clerk has mailed or transmitted to electors
and those ballots that have been returned by the closing hour on
election day. This posting shall not include the names or addresses of
any electors.
§ 40-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-2
1:19
G. The Municipal Board of Absentee Ballot Canvassers shall follow the
remaining procedures prescribed under § 7.52, Wis. Stats.
§ 40-2 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 40-2
1:20
Chapter 45
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
§ 45-1. Adoption of county ordinance.
Chapter 6, Emergency Services, of the Outagamie County Code of
Ordinances, adopted September 12, 2006, as amended, is hereby ratified
and accepted by the Town of Grand Chute, County of Outagamie, State of
Wisconsin, and incorporated by reference in this chapter. A copy of Chapter
6, Emergency Services, is on file at the office of the Town Clerk.
Chapter 57
FINANCE AND TAXATION
§ 40-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-1
1:21

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as Ch. 17 of the 1997 Code]
§ 57-1. Preparation of tax roll and tax receipts. [Amended
9-15-1998]
§ 57-2. Claims against Town.
A. Aggregate tax stated on roll. Pursuant to § 70.65(2), Wis. Stats., the
Town Clerk shall, in computing the tax roll, insert only the aggregate
amount of state, county, school and local taxes in a single column in the
roll opposite the parcel or tract of land against which the tax is levied
or, in the case of personal property, in a single column opposite the
name of the person, firm or corporation against whom or which the tax
is levied.
B. In lieu of entering on each tax receipt the several amounts paid
respectively for state, county, school, local and other taxes, the
aggregate amount of such taxes shall be combined in a single column
on the tax receipt issued by the Town Treasurer. The Treasurer shall
cause to be printed or stamped on the tax receipt the separate
proportion or rate of taxes levied for state, county, school, local or other
purposes. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
C. The Town Treasurer is authorized to issue a check within 15 business
days for the excess of amount escrowed by a taxpayer and paid to the
district by December 31 over the amount due.
A. Claims to be certified. Prior to submission of any account, demand or
claim to the Town Board for approval of payment, the Town Clerk shall
certify, or cause to be endorsed thereon or on attached papers, that the
following conditions have been complied with:
(1) Funds are available therefor pursuant to the budget.
(2) The item or service was duly authorized by the proper official or
agency and has been received or rendered in accordance with the
purchasing agreement.
(3) The claim is accurate in amount and a proper charge against the
treasury.
B. Town Board to audit accounts.
(1) No account or demand against the Town, except as provided in
Subsection C of this section, shall be paid until it has been audited
by the Town Board and an order drawn on the Town Treasurer
therefor. Every such account shall be itemized and certified as
provided in Subsection A.
§ 57-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-2
1:23
(2) After auditing, the Town Board shall cause to be endorsed by the
Treasurer, on each account, the word "allowed" or "disallowed," as
the fact is, adding the amount allowed or specifying the items or
parts of items disallowed. The minutes of the proceedings of the
Board or a statement attached thereto shall show to whom and for
what purpose every such account was allowed and the amount.
C. Payment of regular wages or salaries. Regular wages or salaries of
Town officers and employees shall be paid by payroll, verified by the
proper Town official, department head, board or commission and filed
with the Clerk in time for payment on the regular payday.
D. Method of incurring claims. All actions of the Town Board appropriating
money or creating a charge against the Town, other than claims for
purchases or work previously authorized by the Board, shall only be
acted upon at the next regular meeting after introduction, provided that
this rule may be suspended by affirmative vote of 2/3 of all members of
the Board. A roll call vote shall be taken and recorded on all
appropriations.
E. Alternative claims procedure. [Added 3-3-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-05]
(1) Authority. This subsection is adopted pursuant to the authority
granted town boards under § 60.44(2), Wis. Stats., which allows for
the adoption of an alternative claim procedure for approving
financial claims against the Town which are in the nature of bills
and vouchers.
(2) Applicability. Payments may be made from the Town treasury
pursuant to this subsection for all claims against the Town which
are also consistent with the Town purchasing policy.
(3) Procedure.
(a) Payments may be made from the Town treasury after the Town
Clerk audits and approves each claim as a proper charge
against the treasury by first determining that the following
conditions have been complied with:
[1] Funds are available under the Town budget to pay the bill
or voucher.
[2] The item or service covered by the bill or voucher has been
duly authorized.
[3] The item or service covered by the bill or voucher has been
supplied or rendered in conformity with the authorization
and follows the Town purchasing policy.
[4] The claim appears to be a valid claim against the Town.
§ 57-2 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 57-2
1:24
§ 57-3. Preparation and adoption of annual budget.
(b) The Town Clerk may require submission of proof to determine
compliance with the conditions under Subsection E(3)(a)[1] to
[4] prior to approval.
(c) After determining that the above conditions have been met, the
Clerk shall indicate approval of the claim by placing his or her
signature or initials on the bill. Upon approval of a bill or
voucher under this procedure, the Treasurer/Deputy Treasurer
shall prepare a check and have it countersigned by the Town
Treasurer, Town Clerk, and the Town Chairperson, pursuant to
§ 66.0607, Wis. Stats. The Treasurer/Deputy Treasurer shall
then mail or deliver the completed checks to the appropriate
parties.
(d) At least monthly, the Town Clerk or Town Treasurer shall file
with the Town Board a written list of claims approved pursuant
to this subsection. The list shall include the date paid, name of
claimant, purpose and amount.
F. Retention of nominal overpayments absent demand. [Added
10-1-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-08]
(1) For purposes of this section, a "nominal overpayment" shall be the
overpayment of any tax, fee, or other obligation to the Town in an
amount which does not exceed $5.
(2) As an administrative convenience, the Town shall retain any
nominal overpayment and shall not process a refund of the same
absent appropriate demand for refund by the payer of the
overpayment.
(3) A nominal overpayment retained by the Town pursuant to the
provisions of this section shall be credited to the general fund.
A. The Town Board shall prepare the budget with the assistance of the
Town Clerk and Town Treasurer. In preparing the budget, department
heads and Town officials shall determine the amount to be
recommended in the budget for each department or activity. The
proposed budget shall be presented at a public hearing in conjunction
with the Special Town Meeting held annually (§ 60.12, Wis. Stats.). The
Town Board shall adopt the budget annually. [Amended 12-20-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-30]
B. Form of proposed budget.
(1) The proposed budget shall include the following information:
(a) The actual expenditures of each department and activity for
the expired portion of the current year and last preceding
fiscal year and the estimated expense of conducting each
§ 57-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-3
1:25
department and activity of the Town for the remainder of the
current year and ensuing fiscal year, with reasons for any
proposed increase or decrease as compared with actual and
estimated expenditures for the current year.
(b) An itemization of all anticipated income of the Town from
sources other than general property taxes and bond issues,
with a comparative statement of the amounts received by the
Town from each of the same or similar sources for the last
preceding and current fiscal year.
(c) All existing indebtedness of the Town, including the amount of
interest payable and principal to be redeemed on any
outstanding general obligation bonds of the Town and any
estimated deficiency in the sinking fund of any such bonds
during the ensuing fiscal year.
(d) An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from general
property taxes which, with income from other sources, will be
necessary to meet the proposed expenditures.
(e) Such other information as may be required by the Town Board
and by state law.
(2) The Town Board shall provide a reasonable number of copies of the
budget thus prepared for distribution to citizens.
C. Appropriation ordinance; hearing. The Town Chairperson, with the
assistance of the Town Treasurer, shall submit to the Town Board the
annual budget and a draft of an appropriation ordinance providing for
the expenditures proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. Before adoption
of a final appropriation ordinance, the Town Board shall hold a public
hearing on the budget and the proposed appropriation ordinance as
required by law pursuant to § 65.90, Wis. Stats., and shall give
published notice thereof as provided. The public hearing on the budget
shall be satisfied by presentation at a Special Town Meeting.
[Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
D. Changes in final budget. The Town Board may at any time by a twothirds
vote of the entire membership transfer any portion of an
unencumbered balance of an appropriation to any other purpose or
object. Notice of such transfer shall be given by publication within eight
days thereafter in a newspaper in general circulation in the Town.
E. Expenditures limited by annual appropriation. No money shall be
drawn from the treasury of the Town, nor shall any obligation for the
expenditure of money be incurred, except in pursuance of the annual
appropriation ordinance and changes therein authorized in accordance
with Subsection D of this section. At the close of each fiscal year any
unencumbered balance of an appropriation shall revert to the general
fund and shall be subject to reappropriation, but appropriations may be
made by the Town Board, to be paid out of the income of the current
§ 57-3 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 57-3
1:26
§ 57-4. Room tax. [Amended 4-18-2000; 4-5-2001; 6-18-2002;
10-15-2002; 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-302; 11-3-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-173; 4-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-094]
year, in furtherance of improvements or other objects or works which
will not be completed within such year, and any such appropriation
shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made shall
have been accomplished or abandoned.
A. Definitions. In addition to the terms defined in this § 57-4, the terms
used in this section shall have the definitions, if any, set forth in the
Room Tax Act (as defined below).
CVB — The Fox Cities Convention & Visitors Bureau, Inc., a Wisconsin
nonstock corporation, and its successors.
EXHIBITION CENTER BONDS — The Redevelopment Authority of the
City of Appleton, Wisconsin, taxable lease revenue bonds, Series 2018
(Fox Cities Exhibition Center Project), issued to finance or refinance the
construction and related costs of the Fox Cities Exhibition Center, and
any additional bonds issued to refinance said bonds.
FISCAL AGENCY AGREEMENT — An agreement entered into by and
among the municipalities, the Room Tax Commission, and the fiscal
agent that sets forth the duties of the fiscal agent with respect to the
room taxes as described in this section.
FISCAL AGENT — A financial institution acting in the capacity as an
agent on behalf of the Town for the receipt and allocation of the room
taxes in accordance with this section.
FOX CITIES TOURISM ZONE — That geographic area encompassing
the City of Appleton, Wisconsin; the City of Kaukauna, Wisconsin; the
City of Neenah, Wisconsin; the Village of Kimberly, Wisconsin; the
Village of Little Chute, Wisconsin; the Town of Grand Chute, Wisconsin;
the Town of Neenah, Wisconsin; the Village of Fox Crossing, Wisconsin;
the City of Menasha, Wisconsin; the Village of Sherwood, Wisconsin;
and that may in the future include any municipality that hereafter
becomes a party to the Room Tax Commission agreement.
OPERATORS — Hotelkeepers, motel operators, lodging marketplaces,
owners of short-term rentals, and other persons furnishing
accommodations that are available to the public, which are located in
the Town and are obligated to pay room taxes under this section.
PLEDGE AGREEMENT — Any pledge agreement entered into by the
municipalities and the Room Tax Commission, pursuant to which a
portion of the room tax is pledged to pay a particular project or purpose
in furtherance of the purposes of the room tax set forth in this section,
2. Editor’s Note: See Ch. 315, Hotels and Motels.
3. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided an effective date of 1-1-2016.
4. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided an effective date of 5-1-2018.
§ 57-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-4
1:27
which includes the Exhibition Center bonds and any tourism facilities
bonds.
QUARTERLY PAYMENT DATE — Each January 31, April 30, July 31, and
October 31, each of which is the last day of the month next succeeding
the end of a calendar quarter.
ROOM TAX — A tax on the privilege of furnishing, at retail, except sales
for resale, rooms or lodging to transients by the operators, pursuant to
the Room Tax Act.
ROOM TAX ACT — Section 66.0615, Wis. Stats., as amended from time
to time.
ROOM TAX COMMISSION — The Fox Cities Room Tax Commission
created by the municipalities within the Fox Cities Tourism Zone
pursuant to the Room Tax Commission agreement in order to
coordinate tourism promotion and tourism development within the Fox
Cities Tourism Zone.
ROOM TAX COMMISSION AGREEMENT — The amended and restated
Room Tax Commission agreement, dated as of November 24, 2015,
entered into by and among the municipalities and the Room Tax
Commission, as amended from time to time.
TOURISM FACILITIES BONDS — Any one or more series of bonds
issued to finance or refinance the construction and related costs of
projects undertaken by or on behalf of the municipalities in furtherance
of the Tourism Facilities Room Tax, and any additional bonds issued to
refinance said bonds.
B. Imposition of room tax.
(1) Pursuant to the Room Tax Act, there is hereby imposed a room tax
of 10% on the privilege of furnishing, at retail, except sales for
resale, rooms or lodging to transients, by the operators. Operators
shall remit all room taxes to the Town Treasurer or to a fiscal agent
on behalf of the Town pursuant to a fiscal agency agreement in
accordance with the requirements of this section and the Room Tax
Act. Such ten-percent room tax shall be allocated as follows:
(a) A room tax of 2.85% shall be imposed and allocated toward the
support of the CVB, to be used for the promotion of the Fox
Cities Tourism Zone as a tourism destination (the "CVB room
tax").
(b) A room tax of 3% shall be imposed (subject to sunset as
provided in Subsection C hereof) and allocated toward
payment of debt service on the Exhibition Center bonds in
accordance with a pledge agreement (the "Exhibition Center
room tax").
(c) A room tax of 3% shall be imposed and allocated toward the
support of amateur sports facilities within the Fox Cities
§ 57-4 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 57-4
1:28
Tourism Zone and/or other facilities which are reasonably
likely to generate paid overnight stays at more than one hotel,
motel, or other lodging establishment within the Fox Cities
Tourism Zone (the "tourism facilities room tax").
(d) A room tax of 1.15% shall be imposed and retained by the Town
to be used for general tourism support and development in the
Fox Cities Tourism Zone in accordance with the requirements
of the Room Tax Act (the "municipal room tax").
(2) The Town or its fiscal agent shall forward the room taxes it has
received, to be used as described above, to the following parties:
(a) The CVB room tax to the CVB;
(b) The Exhibition Center room tax as required under the related
pledge agreement;
(c) The municipal room tax to the Town; and
(d) The tourism facilities room tax to the Room Tax Commission or
its designees on its behalf (including the CVB), or as otherwise
required under a pledge agreement.
C. Expiration of Exhibition Center room tax. The Exhibition Center room
tax shall sunset and expire upon payment in full of all outstanding
Exhibition Center bonds and any related outstanding fees or expenses
therefor, at which time the room tax shall be reduced by 3%, with such
reduction being deemed to be the share of the room tax allocated to the
Exhibition Center room tax. Notwithstanding the foregoing, operators
may not discontinue collection of the Exhibition Center room tax until
the Town provides notice that the Exhibition Center room tax has been
terminated by operation of this section. After all outstanding Exhibition
Center bonds are paid in full, any excess Exhibition Center room tax
revenues collected that are not needed to pay the Exhibition Center
bonds or any related outstanding fees or expenses shall be forwarded to
the CVB and reallocated to the purposes of the tourism facilities room
tax.
D. Priority of payment. In the event any operator fails to remit the entire
room tax amounts due on any quarterly payment date under this
section, the Town directs that the amounts actually received by the
Town (or its fiscal agent) shall be applied in the following priority order:
(1) First, to the CVB room tax until paid in full;
(2) Second, to the Exhibition Center room tax, if any, until paid in full;
(3) Third, to the tourism facilities room tax until paid in full; and
(4) Fourth, to the municipal room tax.
§ 57-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-4
1:29
E. Tourism entity. The CVB shall act as the "tourism entity," as that term is
defined in the Room Tax Act, for purposes of providing staff, support
services and assistance to the Room Tax Commission in developing and
implementing programs to promote the Fox Cities Tourism Zone to
visitors, as more fully set forth in an agreement between the Room Tax
Commission and the CVB. The CVB may also hold and administer the
tourism facilities room tax on behalf of the Room Tax Commission in
furtherance of the purpose of the tourism facilities room tax, except
when a related pledge agreement is in effect.
F. Collection and administration of room tax; operator reports. This
section shall be administered by the Town Clerk. The room tax imposed
by this section shall be payable on each quarterly payment date to the
Town (or to a fiscal agent on behalf of the Town pursuant to a fiscal
agency agreement). A report shall be filed by each operator with the
Town Treasurer (or with a fiscal agent) on or before each quarterly
payment date. Such report shall show the gross room receipts of the
preceding calendar quarter from such retail furnishing of rooms or
lodging, the amount of room tax imposed for such period, and such
other information as the Town deems necessary. Every operator
required to file such quarterly report shall, with its first report, elect to
file an annual report based on either the calendar year or its fiscal year.
Such annual report shall be filed within 90 days after the close of each
such calendar or fiscal year. The annual report shall summarize the
quarterly reports, shall reconcile and adjust for errors in the quarterly
reports, and shall contain such additional information as the Town
requires. Such annual reports shall be signed by a representative of the
operator or its duly authorized agent, but need not be verified by oath.
The Town may, for good cause, extend the due date for filing any report,
but in no event shall such extension be longer than one month after the
due date.
G. Operator permit required. Every operator is required under this section
to file with the Town Clerk an application for a permit for each place of
business that is required to pay room tax hereunder. Every application
for a permit shall be submitted to the Town Clerk using a form
prescribed by the Town and shall set forth the name under which the
operator transacts or intends to transact business, the location of its
place of business, and such other information as the Town requires. The
application shall be signed by the owner or the operator if a sole
proprietor and, if not a sole proprietor, by an authorized representative
of such operator. Together with the permit application, each operator
shall pay the Town an initial fee of $20 for each permit. A permit issued
hereunder is nontransferable.
H. Penalty for violations. In addition to the Schedule of Forfeiture
described in Subsection J hereof, any operator in violation of the terms
of this section by failing to obtain a permit shall be subject to a penalty
not to exceed $200 for each violation. Each room or unit separately
rented or offered for rent, and each day of such rental or offer for rental
§ 57-4 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 57-4
1:30
of such unit, shall be a separate violation. In addition, injunctive relief
is hereby authorized to discontinue any violation of this section. Any
operator deemed to have violated any of the provisions of this section
shall be obligated to pay the costs of prosecution, in addition to actual
attorney fees expended in the course of said enforcement. The Town
may revoke or suspend any permit issued hereunder for failure to
comply with the provisions hereof.
I. Liability for room tax on sale or transfer of business. If any operator
sells or transfers all or substantially all of its interest in its hotel, motel
or other lodging accommodation, its successors or assigns shall
withhold sufficient amounts from the purchase price to pay any amount
of room tax liability due through the sale or transfer date until the
operator produces a receipt from the Town Treasurer that its liability
has been paid in full or a certificate stating that no room tax amount is
due. If a successor operator fails to withhold such amount from the
purchase price as required, such successor operator shall become
liable for payment of the room tax amount it is required to withhold.
J. Schedule of forfeiture. In addition to paying the room taxes due
hereunder, any operator that has failed to pay any room tax when due
shall be required to pay a forfeiture in an amount equal to 25% of the
room tax due from the operator to the Town for the previous year and
unpaid or $5,000, whichever is less, for failure to pay the room tax due
hereunder.
K. Confidentiality of information. To the extent permitted under the law,
the information provided to the Town under § 66.0615(2), Wis. Stats.,
shall remain confidential; provided, however, that the Town or any
employee thereof may use such information in the discharge of duties
imposed by law or of the duties of their office or by order of a court.
Persons violating the provisions of this subsection may be required to
forfeit not less than $100 nor more than $500.
L. Enforcement. The Town shall enforce this section in accordance with
the Room Tax Act.
§ 57-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-4
1:31

ARTICLE II
Special Assessments and Charges
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as Ch. 29 of the 1997 Code]
§ 57-5. Authority to levy special assessments.
§ 57-6. Resolution and report required.
A. The Town, by resolution of its Town Board, may levy and collect special
assessments upon property in a limited and determinable area for
special benefits conferred upon such property by any municipal work or
improvement and shall provide for the payment of all or any part of the
costs of the work or improvement in accordance with the current policy
as adopted by the Town Board by written resolution.
B. The amount assessed against any property for any work or
improvement which does not represent an exercise of the police power
shall not exceed the value of the benefits accruing to the property
therefrom, and for those representing an exercise of the police powers,
the assessment shall be upon a reasonable basis as determined by the
Town Board. Reasonable basis shall include all costs of construction,
including but not limited to all legal, engineering, and publication costs
associated with such work or improvement.
C. Charges and special assessments relative to new roads. See § 468-9 for
applicable provisions contained therein.
A. Prior to making any such special assessments, the Town Board shall
declare by preliminary resolution its intention to exercise such powers
for a stated municipal purpose. Such resolution shall describe generally
the contemplated purpose, the limits of the proposed assessment
district, and the number of installments in which the special assessment
may be paid, or that the number of installments will be determined at
the hearing required under § 57-8, and shall direct the proper
municipal officer, agent or employee to make a report thereon.
B. The report required by Subsection A shall consist of:
(1) Preliminary or final plans and specifications.
(2) An estimate of the entire cost of the proposed work or
improvement.
(3) An estimate, as to each parcel of property affected, of the
assessment of benefits to be levied.
(4) A statement that the property against which the assessments are
proposed is benefited, where the work or improvements constitute
an exercise of the police powers.
C. A copy of the report when completed shall be filed with the Town Clerk
for public inspection.
§ 57-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-7
1:33
§ 57-7. Costs to be paid by special assessment.
The cost of any work or improvement to be paid in whole or in part
by special assessment on property may include the direct and indirect
costs thereof, the interest on bonds or notes issued in anticipation of the
collection of the assessments, a reasonable charge for the services of the
administrative staff of the Town, the cost of any architectural, engineering
and legal services, and any other direct or indirect costs which may
reasonably be attributed to the proposed work or improvement. The amount
to be assessed against all property for any such proposed work or
improvement shall be apportioned among the individual parcels in the
manner designated by the Town Board.
§ 57-8. Notice of proposed or approved project. [Amended
12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
On the completion and filing of the report required in § 57-6, the Town
Clerk shall give notice stating the nature of the proposed or approved work
or improvement, the general boundary lines of the proposed assessment
district, the place and time at which the report may be inspected, and the
place and time at which all interested persons, their agents or attorneys
may appear before the Town Board and be heard concerning the matters
contained in the preliminary resolution report. Such notice shall be given by
publication in the official municipal newspaper and be posted in not fewer
than three public places within the Town, and a copy of said notice shall be
mailed to each interested person whose post office address is known. The
hearing shall commence not less than 10 days and not more than 40 days
after the publication and posting of said notice by the Town Clerk.
§ 57-9. Town Board actions after hearing.
A. After the hearing, the Town Board may approve, disapprove, modify or
refer the report to the designated officer or employee with such
directions as it deems necessary to change the plans and specifications
so as to accomplish a fair and equitable assessment.
B. As the work or improvement has not been previously authorized or
approved, the Town Board shall approve the work or improvement and
by resolution direct that the same be done and paid for in accordance
with the report finally approved.5
C. The Town Clerk shall publish the final resolutions as required by state
statute and consistent with the provisions of this article.
D. After the publication of the final resolution, any work or improvement
provided for and not yet authorized shall be deemed fully authorized
and all assessments made shall be deemed duly and property made,
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 57-7 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 57-9
1:34
§ 57-10. Combined assessments.
If more than a single improvement is undertaken, the Town Board may
combined the assessments as a single assessment on each property
affected, except that the property owner may object to any one or more of
said improvements.
§ 57-11. Reconsideration of assessment.
If after completion or after the receipt of bids the actual cost of any work
or improvement is found to vary materially from the original estimate, or
the assessment is void or invalid for any reason, or if the Town Board
determines to reconsider an assessment, the Town Board is empowered,
after giving notice as required, to amend, cancel or confirm any prior
assessment, and notice of this amending, canceling or confirming shall be
given by the Town Clerk.
§ 57-12. Reduction or refund.
If the cost of the work or improvement is less than the assessment levied,
the Town Board shall reduce each assessment proportionately. If the
assessment has been paid either in part or in full, the Town shall refund the
property owner any such overpayment.
§ 57-13. Appealed assessments payable when due.
Consistent with § 66.0703(12)(f), Wis. Stats., it shall be a condition to the
maintenance of any assessment appeal that any assessment shall be paid
when due and payable, and upon default in payment any such appeal shall
be dismissed.
§ 57-14. Lien on property; collection and penalties.
Any special assessment shall be a lien on the property against which it is
levied on behalf of the Town. The Town Board shall provide for the collection
of such assessments and may establish penalties for payment after the
due date. The Town Board shall provide that all assessments not paid by
the date specified shall be extended upon the tax roll as a delinquent tax
against the property, and all proceedings in relation to the collection of
such delinquent taxes shall apply to such assessment, except as otherwise
provided by statute.
§ 57-15. Reassessment; waiver of notice and hearing.
subject to the right of appeal under § 66.0703(12), Wis. Stats., or any
other applicable provision of law.
A. If any assessment levied under this chapter is invalid because certain
underlying statutes are determined to be unconstitutional, the Town
Board may thereafter reassess such assessment pursuant to the
provisions of any applicable law.
§ 57-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-15
1:35
§ 57-16. Method of payment.6
All special assessment taxes levied by the Town shall be paid by taxpayers
as set forth in the Town of Grand Chute Special Assessment Policy, as
revised, which is herein adopted by reference.
§ 57-17. Costs of improvements.7
Costs of improvements shall be charged per the Town of Grand Chute
Special Assessment Policy, as revised, which is herein adopted by reference.
§ 57-18. Culs-de-sac, irregular lots and triangular parcels.
Special assessments for these types of parcels shall be assessed as provided
by the written resolution of the Town Board in its policy on special
assessments.
§ 57-19. Maintenance of streets.8
Intermittent general maintenance of streets shall not be subject to special
assessments when such maintenance consists of the application of a
covering mat or overlay no greater than 1 1/4 inches in depth. Any such
applications that exceed 1 1/4 inches in depth shall be subject to the
assessment process as set forth in this article and the Special Assessment
Policy, as revised, which is herein adopted by reference.
§ 57-20. Recapturing of special assessments for completed work.
[Added 5-20-2003; amended 7-15-2003]
B. The Town Board may, without notice or hearing, levy and assess all or
any part of the cost of any work or improvement upon property
benefitted if notice and hearing are specifically waived in writing by the
property owner(s) affected.
A. Purpose. The Town of Grand Chute often imposes on private developers
requirements to install public streets and/or utilities as a condition for
developing property in the Town. It has been determined by the Grand
Chute Town Board that there is a need for procedures enabling the
Town of Grand Chute to make special assessments to benefited
property for installing or constructing public works or improvements,
pertaining to those installed by private developers, such as roads and
utilities, which are then dedicated to the public upon completion. This is
partially justified when such public works and improvements are
designed or engineered to specially benefit other private properties, in
addition to those owned by the developer, when such work is required
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 57-15 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 57-20
1:36
by the Town and the developer is required to dedicate the
improvements to the Town as public facilities upon completion. The
Town Board finds that it is reasonable, necessary, and justifiable to
make special assessments against properties benefited by such public
works and improvements and to collect such assessments and
distribute all or a portion of the assessments so collected to the
developer initially incurring the cost for such improvements. There is
also a need to make special assessments, in certain circumstances,
after work has started or after improvements have been completed,
under either § 66.0701 or 66.0703, Wis. Stats., whether the work is
undertaken by the Town or by the developer.
B. Exclusions. Nothing herein shall preempt the rights of a developer to
receive cost recovery for sewer main extension contributions to the
extent allowed under Ch. PSC 187, Wis. Adm. Code, involving
connections to property outside of a development within three years
after the date of completion of sewer main installation under § PSC
187.05(3), Wis. Adm. Code.
C. Special assessment under § 66.0701, Wis. Stats. The Town of Grand
Chute is hereby authorized by action of the Town Board to make special
assessments pursuant to § 66.0701, Wis. Stats., for benefited property
for public work or improvements constructed or installed by private
developers which have been or will be dedicated to the Town for public
purposes upon completion. Such assessments will be made in
accordance with the police powers of the Town of Grand Chute.
D. Amount of assessment. The amount of assessment to be determined due
from property benefited shall be in such amounts and assessed on a
reasonable basis in accordance with those standards generally
established as a reasonable basis for assessments as set forth in
§ 66.0703(1)(b), Wis. Stats., which standard is hereby adopted by
reference.
E. Notice and hearing. Prior to the imposition of any assessment pursuant
to this section, all property owners to be assessed shall be given written
notice of the time and place at which a public hearing will be held
before the Town Board. Any property owner so notified of the public
hearing who does not appear shall be deemed to have waived his rights
to be heard; however, objections or comments pertaining to the special
assessment proposed may be submitted by affected property owners to
the Board in advance of the hearing in writing.
F. Form of notice. The notice to be given for purposes of the public hearing
required under this section shall include a description of the work or
improvement and/or the location of the work or improvement, the total
actual or estimated cost of the work or improvement, the total portion
or fraction of the estimated or actual cost of the work or improvement
which will be assessed, a listing of all properties to be assessed for the
specific work or improvement involved, a declaration that the
properties being assessed are benefited in whatever manner
§ 57-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-20
1:37
determined by the Town Board, and the amount of dollars to be
assessed in terms of payment for each property against which the
assessments will be imposed. Publication in a newspaper is not
required for assessments under this notice. Such notice of public
hearing shall be mailed by regular mail to the property owner affected
to the address to which real estate tax bills are mailed by the Town for
the properties affected.
G. Levy. Following the public hearing, the Town may levy the special
assessments against the property affected on a reasonable basis. This
levy shall be imposed by action of the Town Board approving the
amount of assessment to be levied to each property. Upon such action,
which shall be deemed the final determination of the Board, this levy
shall be deemed to have been made. Notice of the Board's
determination of the final levy shall be mailed to each property owner
affected by first-class mail to the address to which real estate tax bills
for the property being assessed are mailed by the Town. This
determination shall be made in the form of a final assessment resolution
passed by the Town Board.
H. Appeal. Within 40 days of the date of the final determination of the
governing body of the amount of levy to be imposed, any person against
whose land a special assessment is levied under this section may appeal
in the manner prescribed in § 66.0703(12), Wis. Stats., by filing a
written petition with the Circuit Court and bond for costs within 40 days
of the date of the final determination of the governing body.
I. Disbursement of assessment proceeds. The Town Board, as part of its
final determination to levy assessments for public improvements made
by private developers pursuant to this section, may also determine at
the time of the final determination or thereafter the persons or entities
to whom or to which such collected special assessments shall be
distributed for purposes of equitably reducing the costs incurred for the
construction of the public work or improvement by such person or
entity as thereafter dedicated to the Town upon completion.
J. Special assessments under § 66.0703, Wis. Stats. The Town, in its
discretion, may also make assessments against benefited property in its
discretion under § 66.0703, Wis. Stats., procedures whenever deemed
appropriate for public improvements constructed or installed by the
Town.
K. Time of assessment proceedings. Special assessments and proceedings
under this section may be made either prior to or subsequent to
completion of the public work or improvement for which assessments
hereunder are being imposed. Such assessments and proceedings may
be made either pursuant to § 66.0701, Wis. Stats, and this section or
under § 66.0703, Wis. Stats.
L. Lien. Special assessments imposed by this section shall constitute a lien
against the property from the date of the levy.
§ 57-20 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 57-21
1:38
§ 57-21. Special charges for current services. [Added 12-20-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-30]
A. In addition to all other methods provided by law, special charges for
current services may be imposed by the Town Board by allocating all or
part of the cost of the service to the property served. Such services may
include snow and ice removal, weed elimination, street repair, street
paving, repair of sidewalks and trails or curb and gutter, garbage and
refuse disposal, recycling, stormwater management, including
construction of stormwater management facilities, tree care, removal
and disposition of dead animals under § 60.23(20), Wis. Stats., loan
repayment under § 70.57(4)(b), Wis. Stats., soil conservation work
under § 92.115, Wis. Stats., and snow removal under § 86.105, Wis.
Stats. The Town Board may determine the manner of providing notice of
a special charge, except that before a special charge for street repair or
the repair of sidewalks and trails or curbs or gutters may be imposed,
notice and a public hearing shall be provided as set forth in
§ 66.0627(3)(b),Wis. Stats.
B. Such special charges shall not be payable in installments. If not paid
within the period fixed by the Town Board, such delinquent charge shall
become a lien as provided in § 57-14 of this article.
C. Section 57-6A of this article shall not be applicable to proceedings
under this section.
§ 57-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-21
1:39

ARTICLE III
State Property Tax Credits
[Adopted 2-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
§ 57-22. Distribution of payments to county.
The Wisconsin Department of Administration currently distributes the Town
of Grand Chute's portion of the school levy tax credit, lottery and gaming
credit, and first dollar credit directly to Outagamie County.
§ 57-23. Statutory authority.
Wisconsin Statutes allows municipalities that receive $3,000,000 or more
in school levy tax credit, lottery and gaming credit and first dollar credit to
notify the Department of Administration to distribute the amounts directly
to the municipality.
§ 57-24. Direct distribution of payments to Town.
The Town Board hereby approves the direct distribution of the school levy
tax credit, lottery and gaming credit and first dollar credit as outlined
in § 79.10 (7m) (cm)1a, Wis. Stats., and directs the Department of
Administration to directly distribute the amounts referenced in § 79.10 (4),
(5), and (5m), Wis. Stats., to the Town of Grand Chute as provided in § 79.10
(7m)(cm)1.a, Wis. Stats.
§ 57-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-24
1:41
Chapter 61
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 291. Hazardous substances — See Ch. 310.
§ 61-1. Duties of Fire Chief.
A. General supervision. The Chief shall have the responsibility of overall
supervision of the Department and personnel assigned to the
Department. The Chief shall be responsible for all activities within the
Department, as well as the personnel, Department budget and general
efficiency of the Department, and shall report directly to the Town
Administrator on all matters that do not conflict with Wisconsin
Administrative Code and statutes or federal regulations and laws. The
Chief shall perform such other duties as are usually incumbent upon the
commanding officer of a Fire Department and as are detailed in the job
description for this position.
B. It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to:
(1) Direct the operation of the Fire Department subject to the rules
and regulations which may be adopted by the Town Board or the
Board of Police and Fire Commissioners.
(2) Issue and enforce such orders as in his judgment may be best for
the protection of property and the extinguishing of fires.
(3) Enforce all ordinances, rules and regulations of the Town of Grand
Chute governing the Fire Department.
(4) Report the condition of the Fire Department at the end of each year
and make further reports when ordered to do so by the Town Board
or the Board of Police and Fire Commissioners.
(5) Report to the Board of Police and Fire Commissioners any member
of the Fire Department who may have disobeyed his/her order or
violated any of the laws or rules governing the Department.
(6) Keep a record and report to the Board of Police and Fire
Commissioners on the employment status of any members of the
Fire Department.
(7) Submit an annual departmental report to the Town Board not later
than March 31 of each year.
§ 57-24 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 61-2
1:42
§ 61-2. Command at incidents.
The Chief shall have all of the authority and responsibility for command
at all fire-fighting, rescue, and emergency medical incidents and other
incidents that the Department may respond to where life and/or property
is threatened within the Town. The Chief shall plan the control of the
same, direct the actions of the Department and/or mutual/automatic aid
personnel and other agencies which may be called to assist, assure that
the Department performs the duties required, and grant leaves and/or
release personnel and equipment from the scene of the emergency when
appropriate. In the absence of the Chief, the next highest ranking officer
or, in the absence of an officer, the most senior member of the Department
shall be in charge and shall have the same authority and responsibility at
incidents as the Chief.
§ 61-3. State of readiness.
The Chief shall maintain the Department, personnel and equipment in
a constant state of readiness in anticipation of an emergency response.
The Chief shall keep the Town Board and Administrator apprised of the
Department's readiness and report deficiencies in the Department's ability
to provide service.
Chapter 110
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 110-1. Elected officials.
A. At the annual spring election, the following Town officers shall be
elected, with the exception of the Municipal Judge, whose term shall be
four years: [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
(1) Five Town Supervisors, one of whom shall be designated on the
election ballots as Town Chairperson.
(a) Two Supervisory Board member positions shall be elected in
even-numbered years for a period of two years and three
Supervisory Board member positions shall be elected in oddnumbered
years with one designated on the election ballots as
Town Chairperson.
(b) The Town Chairperson and two other Board members
designated by appointment of the Town Chairperson shall be
the Commissioners of the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary
District No. 2 who shall serve as Commission members of the
Grand Chute - Menasha West Sewerage Commission.
Appointments by the Town Chairperson shall be made
annually.
§ 61-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-1
1:43
§ 110-2. Appointed officials. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-30]
The following officials shall be appointed annually by the Town Board of
Supervisors at its first regular meeting following the Annual Town Meeting,
unless the Town Board of Supervisors otherwise directs (§ 61.19, Wis.
Stats.):
§ 110-3. Duties of elected officials. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-30]
The following enumerated statutes, without limitation, shall govern the
rights, duties and obligations of elected officials of the Town of Grand
Chute:
(2) One Municipal Judge pursuant to § 755.02, Wis. Stats., for a fouryear
term effective May 1, 1997.
B. Pursuant to authority of the Town Meeting of April 1995, the Town
Board designated that the Town Assessor would be selected by
appointment of the Board. See § 110-2B.
C. Pursuant to authority of the Town Meeting of April 2006, the office of
Town Clerk is an appointed position. [Added 12-20-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-30]
D. Pursuant to authority of the Town Meeting of April 2002, the office of
Town Treasurer is an appointed position. [Added 12-20-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-30]
E. No sitting Town Board member and no candidate running for election to
the Town Board shall be permitted to work at election sites in the Town
as an election inspector, election official, or in any other capacity as an
employee of the Town for the purpose of performing election duties. In
addition, family members of a candidate whose name appears on the
ballot shall not be permitted to work as an election inspector for those
specific elections. [Added 1-5-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
A. Weed Commissioner (to be appointed by Town Chairperson).
B. Town Assessor(s) (appointed for terms not to exceed three years).
Section 60.307(3)(b), Wis. Stats.
A. The Town Board of Supervisors shall have the rights, obligations and
duties as specified in Ch. 60, Wis. Stats., particularly §§ 60.22 and
60.23, Wis. Stats.
B. The Municipal Judge shall have the jurisdiction and powers prescribed
in § 755.045, Wis. Stats., and Chapter 28 of this Code.
§ 110-1 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 110-4
1:44
§ 110-4. Duties of appointed officials. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-30]
The rights, obligations and duties of appointed officials shall be as follows:
§ 110-5. Use of facsimile signatures.
The Town Board of Supervisors authorizes the use of facsimile signatures
for signing documents, drafts, order checks and transfers under the
following conditions:
A. The Town Clerk shall have the rights, obligations and duties as specified
in § 60.33, Wis. Stats.
B. The Town Treasurer shall have the rights, obligations and duties as
specified in § 60.34, Wis. Stats.
C. The Town Assessor shall have the rights, obligations and duties as
specified in Ch. 70, Wis. Stats. Whenever the Assessor, in the
performance of the Assessor's duties, requests or obtains income and
expense information pursuant to § 70.47(7)(af), Wis. Stats., or any
successor statute thereto, then such income and expense information
that is provided to the Assessor shall be held by the Assessor on a
confidential basis; except, however, that the information may be
revealed to and used by persons in the discharge of duties imposed by
law, in the discharge of duties imposed by office (including but not
limited to use by the Assessor in performance of official duties of the
Assessor's office and use by the Board of Review in performance of its
official duties), or pursuant to order of a court. Income and expense
information provided to the Assessor under § 70.47(7)(af), Wis. Stats.,
unless a court determines that it is inaccurate, is, per § 70.47(7)(af),
Wis. Stats., not subject to the right of inspection and copying under
§ 19.35(1), Wis. Stats.
D. The Town Administrator shall have the rights, obligations, and duties as
specified by the Town Board per employment contract.
A. All facsimile signature stamps shall be kept under lock and key.
B. All facsimile signature stamps shall be approved by the bank by
submitting proper signature cards.
C. At least one manual signature shall appear on all drafts, order checks
and transfer orders unless the Board authorizes the use of a signature
machine for the purpose of signing drafts.
§ 110-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-5
1:45
Chapter 123
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police canines — See Ch. 197, Art. III.
§ 123-1. General powers of police officers.
The Police Chief and all police officers of the Town shall possess the powers,
enjoy the privileges and be subject to the liabilities conferred and imposed
by law on police officers. The Police Chief and police officers shall have full
power and authority and it shall be their duty to:
A. Arrest with or without process and, with reasonable diligence, take
before the proper court every person found in the Town violating any
law of the state or ordinance of the Town of Grand Chute.9
B. Familiarize themselves with the ordinances of the Town and attend to
the enforcement of such ordinances by all lawful means.
C. Help prevent crimes, misdemeanors and violations of Town ordinances
and protect the health, safety, public peace and order of the Town and
its inhabitants.
D. Report complaints of or observed street and sidewalk obstructions,
unlighted streetlamps, unlawful street signs or signals and defective or
dangerous streets and sidewalks to the Town Board or appropriate
department.
E. Obey the orders of the Police Chief and report to the Police Chief all
violations of the Town ordinances.
F. Enforce the ordinances of the Town and perform any duty which may be
required, and a police officer shall not in the discharge of his/her duties
as such officer be guilty of any fraud, extortion, oppression, favoritism,
partiality or willful wrong or injustice.
G. Not communicate to any person any information which shall enable
persons to escape from arrest or punishment or enable them to dispose
of or secrete any goods or other valuable things stolen or embezzled.
H. Not compound any offense committed against person or property, or
withdraw any complaint therefor, unless by the consent of the Police
Chief.
9. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 110-5 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 123-1
1:46
§ 123-2. Duties of Police Chief.10
The Police Chief shall have the following duties in addition to any duties
prescribed by Wisconsin Statutes and not enumerated herein. The Police
Chief shall:
Chapter 128
PROPERTY, ABANDONED
§ 128-1. State law regarding disposal of abandoned property
adopted.
The provisions of § 66.0139, Wis. Stats., are hereby adopted by reference.
§ 128-2. Methods of disposal.
I. Deliver fees collected in the line of duty by the Police Chief or any police
officer thereof to the treasury of the Town of Grand Chute.
J. Not become bail for any person arrested and shall in no case become
bail for any person.
K. Assist the Fire Department in maintaining order at the scene of a fire.
L. See that the necessary permits and licenses issued by the proper
authority of the state or Town are in the possession of or properly
displayed by any person engaged in an activity or business within the
Town for which such permit or license is required and that the terms of
such permits or licenses are complied with.
M. Exercise and comply with the provisions of § 60.35, Wis. Stats.
A. Keep in his/her office a record of all arrests made by members of the
Department, traffic tickets issued, the dates, hours and places thereof,
names of persons arrested, arresting officers, offenses charged, actions
taken and results.
B. Not be absent from duty or leave the County of Outagamie for more
than 24 hours without first reporting to the Town Chairperson, provided
that he/she may leave without such report when discharging his/her
official duties or when in pursuit of any person known to have violated
any law or ordinance of the state or Town, or upon regularly scheduled
vacations, or upon regularly scheduled days off, or in cases of absence
due to illness.
C. Submit a written annual report to the Town Board of all activities and
transactions of the Department during the preceding year.
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 123-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 128-2
1:47
§ 128-3. Storage fees.
Any property remaining unclaimed beyond the thirty-day period shall be
subject to a storage fee as prescribed by the fee schedule on file in the Town
Clerk’s office, commencing with the expiration of the thirty-day period and
continuing until the property is reclaimed or disposed of.
Chapter 135
RECORDS
A. Except as otherwise provided in this Town code, all personal property
which has been abandoned or remains unclaimed for a period of 30
days, may be disposed of by public sale, private sale, online sale,
conversion to public use, donation to charity, or disposed of by junking
or salvage.
B. The method of disposal shall be at the sole option of the Police
Department.
C. If the owner of the property is known, the thirty-day period shall
commence on the date of the mailing of a notice by regular mail to the
owner’s last known address. If ownership is unknown, the thirty-day
period shall commence on the date the property is taken into possession
by the Police Department.
§ 128-2 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 128-3
1:48
ARTICLE I
Retention and Destruction of Public Records
[Adopted 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-12 (§ 1.07 of the 1997 Code)]
§ 135-1. Retention of public records.
Public records for which the Town of Grand Chute is the legal custodian
shall be retained for a period of time as prescribed by § 19.21(4)(b), Wis.
Stats., unless another period of time has been set by statute, or unless a
shorter period has been set by the State Public Records Board pursuant to
§ 16.61(3)(e), Wis. Stats.
§ 135-2. Destruction of public records.
Public records deemed obsolete by the Town officer serving as legal
custodian may be destroyed pursuant to the provisions of this article only
after passage of the retention period prescribed by state statute, unless a
shorter period has been set by the State Public Records Board, and then
only after passage of such shorter period. No record shall be destroyed for
which there is reason to believe litigation may be pending, regardless of
whether the retention period has concluded.
§ 135-3. Microfilm and similar reproductive devices.
Any public record may be kept and preserved by the use of microfilm or
other reproductive device. Any photographic reproduction shall be deemed
an original record for all purposes if it meets the applicable standards of
§ 16.61(7), Wis. Stats. Once reproduced by photographic reproduction, the
original document may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of.
A. Notice to Historical Society. Prior to the destruction of any public
record, at least 60 days' notice shall be given the State Historical
Society, unless such notice has been waived.
B. Limitation. This section shall not be construed to authorize destruction
of any public record after a period less than that prescribed by statute
or state administrative regulations.
§ 135-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-3
1:49
Chapter 150
TOWN BOARD
§ 150-1. Village powers; meetings.
A. Adoption of village powers. The Annual Town Meeting of the Town of
Grand Chute having previously hereto adopted a resolution pursuant to
§ 60.22(3), Wis. Stats., allowing the Town Board to exercise village
powers, said resolution remaining unchanged and not rescinded by this
Code, now therefore the Town Board shall exercise power as follows:
the Town Board shall exercise all powers relating to villages and
conferred on village boards by Ch. 61, Wis. Stats., except such power
the exercise of which would conflict with the statutes relating to towns
and town boards. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
B. Meeting time and date.
(1) Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the Town Board shall be
held on the first and third Tuesdays of each calendar month. Any
regular meeting falling on a legal holiday shall be held at the
pleasure of the Town Board. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-30]
(2) Place of meetings. Meetings of the Board, including special and
adjourned meetings, shall be held at the Grand Chute Town Hall,
1900 Grand Chute Boulevard. Place of meeting may be changed to
accommodate large groups of citizens. [Amended 12-20-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-30]
(3) Quorum. Three Supervisors, including the Town Chairperson, shall
constitute a quorum but a lesser number may adjourn from time to
time or compel the attendance of absent members. Any Supervisor
who shall without good cause fail to attend a regular or adjourned
meeting or special meeting called in accordance with these rules
shall be subject to a fine as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture
and Bond Schedules by vote of all members present at such
meeting, whether or not such members constitute a quorum.
(4) Rescheduled meetings. Any regular meeting may be rescheduled or
changed by action of the Board at the next preceding meeting. The
vote shall be by 2/3 of the members of the Board, and the Clerk
shall be directed to post notice at the Town Hall 10 days before the
time when the regular meeting would have been held if not
rescheduled. The notice shall include the newly scheduled date.
(5) Withdrawal from meetings. No member at any meeting of the
Board shall withdraw therefrom without permission from the
presiding officer, and any member so withdrawing without such
permission may be compelled to return and may be punished by
§ 135-3 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 150-1
1:50
§ 150-2. Order of business. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-30]
The business of the Town Board shall be conducted in the following order:
§ 150-3. Presiding officer.
forfeiture as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond
Schedules.
A. Call to order by presiding officer.
B. Roll call. (If a quorum is not present, the meeting shall adjourn, which
may be to a specified date.)
C. Public input.
D. Minutes of the previous meeting.
E. Reports of officers and committee reports.
F. Financial report.
G. Auditing and passing upon claims and bills.
H. Communications and miscellaneous business.
I. Unfinished business from previous meetings.
J. New business, including introduction of ordinances and resolutions.
K. Licenses and permits.
L. Resolutions.
M. Ordinances.
A. Control of meeting. The Town Chairperson shall preserve order and
conduct the proceedings of the meeting. A member may appeal from
the decision of the presiding officer. Such appeal is not debatable and
must be sustained by a majority of the members present, exclusive of
the presiding officer.
B. Absence of Chairperson. If the Chairperson is absent at any meeting,
the Clerk shall call the meeting to order and preside until the Board
selects a Supervisor to preside for that meeting.
C. Participation in debate. The presiding officer may, from the Chair, speak
upon any question, may make motions, and may second motions. The
presiding officer may make nominations for committee membership and
for other official positions.
§ 150-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-4
1:51
§ 150-4. Special meetings.
Special meetings of the Board may be called by filing a written request with
the Town Clerk signed by 2/3 members of the Town Board at least 48 hours
prior to the time specified for such meeting. The Clerk shall immediately
notify each member of the Town Board of the time and purpose of such
meeting. Said notice shall be via phone communication at least 24 hours
prior to the time set for the meeting.
§ 150-5. Ordinances and resolutions.
Ordinances, resolutions, bylaws, communications and other matters
submitted to the Board shall be read by title and author and referred
to the appropriate committee by the Chairperson. No ordinance or bylaw
shall be considered unless presented in writing by a Supervisor or Town
Administrator. Unless requested by a Supervisor before final vote is taken,
no ordinance, resolution or bylaw need be read in full.
§ 150-6. General rules.
§ 150-7. Suspension of rules.
These rules or any part thereof may be temporarily suspended in connection
with any matter under consideration by a recorded vote of 2/3 of the
members present, but in no event shall the rules be suspended when there
are fewer than three Supervisors present.
§ 150-8. Terms of office. [Added 3-20-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-05]
Every elected officer shall hold the office for two years. The regular term of
elected town officers, other than the town assessor, commences on the 3rd
Tuesday of April in the year of their election pursuant to § 60.30,Wis. Stats.
The regular term of an elected assessor commences on June 1 in the year of
the assessor’s election.
Chapter 154
TOWN MEETING
A. The deliberations of the Board shall be conducted in accordance with
the parliamentary rules contained in Robert's Rules of Order Revised,
as amended and updated from time to time, which is hereby
incorporated in this section by reference. No person other than a
member shall address the Board except by majority vote of the
members present.
B. No ordinance, resolution or other motion shall be discussed or acted
upon unless it has been seconded. No motion shall be withdrawn or
amended without the consent of the person making the same and the
person seconding it.
§ 150-4 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 154-1
1:52
§ 154-1. Annual Town Meeting. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-30; 3-20-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-05]
The Annual Town Meeting shall be held on the third Tuesday of April of
each year at the Grand Chute Town Hall unless changed by the electors
pursuant to § 60.11, Wis. Stats. The order of business and the business to
be conducted at the Annual Town Meeting shall be governed by §§ 60.10,
60.11, 60.12, 60.13, 60.14, 60.15 and 60.16, Wis. Stats.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 185
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 154-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-1
1:53

ARTICLE I
False Alarms
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as § 7.07 of the 1997 Code; amended in its
entirety 8-17-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-09]
§ 185-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM BUSINESS — Any person, property owner, firm, partnership or
corporation who or which alters, installs, leases, maintains, repairs,
replaces or services an alarm system or who or which causes any of these
activities to take place.
FALSE ALARM — Any signal, message, or other communication transmitted
by an alarm system, person, or other device which causes Police or Fire
Department response and which is determined by the Town not to be of an
existing emergency or unlawful situation.
TWELVE-MONTH PERIOD — The 12 months preceding the most recent
false alarm event.
§ 185-2. Intentional false alarms.
Pursuant to § 941.13, Wis. Stats., whoever intentionally gives a false alarm
to any public officer or employee, whether by means of a fire alarm system
or otherwise, is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
§ 185-3. Fees for false alarms.
A. The user of any private alarm system shall pay the Town of Grand Chute
a fee according to the schedule of fees established by the Town Board
for any false alarm occurring in a twelve-month period. Any fees
payable to the Town which are delinquent may be assessed against the
property involved as a special charge for current service, without
notice, pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
B. A fee shall not be charged if any of the following apply:
(1) The alarm was activated by criminal activity or a legitimate
emergency.
(2) The alarm was activated after a power outage that lasted more than
four hours.
(3) The alarm was activated after the premises was impacted by
documented adverse weather conditions.
(4) The alarm was activated by a technician or representative of the
alarm business responsible for installation and/or maintenance of
the alarm system.
§ 185-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-4
1:55
§ 185-4. Appeal of false alarm fee.
An alarm user may appeal the assessment of a false alarm fee by submitting
written documentation to the Police Chief or Fire Chief within 10 business
days after notification of the assessment of a fee.
§ 185-5. Alarms during system installation or maintenance.
No representative or technician of an alarm business may cause a false
alarm during the process of installation or maintenance of an alarm system
without first notifying the Town.
§ 185-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article may be subject to
a forfeiture of an amount prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond
Schedules, as established by the Town Board, and the costs of prosecution,
and in default of payment of the fine and costs of prosecution shall be
imprisoned in the county jail until said fine and the costs of prosecution are
paid, but not to exceed 30 days. Each day during which a violation continues
shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
§ 185-4 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 185-6
1:56
Chapter 190
AMUSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dances and dance halls — See Ch. 252.
Fireworks — See Ch. 295.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 409.
Special events — See Ch. 456.
§ 190-1. License required.
No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall be allowed to exhibit or
hold any show, exhibition, contest, caravan, circus, carnival, menagerie,
concert, sporting event, musical entertainment, theatrical performance or
vaudeville performance within the Town of Grand Chute without first
obtaining a license as herein required.
§ 190-2. Application for license.11
Every application for a license shall be furnished by the Town Clerk and
verified and shall contain the name, place of residence, age, and occupation
of the applicant, the purposes for which a license is desired, and the place
where and the time when and the terms for which he/she proposes to carry
on the amusement to be licensed.
§ 190-3. Investigation; issuance of license.
Upon receipt of each such application, the Town Clerk shall immediately
institute such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character
as he/she deems necessary for the protection of the public good and shall
endorse his/her approval or disapproval upon said application within 72
hours after it has been filed with him/her and shall issue or deny the license
in accordance with his/her findings after presentation by the applicant of a
receipt of the Town Treasurer showing payment of the required fee.
§ 190-4. Term of license; fee.
The license required in § 190-1 shall be for one day, including evening, or
from day to day or other specified time, as the case may be, and the license
fee therefor shall be as prescribed in the Town Fee Schedule.
§ 190-5. Violations and penalties.12
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 185-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-5
1:57
Chapter 197
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 398.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 409.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 415.
Special events — See Ch. 456.
Zoning — See Ch. 535.
A. A first violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules,
together with the costs of prosecution, and on default of the payment of
any such fine and/or costs of prosecution such person shall be
committed to the county jail of Outagamie County until such fine and
costs are paid, but not to exceed 90 days.
B. Any person violating this chapter who shall previously have been
convicted of a violation of this chapter shall, upon proof and conviction
thereof, forfeit an amount as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and
Bond Schedules, together with the costs of prosecution, and on default
of the payment of any such fine and costs of prosecution, or either of
them, such convicted person shall be committed to and confined within
the county jail of Outagamie County, Wisconsin, until such fine and
costs of prosecution are paid, but not to exceed six months.
C. Each day of violation under this chapter shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
§ 190-5 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 190-5
1:58
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 197-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
indicates a different meaning:
ANIMAL — A vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, other than humans.
ANIMAL AT LARGE — A domestic animal off the property of the owner and
not under restraint.
BODILY HARM — Bodily injury including, but not limited to, a laceration, a
puncture, any fracture of a bone, a concussion, a loss or fracture of a tooth,
or any temporary loss of consciousness, sight, or hearing.
CARETAKER — Any person who, in the absence of the owner, temporarily
harbors, shelters, keeps, or is in charge of a domesticated animal.
CONFINED — Restriction of an animal at all times by the owner to an
escape-proof building, vehicle, or other enclosure.
CRUEL — Causing unnecessary and excessive pain, suffering or
unjustifiable injury or death to an animal.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL — Any of the following:
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Any animal which normally can be tamed and
converted to home life.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof designed to be used
exclusively for residential purposes.
KENNEL — Any premises wherein any person is engaged in the business of
boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling of
dogs or cats.
LIVESTOCK — A domesticated animal, raised in an agricultural setting for
the purpose of providing food, fiber, or labor.
OWNER — Any individual owning an animal or who keeps, harbors, cares
for, acts as its custodian, or who knowingly permits an animal to remain on
or about his premises/property for five or more consecutive days.
Any animal which, when unprovoked, inflicts bodily harm on a person,
domestic pet, or domestic animal on public or private property.
A.
Any animal which, without provocation, repeatedly chases or
approaches persons in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of
attack upon streets, sidewalks, any public grounds, or on the private
property of another.
B.
Any animal with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack,
cause injury to, or otherwise threaten the safety of humans or other
domestic pets or animals.
C.
§ 197-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 197-1
1:59
PET — Any animal kept primarily for pleasure or companionship.
POULTRY — A domesticated bird raised for meat or eggs.
PROHIBITED DANGEROUS ANIMAL — Any of the following:
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Any animal which:
RENDER STERILE — A surgical procedure by which an animal has been
rendered incapable of siring or bearing offspring. This term includes
neutering and spaying.
RESTRAINT — Secured by a leash or lead, and under the control of a
responsible person and obedient to that person's command, or within the
real property limits of its owner.
SERIOUS BODILY HARM — Bodily injury which creates a substantial risk of
death, or which causes serious, permanent disfigurement, or which causes
a permanent or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily
member or organ or other serious bodily injury.
SERVICE DOG — A dog specially trained to lead blind or deaf persons, to
provide support for mobility impaired persons, or to assist with public safety
operations.
Any animal that is determined to be a prohibited dangerous animal
under this chapter.
A.
Any animal that, while off the owner or caretaker's property, has killed
or caused serious bodily harm to a domesticated animal without
provocation.
B.
Any animal that, without provocation, inflicts serious bodily harm on a
person on public or private property.
C.
Any animal brought from another city, village, town, or county that has
been declared dangerous or vicious by that jurisdiction.
D.
A. Molests passersby or passing vehicles.
Attacks persons or animals without provocation when such persons or
animals are peacefully conducting themselves in a place where they are
lawfully entitled to be.
B.
C. Is at large on school grounds, parks, or cemeteries.
D. Is repeatedly at large.
E. Damages private or public property
Barks, whines, howls, yelps, crows, or makes other noises in an
excessive, continuous, or untimely fashion.
F.
Does not have the current vaccination as required by Article II of this
chapter.
G.
H. Is the subject of repeated violations under this chapter.
§ 197-1 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 197-1
1:60
WILD ANIMAL — A nondomesticated vertebrate creature, including any
nonhuman primate, raccoon, skunk, fox, wolf, or any animal which is part
of the canis lupis species, any animal raised for fur-bearing purposes, or
any other animal or hybrid thereof which can normally be found in the wild
state, or poisonous reptiles, crocodilians, and any other snake or reptile
exceeding three feet in length.
§ 197-2. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
§ 197-3. Animal care.
No owner or caretaker of an animal shall fail to provide it with adequate
food, adequate water, and adequate heating, cooling, ventilation, sanitation,
shelter, and medical care consistent with the normal requirements of the
animal's size, species, and breed.
§ 197-4. Abuse of animals; cruelty to animals; fighting animals
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by employees of the
Police Department and the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. The Chief of Police may grant exemptions or variances to the
enforcement of this chapter for service dogs.
C. Police Department personnel and the Code Enforcement Officer are
authorized to catch and impound animals at large, with such
authorization to include the pursuit of animals upon the premises of the
owner, caretaker, or other private property.
D. It shall be a violation of this chapter to interfere with Police Department
personnel or the Code Enforcement Officer while engaged in the
performance of duties authorized herein.
E. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon proof
and conviction thereof, forfeit an amount as prescribed in the Uniform
Forfeiture and Bond Schedule, together with the costs of prosecution,
and in default of payment of the forfeiture and costs of prosecution, or
either of them, such convicted person shall be committed to and
confined within the county jail of Outagamie County, Wisconsin, until
such fine and costs of prosecution are paid, but not to exceed 60 days.
F. In addition to any other forfeiture, penalty, or remedy authorized under
this Ordinance, the Town may seek enforcement hereof by an action for
equitable or other injunctive relief through the Circuit Court for
Outagamie County, upon which successful enforcement the violator(s)
named in the action shall be liable to the Town for statutory costs,
disbursements, and fees as provided for under state statutes for Circuit
Court actions.
G. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
§ 197-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 197-4
1:61
§ 197-5. Abandonment.
No owner or caretaker of an animal shall abandon such animal.
§ 197-6. Report of vehicle striking animal.
Any person, who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic
animal, shall stop at once and shall immediately report such injury or death
to the animal's owner or caretaker. If the owner or caretaker cannot be
ascertained and located, such operator shall at once report the accident to
the Police Department or to the Humane Society.
§ 197-7. Poisoning.
No person shall expose any poisonous substances, whether mixed with food
or not, so that the substance shall be liable to be eaten by any animal,
provided that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on his own
property poisons designed for the purpose of rodent or pest extermination.
This provision shall not prohibit persons authorized by the Town of Grand
Chute or licensed pest control operators from providing rodent or pest
control services.
§ 197-8. Maintenance of pens and enclosures.
All pens, yards, structures, or areas where animals are kept shall be
maintained in a nuisance-free manner. Excrement shall be removed
regularly and disposed of properly so not to attract insects or rodents,
become unsightly, or cause objectionable odors.
§ 197-9. Removal of animal waste.
A. No person shall beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment, overload, overwork, or
otherwise abuse an animal.
B. The provisions of § 951.02, Wis. Stats., regarding cruelty to animals,
exclusive of any penalties, are hereby adopted by reference and made
an offense punishable by this Code.
C. No person shall cause, instigate, or permit any dogfight, cockfight, or
other combat between animals or between animals and humans, and no
person may own, possess, keep, or train any animal with the intent that
the animal be engaged in fighting with other animals or humans. This
section shall not apply to animals used by law enforcement, military, or
licensed security agencies.
A. The owner or caretaker of an animal shall promptly remove and dispose
of, in a sanitary manner, any excrement left or deposited by the animal
upon public or private property. This requirement shall not apply to
domestic animals, including livestock and poultry, kept on private
property zoned as an Agricultural District, and maintained for a
§ 197-4 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 197-9
1:62
§ 197-10. Restraint; nuisance animals.
§ 197-11. Impoundment of animals.
§ 197-12. Maximum number of animals.
No person or household shall keep more than six animals, the maximum
number of dogs being three, the maximum number of rabbits being two,
principal permitted use as outlined in §§ 535-23B(1) and 535-24B(1) of
the Zoning Code, unless such conditions constitute a public nuisance.
B. The owner or caretaker of a dog or cat shall have in his or her
immediate possession an appropriate means of removing animal
excrement whenever said animal is not on property owned or possessed
by the owner of caretaker. This subsection shall not be applicable in
cases in which a person is being assisted by a service dog.
A. The owner or caretaker of any animal shall confine, restrain, or
maintain control over the animal so that the unprovoked animal does
not run at large, attack, or injure any person or domesticated animal.
B. All owners shall exercise proper care and control of their animals to
prevent them from becoming a public nuisance.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person within the Town of Grand Chute to
own, harbor, or keep any dog, cat, or other animal which has been
determined to be a public nuisance as defined in § 197-1.
D. Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or secure
enclosure, or otherwise restrained, in such a manner that such female
dog or cat cannot come into contact with an unneutered male of the
same species, except for planned breeding.
A. Unrestrained and nuisance animals shall be taken by employees of the
Police Department or the Code Enforcement Officer and impounded in a
temporary or permanent animal shelter and there confined in a humane
manner.
B. When an animal is causing a public nuisance and its owner cannot be
contacted at the time of the complaint, it may be impounded by
employees of the Police Department or Code Enforcement Officer after
an attempt to contact the owner is unsuccessful. After impoundment,
reasonable attempts shall be made to contact the owner.
C. An owner reclaiming an impounded animal shall pay the accrued
impoundment fee and comply with provisions of Article III of this
chapter.
D. Any animal not reclaimed by its owner within seven days becomes the
property of the Town or Humane Society and shall be placed for
adoption in a suitable home or humanely euthanized.
§ 197-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 197-12
1:63
on any Town lot, land parcel, or dwelling unit if in a multiple-dwelling unit,
with the exception of a litter of pups or kittens, which may be kept for a
period of time not to exceed five months from birth. This restriction does not
apply to private property or premises holding a special exception permit for
a kennel, a permitted veterinary clinic, or property zoned as an Agricultural
District, as outlined in §§ 535-23 and 535-24 of the Zoning Code, except that
possession of more than three dogs on property zoned as an Agricultural
District would require a special exception permit for a kennel.
§ 197-13. Record of sales for pet shops and animal dealers.
Pet shops and animal dealers shall keep a record of all sales of dogs, cats,
and ferrets. The record shall contain the date and source of acquisition of
the animal and the name, address, and telephone number of the purchaser.
The record of such sale must be kept at least one year, and all records shall
be subject to inspection by any employee of the Police Department.
§ 197-14. Animals prohibited at special events.
§ 197-15. State law regarding humane officers, rabies control, and
dogs adopted.
The provisions of § 95.21, Chapter 173, and Chapter 174, Wis. Stats.,
exclusive of any penalties, are adopted by reference and are made a part of
this chapter, so far as applicable.
A. Animals are prohibited on public property within the Town of Grand
Chute during such periods of time as the public property is in use for a
special event as permitted in accordance with Chapter 456, Special
Events, of this Code, except by written permission from the event
permit holder for special activities in accordance with the event.
B. Exempted from enforcement of this section are dogs specially trained to
lead blind or deaf persons, to provide support for mobility impaired
persons, or to assist with emergency services personnel.
§ 197-12 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 197-15
1:64
ARTICLE II
Rabies Control
§ 197-16. Rabies vaccination for dogs, cats, and ferrets;
exemptions.
§ 197-17. Report of animal bites and scratches.
All incidents occurring in the Town in which any animal bites or scratches
a person or another animal, or is suspected of such, shall immediately be
reported to the Police Department by any person having knowledge of such
incident. If the bite or scratch is caused by an animal for which there is
no rabies vaccine or known quarantine, the animal, at the discretion of
the Police Department, may be euthanized and analyzed for rabies with all
expenses incurred being the responsibility of the owner.
§ 197-18. Confinement of animal involved in bite or scratch
incident.
A. The owner of a dog, cat, or ferret shall have the animal vaccinated by a
veterinarian at not later than five months of age; or, if an owner obtains
or brings an animal into the Town that has reached five months of age,
unless that animal has been vaccinated as evidenced by a current
certificate of rabies vaccination from this state or another state, the
owner of that animal shall have the animal revaccinated:
(1) Before the date that the immunization expires as stated on the
certificate; or
(2) If no date is specified, within one year after the previous
vaccination.
B. The owner of an animal may petition the Police Department for an
exemption to this section. Exemptions shall only be considered if a
licensed veterinarian provides a detailed written explanation stating
the vaccination is inadvisable because of a reaction to a previous
vaccination, a physical condition, or a regimen of therapy that the dog
is undergoing. A new letter shall be required for each year that an
exemption is sought.
A. If any animal for which the owner holds a current rabies certificate is
involved in a bite or scratch incident, the owner shall quarantine and
confine the animal under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian for
at least 10 days from the date of the incident. The animal may be
quarantined on the premises of the owner, but shall not be allowed to
come into contact with other animals or people during the period of
confinement. Supervision of a veterinarian includes, at a minimum,
examination of the animal on the first day, on the 10th day, and on one
intervening day.
§ 197-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 197-18
1:65
§ 197-19. General rabies quarantine.
§ 197-20. Police dog, service dog exemption.
B. Any animal without a current rabies certificate involved in a bite or
scratch incident, or any other animal that the officer has reason to
believe has bitten a person or is infected with rabies, must be confined
at a veterinary hospital or a place designated by the Police Department
under the conditions described in Subsection A, above.
C. The owner of any animal involved in a bite or scratch incident is
responsible for any expenses incurred.
A. When reports indicate a positive diagnosis of rabies to the extent that
lives of persons are endangered, the Town Chairman may declare an
area-wide quarantine within such borders and for such period as are
deemed necessary.
B. In the event of a general quarantine for rabies, all dogs and cats shall
be kept securely confined, tied, leashed or muzzled. Any dog or cat not
confined, tied, leashed or muzzled is declared a public nuisance and
may be impounded.
C. When quarantine for rabies has been declared by the Town Chairman,
the Town Clerk shall promptly post, in at least three public places
within the quarantine area, notices of quarantine.
D. A dog or cat which is immunized currently against rabies as evidenced
by a valid certificate of rabies vaccination or other evidence is exempt
from the general quarantine restrictions if a rabies vaccination tag or
substitute tag is attached to the animal's collar.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a service dog shall
not be quarantined in the absence of evidence that it has been exposed
to rabies unless the owner fails:
(1) To keep the dog safely confined to the premises of the owner.
(2) To keep the dog available for examination at all reasonable times.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a police dog used by
any recognized law enforcement agency shall not be quarantined
during general quarantine, or after biting any person, if such bite
occurred while the dog was being used for any law enforcement
purpose.
§ 197-18 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 197-20
1:66
ARTICLE III
Licensing
§ 197-21. License required.
§ 197-22. Application.
Written application for a dog license shall be made to the Town Treasurer
and shall include the name and address of the applicant, a description of
the animal, any additional information requested, the appropriate fee, and
a rabies certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian.
§ 197-23. Issuance; fee.
§ 197-24. Persons exempted from fee.
The license fee in this article shall not be required for police dogs or other
dogs subject to exemptions under §§ 174.054 and 174.055, Wis. Stats. Every
person owning such a dog shall receive a free dog license annually upon
application.
§ 197-25. License year; proration of fee.
The license year commences on January 1 and ends on the following
December 31. Application for a license may be made 30 days prior to the
license year. Persons applying for a license during the licensing year shall
be required to pay 50% of the fee stipulated in this article if the animal
becomes five months of age after July 1 of the licensing year.
§ 197-26. Late fee.
The Town Treasurer shall assess and collect a late fee, as prescribed by the
Town Fee Schedule, if the owner fails to obtain a dog license prior to April 1
of each year or within 30 days of acquiring ownership of a licensable animal,
A. Any person owning, keeping, harboring or having custody of any dog
over five months of age within the Town of Grand Chute must obtain a
license as provided in this article.
B. Application for a license must be made within 30 days after obtaining a
dog over four months of age, except that this requirement will not apply
to a nonresident keeping a dog within the Town for not longer than 30
days.
A. A dog license shall be issued after completing an application, showing
evidence of rabies vaccination certificate and payment of the applicable
fee. The license fee shall be reduced upon showing evidence from a
licensed veterinarian of neutering, spaying, or another method of
rendering the animal sterile.
B. License fees shall be established in the Town Fee Schedule.
§ 197-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 197-26
1:67
or if the owner failed to obtain a license on or before the animal reached
licensable age.
§ 197-27. Duplicate license.
A duplicate license may be obtained upon payment of a replacement fee, as
prescribed by the Town Fee Schedule.
§ 197-28. Issuance of tags.
Upon acceptance of the dog license application and fee, the Town Treasurer
shall issue a durable tag stamped with an identifying number and the year
of issuance.
§ 197-29. Record of tags.
The Town Treasurer shall maintain a record of the identifying numbers of
all dog license tags and shall make this record available to the public.
§ 197-30. Wearing of license tag and rabies tag required.
Dogs must wear license and rabies vaccination tags at all times when off the
premises of the owner, with the exception of show dogs during competition.
§ 197-31. Unlawful use.
No person may use any dog license for any animal other than the animal for
which it was issued.
§ 197-32. Revocation.
A. The Town Board may revoke any dog license if the person holding the
license refuses or fails to comply with this chapter or any other law
governing the protection and keeping of animals.
B. Any person whose license is revoked shall, within 10 days thereafter,
humanely dispose of all animals owned, kept, or harbored. No part of
the license fee shall be refunded. A receipt from an animal shelter,
veterinarian, or other individual must be obtained as proof of proper
disposal.
§ 197-26 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 197-32
1:68
ARTICLE IV
Wild Animals
§ 197-33. Keeping for exhibition purposes; keeping as pet.
§ 197-34. Feeding of deer.
A. No person shall exhibit or permit to be kept on their premises or any
public place any wild animal for display or exhibition purposes, whether
gratuitously or for a fee.
B. The prohibitions in Subsection A do not apply when the creatures are in
the care, custody, or control of a veterinarian for treatment.
C. Public or private educational institutions, nonprofit organizations,
itinerant or transient carnivals, circuses, or other theatrical
performances may seek, from the Town Board, a limited exemption
from this section, provided the display will be of limited duration and
meet any other requirements or conditions mandated by the Board. The
person or organization having custody and control of any animal
permitted by this section shall be responsible for compliance with all
other provisions of this chapter while the animal remains with the
Town.
D. No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild animal as a pet.
A. No person may place any salt, mineral, grain, fruit, or vegetable
material outdoors on any public or private property within the area of
the Town of Grand Chute defined and described in Exhibit A of § 415-3
of this code for the purpose of feeding whitetail deer.
B. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that either of the following acts
are for the purpose of feeding whitetail deer.
(1) The placement of salt, mineral, grain, fruit, or vegetable material in
an aggregate quantity of greater than 1/2 gallon at a height of less
than six feet off the ground.
(2) The placement of salt, mineral, grain, fruit, or vegetable material in
aggregate quantity of greater than 1/2 gallon in a drop feeder,
automatic feeder, or similar device regardless of the height of the
grain, fruit, or vegetable material.
C. This section shall not apply to the following situations:
(1) The placement of bait for the purpose of hunting whitetail deer
subject to all other laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations
governing hunting and the discharge of hunting weapons.
(2) Naturally growing grain, fruit, or vegetable material, including
gardens.
§ 197-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 197-34
1:69
(3) Unmodified commercially purchased bird feeders or their
equivalent.
§ 197-34 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 197-34
1:70
ARTICLE V
Dangerous Animals
§ 197-35. Procedure for declaring animal dangerous.
§ 197-36. Harboring dangerous animals.
A. Upon conducting an investigation, a law enforcement officer may issue
an order declaring an animal to be a dangerous animal. Whenever an
owner or caretaker wishes to contest an order, he or she shall, within 72
hours after receipt of the order, deliver to the Police Department a
written objection to the order stating specific reasons for contesting the
order. Upon receipt of the written objection, the matter shall be placed
on the agenda for the Town Board to be reviewed at the next regular
meeting. The Town Board shall act as a quasi-judicial body, allowing the
animal's owner or caretaker an opportunity to present evidence as to
why the animal should not be declared dangerous.
B. After the hearing, the owner or caretaker shall be notified in writing of
the Board's determination. If the Board upholds the determination that
the animal is dangerous, the owner or caretaker shall comply with the
requirements of § 197-36. If the owner or caretaker further contests the
determination, he or she may, within five days of receiving the Town
Board's decision, seek review of the decision by the Circuit Court.
C. Upon an animal being declared dangerous, the owner or caretaker shall
immediately comply with leashing, muzzling, and confinement
requirements of § 197-36, with all other requirements in that section
being satisfied within 30 days of the dangerous declaration or
reaffirmation thereof, or within such time as established by the Town
Board.
A. Dangerous animals regulated.
(1) No person may harbor or keep a dangerous animal within the Town
unless all provisions of this section are complied with. Any animal
that is determined to be a prohibited dangerous animal under this
article shall not be kept or harbored in the Town.
(2) The issuance of a citation for a violation of this section need not be
predicated on a determination that an animal is a dangerous
animal.
B. Registration. The owner of any animal declared dangerous, shall
register it with the Police Department upon disposition, and annually
thereafter on or before April 1 of each year, by providing a current color
photograph of the animal and payment of a registration fee as
established in the Town's fee schedule.
C. Leash and muzzle.
§ 197-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 197-36
1:71
(1) No owner or caretaker, harboring or having the care of a dangerous
animal may permit such an animal to go outside its dwelling,
kennel, or pen unless the animal is securely restrained with a leash
no longer than four feet in length.
(2) No person may permit a dangerous animal to be kept on a chain,
rope, or other type of leash outside its dwelling, kennel, or pen
unless a person who is 16 years of age or older, competent to
govern the animal and capable of physically controlling and
restraining the animal, is in physical control of the leash.
(3) A dangerous animal may be securely leashed or chained to an
immoveable object, with the owner or caretaker being in the
physical presence of the animal at all times when it is so leashed or
chained.
(4) A dangerous animal outside of the animal's dwelling, kennel, or pen
shall be muzzled in a humane way by a muzzling device sufficient to
prevent the animal from biting persons or other animals.
D. Confinement.
(1) Except when leashed and muzzled, all dangerous animals shall be
securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen
or kennel that is located on the premises of the owner or caretaker
and constructed in a manner that does not allow the animal to exit
the pen or kennel on its own volition.
(2) When constructed in a yard, the pen or kennel shall, at a minimum,
be constructed to conform to the requirements of this paragraph.
The pen or kennel shall be childproof from the outside and animalproof
from the inside. A strong, metal double fence with adequate
space between fences (at least two feet) shall be provided so that a
child cannot reach into the animal enclosure. The pen, kennel, or
structure shall have secure sides and a secure top attached to all
sides. A structure used to confine a dangerous animal shall be
locked with a key or combination lock when the animal is within the
structure. The structure shall either have a secure bottom or floor
attached to the sides of the pen or the sides of the pen shall be
embedded in the ground no less than two feet. All structures
erected to house dangerous animals shall comply with all Town
zoning and building regulations. All structures shall be adequately
lighted and ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(3) No dangerous animal may be kept on a porch, patio, or in any part
of a house or structure on the premises of the owner or caretaker
that would allow the animal to exit the building on its own volition.
No dangerous animal may be kept in a house or structure when the
windows are open or when screen windows or screen doors are the
only obstacle preventing the animal from exiting the structure.
§ 197-36 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 197-36
1:72
E. Signs. The owner or caretaker of a dangerous animal shall display, in
prominent places on his or her premises, near all entrances to the
premises, signs, in letters not less than two inches high, warning that
there is a dangerous animal on the property. A similar sign is required
to be posted on the kennel or pen of the animal. In addition, the owner
or caretaker shall conspicuously display a sign with a symbol warning
children of the presence of a dangerous animal.
F. Spay and neuter requirement. Within 30 days after an animal has been
designated dangerous, the owner or caretaker of the animal shall
provide written proof from a licensed veterinarian that the animal has
been rendered sterile.
G. Liability insurance. The owner or caretaker of a dangerous animal shall
present to the Police Department a certificate of insurance that the
owner or caretaker has procured liability insurance in an amount not
less than $1,000,000 for any personal injuries inflicted by the
dangerous animal. Whenever such policy is cancelled or not renewed,
the insurer and animal's owner or caretaker shall notify the Police
Department of such cancellation or nonrenewal in writing by certified
mail.
H. Waiver by Town Board. Upon request by owner or caretaker, the Town
Board may waive any requirement specified in Subsections A through G
that is deemed to be inappropriate for a particular dangerous animal.
I. Notification. The owner or caretaker shall notify the Police Department
within 24 hours if a dangerous animal is at large, is unconfined, has
attacked another animal, has attacked a human being, or has died. No
person may sell or transfer possession of a dangerous animal to another
person without first notifying the person to whom the dangerous animal
is being sold or transferred of the fact that such animal is a dangerous
animal and of any requirements imposed upon the selling or
transferring party by this article. No person may sell or transfer
possession of a dangerous animal to another person, agency,
organization, or the like without first notifying the Police Department in
writing, at least three days in advance of the sale or transfer of
possession with the name, address and telephone number of the new
owner of the dangerous animal. If the dangerous animal is sold or given
away to a person residing outside the Town, the owner or caretaker
shall provide written notification to the Police Department of the
animal's new residence, including the name, address and telephone
number of the new owner of the dangerous animal.
J. Euthanasia. If the owner or caretaker of an animal that has been
designated a dangerous animal is unwilling or unable to comply with
the regulations for keeping the animal in accordance with this section,
he or she may have the animal euthanized by an animal shelter, the
humane society, or a licensed veterinarian.
§ 197-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 197-36
1:73
§ 197-37. Certain animals not to be declared dangerous.
Notwithstanding the definition of dangerous animal in § 197-1:
§ 197-38. Prohibited dangerous animals.
K. Waiver. The Town Board may waive the provisions of Subsections B
through G for a law enforcement or military animal upon presentation
by the animal's owner or handler of satisfactory arrangement for
safekeeping of the animal.
A. No animal may be declared dangerous if death, injury, or damage is
sustained by a person who, at the time such injury or damage was
sustained, was committing a trespass on the land or criminal trespass
on the dwelling upon premises occupied by the owner of the animal;
was teasing tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal; or was
committing or attempting to commit a crime or violating or attempting
to violate an ordinance which protects persons or property.
B. No animal may be declared dangerous if death, injury, or damage was
sustained by a domestic animal which, at the time such was sustained,
was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal.
C. No animal may be declared dangerous if the animal was protecting or
defending a human being within the immediate vicinity of the animal
from an unjustified attack or assault.
A. No person may bring into or keep in the Town any animal that is a
prohibited dangerous animal.
B. Determination of a prohibited dangerous animal.
(1) The Police Department may determine an animal to be a prohibited
dangerous animal whenever the Police Department finds that an
animal meets the definition of prohibited dangerous animal or is a
dangerous animal in noncompliance with any of the provisions of
§ 197-36.
(2) Upon conducting an investigation and finding an animal meets the
definition of a prohibited dangerous animal, the Police Department
may issue an order declaring an animal to be a prohibited
dangerous animal. Whenever an owner or caretaker wishes to
contest an order, he or she shall, within 72 hours after receipt of
the order, deliver to the Police Department a written objection to
the order stating specific reasons for contesting the order. Upon
receipt of the written objection, the matter shall be placed on the
agenda for the Town Board to be reviewed at the next regular
meeting. The Town Board shall act as a quasi-judicial body allowing
the animal's owner or caretaker an opportunity to present evidence
as to why the animal should not be declared a prohibited dangerous
animal.
§ 197-36 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 197-38
1:74
(3) Pending the outcome of the hearing, the animal may be confined
subject to § 173.21, Wis. Stats., or held at a location outside the
limits of the Town.
(4) After the hearing, the owner or caretaker shall be notified in
writing of the Board's determination. If a determination is made
that the animal is a prohibited dangerous animal, the owner or
caretaker shall comply with the requirements of Subsection A
within five days after the date of the determination. If the owner or
caretaker further contests the determination, he or she may, within
five days of receiving the Town Board's decision, seek review of the
decision by the Circuit Court.
C. Destruction. Any dog that has caused bodily harm to a person, persons,
or a domestic animal on two occasions off the owner's premises,
without reasonable cause, may be destroyed as a result of judgment
rendered by a court of competent jurisdiction, as specified under
§ 174.02(3), Wis. Stats. The Town may petition an appropriate court to
obtain a court order to destroy such a dog.
D. Enforcement. The Police Department may make whatever inquiry is
deemed necessary to ensure compliance with this section.
E. Waiver. The Town Board may waive the provisions of this section for a
law enforcement or military animal upon presentation by the animal's
owner or handler of a satisfactory arrangement for safekeeping of the
animal.
§ 197-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 197-38
1:75
Chapter 220
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 275.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 291.
Housing standards — See Ch. 317.
Impact fees — See Ch. 330.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 423.
Sewers — See Ch. 440.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 463.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 475.
Water — See Ch. 523.
Zoning — See Ch. 535.
§ 197-38 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 197-38
1:76
ARTICLE I
Town Building Code
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as Ch. 13 of the 1997 Code]
§ 220-1. Title and scope.
§ 220-2. Applicability.
The provisions of the Town Building Code shall apply to all buildings and
structures and their appurtenant constructions, including vaults, area and
street projections, and accessory additions, and shall apply with equal
force to municipal, county, state and private buildings, except where such
buildings are otherwise specifically provided for by statute.
A. Title. These regulations (Articles I and II of this chapter and Chapter
317, Housing Standards) shall be known as the "Town Building Code."
They shall control all matters concerning the construction, alteration,
addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and
maintenance of all buildings and structures and their service
equipment as herein defined and shall apply to existing or proposed
buildings and structures, except as such matters are otherwise
provided for in other ordinances or statutes.13
B. Code remedial. The Town Building Code shall be construed to secure its
expressed intent and ensure public safety, health and welfare, insofar
as they are affected by building construction, through structural
strength, adequate egress facilities, sanitary equipment, light and
ventilation and firesafety and, in general, to secure safety to life and
property from all hazards incident to the design, erection, repair,
removal, demolition or use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or
premises.
A. Exemptions. No building or structure shall be constructed, extended,
repaired, removed or altered in violation of these provisions, except for
ordinary repairs as defined in § 220-3 hereof and except further that the
raising or lowering or moving of a building or structure as a unit
necessitated by a change in legal grade or widening of a street shall be
permitted, provided that the building is not otherwise altered or its use
or occupancy changed.
B. Matters not provided for. Any requirement essential for structural, fireor
sanitary safety of an existing or proposed building or structure or
essential for the safety of the occupants thereof and which is not
specifically covered by the Building Code shall be determined by the
Building Inspector, subject to review by the Town Board or board duly
authorized to hear such appeal.
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 220-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-2
1:77
§ 220-3. Ordinary repairs.
Ordinary repairs to buildings may be made without application or notice
to the Building Inspector, but such repairs shall not include the cutting
away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of
any structural beam or bearing support, the removal or change of any
required means of egress, or the rearrangement of parts of a structure
affecting the exit requirements, nor shall ordinary repairs include addition
to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply,
sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping,
electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or
general safety.
§ 220-4. Installation of service equipment.
When the installation, extension, alteration or major repair of an elevator,
moving stairway, mechanical equipment, refrigerating, air-conditioning or
ventilating apparatus, plumbing, gas piping, electric wiring, heating system
or any other equipment is specifically controlled by the provisions of the
Town Building Code or the approved rules, it shall be unlawful to use such
equipment until a certificate of approval has been issued therefor by the
Building Inspector.
§ 220-5. Maintenance.
All buildings and structures and all parts thereof, both existing and new,
shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All service equipment,
means of egress, devices and safeguards which are required by the Town
Building Code in a building, or which were required by a previous code in
a building when erected, altered or repaired, shall be maintained in good
working order. The owner or his designated agent shall be responsible for
the safe and sanitary maintenance of the building or structure and its exit
facilities at all times.
§ 220-6. Existing use.
C. Continuation of unlawful use. The continuation of occupancy or use of a
building or structure or of a part thereof which occupancy or use is
commenced after January 3, 1969, contrary to the provisions of the
Town Building Code shall be deemed a violation and subject to the
penalties as prescribed in § 220-22C.
A. Continuation of existing use. The legal use and occupancy of any
structure existing on June 30, 1974, or for which it had been heretofore
approved, may be continued without change, except as may be
specifically covered in the Town Building Code or as may be deemed
necessary by the Building Inspector for the general safety and welfare
of the occupants and the public.
B. Change in use. It shall be unlawful to make any changes in the use or
occupancy of any structure which would subject it to any special
§ 220-2 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 220-6
1:78
§ 220-7. Existing buildings.
§ 220-8. Building Inspection Department.15
provision of the Town Building Code without approval of the Building
Inspector and his certification that such structure meets the provisions
of law governing building construction for the proposed new use and
occupancy.
A. Except as provided in this section, existing buildings, when altered or
repaired as herein specified, shall be made to conform to the full
requirements of the Town Building Code for new buildings:
(1) Alterations exceeding 50%. If alterations or repairs are made
within any period of 12 months costing in excess of 50% of the
physical value of the building; or
(2) Damages exceeding 50%. If the building is damaged by fire or any
other cause to an extent in excess of 50% of the physical value of
the building before the damage was incurred.
B. Alterations under 50%. If the cost of alterations or repairs described
herein is between 25% and 50% of the physical value of the building,
the Building Inspector shall determine to what degree the portions so
altered or repaired shall be made to conform to the requirements for
new buildings.
C. Alterations under 25%. If the cost of alterations or repairs described
herein is 25% or less of the physical value of the building, the Building
Inspector shall permit restoration of the building to its condition
previous to damage or deterioration with the same kind of materials as
those of which the building was constructed, provided that such
construction does not endanger the general safety and public welfare
D. Increase in size. If the building is increased in floor area or number of
stories, the entire building shall be made to conform to the
requirements of the Town Building Code in respect to means of egress,
firesafety, light and ventilation.14
E. Physical value. In applying the provisions of this section, the physical
value of the building shall be determined by the Town Assessor based
on current replacement costs.
A. Building official. The Building Inspection Department of Building
Inspection of the Town is hereby created, and the executive official in
charge thereof shall be known as the "Building Inspector."
14.Editor's Note: Original § 13.07, Subsection 6, Part change in use, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 220-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-8
1:79
§ 220-9. Duties and powers of Building Inspector.
The Building Inspector shall enforce all the provisions of the Town Building
Code and shall act on any question relative to the mode or manner of
construction and the materials to be used in the erection, addition to,
alteration, repair, removal, or demolition, installation of service equipment,
B. Appointment. The Building Inspector shall be appointed by the Town
Board, and he shall not be removed from office except for cause and
after full opportunity has been granted him to be heard on specific and
relevant charges by and before the appointing authority.
C. Organization. The Building Inspector shall appoint such number of
officers, technical assistants, inspectors and other employees as shall
be necessary for the administration of the Town Building Code and as
authorized by the Town Board.
D. Deputy. The Building Inspector may designate an employee as his
deputy who shall exercise all the powers of the Building Inspector
during the temporary absence or disability of the Building Inspector.
E. Restriction on employees. No official or employee connected with the
Building Inspection Department shall be engaged in or directly or
indirectly connected with the furnishing of labor, materials or
appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building,
or the preparation of plans or of specifications therefor, unless he is the
owner of the building, nor shall such officer or employee engage in any
work which conflicts with his official duties or with the interests of the
Department.
F. Relief from person responsibility. The Building Inspector, officer or
employee charged with the enforcement of the Town Building Code,
while acting for the Town, shall not thereby render himself liable
personally, and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any
damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act
required or permitted in the discharge of his official duties. Any suit
instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed
by him in the lawful discharge of his duties and under the provisions of
the Town Building Code shall be defended by the Town Attorney until
the final termination of the proceedings. In no case shall the Building
Inspector or any of his subordinates be liable for costs in any action,
suit or proceeding that may be instituted in pursuance of the provisions
of the Town Building Code, and any officer of the Building Inspection
Department, acting in good faith and without malice, shall be free from
liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of
any act or omission in the performance of his official duties in
connection therewith.
G. Official records. An official record shall be kept of all business and
activities of the Department, and all such records shall be open to
public inspection at all appropriate times.
§ 220-8 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 220-9
1:80
and the location, use, occupancy and maintenance of all buildings and
structures, except as may otherwise be provided for by statutory
requirements or as herein provided.
§ 220-10. Rules and regulations.
A. Applications and permits. He shall receive all applications and be
responsible for all permits issued for the erection and alteration of
buildings and structures and the examination of premises for which
such permits have been issued and the enforcement of compliance with
the Town Building Code provisions.
B. Building notices and orders. He shall issue all necessary notices or
orders to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to require the necessary
safeguards during construction, to require adequate exit facilities in
existing buildings and structures, and to ensure compliance with all the
code requirements for the safety, health and general welfare of the
public.
C. Inspections. He shall make all the required inspections, or he may
accept reports of inspection of authoritative and recognized services or
individuals, and all reports of such inspections shall be in writing and
certified by a responsible officer of such authoritative service or by the
responsible individual, or he may engage such expert opinion as he may
deem necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that may arise,
subject to the approval of the appointing authority.16
D. Department records. He shall keep official records of applications
received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of
inspections, and notices and orders issued. File copies of all papers in
connection with building operations shall be retained in the official
records so long as the building or structure to which they relate
remains in existence, and such records shall be furnished to other
municipal departments.
E. Reports. He shall submit periodic reports as required by the Town
Board and an annual report summarizing the preceding year to the
municipal governing body.
A. Rule-making authority. The Building Inspector shall have power as may
be necessary in the interest of public safety, health and general welfare
to adopt and promulgate rules and regulations to interpret and
implement the provisions of the Town Building Code to secure the
intent thereof and to designate requirements applicable because of
local climatic or other conditions, but no such rules shall have the effect
of waiving working stresses or fire-resistive requirements specifically
provided in the Town Building Code or of violating accepted
engineering practice involving public safety.
16.Editor's Note: Original § 13.09, Subsection 4, Research and investigations, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 220-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-10
1:81
§ 220-11. Modifications.
§ 220-12. Inspections.
§ 220-13. Right of entry.
In the discharge of his duties, the Building Inspector or his authorized
representative may enter at any reasonable hour any building, structure or
premises in the Town to enforce the provisions of the Town Building Code.
§ 220-14. Application for permit.
B. Promulgation of rules. No rule or regulation shall become effective until
after the intention to adopt such rules shall have been published in
accordance with local ordinances.
C. Amendment of rules. All rules adopted by the procedure herein
established shall have the same effect as provisions of the Town
Building Code, but such rules may be amended or repealed at any time
by the same procedure herein prescribed for their adoption.
A. Variations. When there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out
structural or mechanical provisions of the Town Building Code or of an
approved rule, the Building Inspector may vary or modify such
provision upon application of the owner or his representative, provided
that the spirit and intent of the law shall be observed and public welfare
and safety shall be assured.
B. Written modification. The application for modification and the final
decision of the Building Inspector shall be in writing and shall be
officially recorded with the permanent application for the permit in the
permanent records of the Building Inspection Department.17
A. Preliminary inspection. Before issuing a permit, the Building Inspector
shall examine or cause to be examined all buildings, structures and
sites for which an application has been filed for a permit to construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, remove, demolish or change the use thereof, and
he shall conduct such inspections from time to time during and upon
completion of the work for which he has issued a permit, and he shall
maintain a record of all such examinations and inspections and of all
violations of the Town Building Code.
B. Final inspection. Upon completion of the building or structure and
before issuance of the certificate of occupancy required in this article, a
final inspection shall be made and all violations of the approved plans
and permit shall be noted and the holder of the permit shall be notified
of the discrepancies.18
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 220-10 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 220-14
1:82
A. When permit is required. It shall be unlawful to construct, enlarge,
alter, remove or demolish, or change the occupancy of a building from
one use group to another requiring greater strength, exit or sanitary
provisions, or to change to a prohibited use, or to install or alter any
equipment for which provision is made or the installation of which is
regulated by the Town Building Code, without first filing an application
with the Building Inspector on the form provided in writing and
obtaining the required permit therefor, except that ordinary repairs as
defined in § 220-3 which do not involve any violation of the Town
Building Code shall be exempt from this provision.
B. By whom application is made. Application for a permit shall be made by
the owner or lessee of the building or structure, or agent of either, or by
the licensed engineer or architect employed in connection with the
proposed work. If the application is made by a person other than the
owner in fee, it shall be accompanied by a duly verified affidavit of the
owner or the qualified person making the application that the proposed
work is authorized by the owner in fee and the applicant is authorized
to make such application. The full names and addresses of the owner,
lessee, applicant, and of the responsible officers, if the owner or lessee
is a corporate body, shall be stated in the application.
C. Description of work. The application shall contain a general description
of the proposed work, its location, the use and occupancy of all parts of
the building or structure and of all portions of the site or lot not covered
by the building, and such additional information as may be required by
the Building Inspector.
D. Plans and specifications. The application for the permit shall be
accompanied by not fewer than two copies of specifications and of plans
drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail dimensions to show the
nature and character of the work to be performed. When quality of
materials is essential for conformity to the Town Building Code, specific
information shall be given to establish such quality, and in no case shall
this code be cited or the term "legal" or its equivalent be used as a
substitute for specific information.
E. Plot diagram. There shall also be filed a plot plan showing to scale the
size and location of all the new construction and all existing structures
on the site, distances from lot lines and the established street grades,
and it shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line
survey. In the case of demolition, the plot plan shall show all
construction to be demolished and the location and size of all existing
buildings and construction that are to remain on the site or plot.
F. Engineering details. The Building Inspector may require adequate
details of structural, mechanical and electrical work, including
computations, stress diagrams and other essential technical data, to be
filed. All engineering plans and computations shall bear the signature of
the engineer or architect responsible for the design.
§ 220-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-14
1:83
§ 220-15. Issuance, denial, suspension or revocation of permit.
G. Amendments to application. Subject to the limitations of Subsection H,
amendments to a plan, application or other records accompanying the
same may be filed at any time before completion of the work for which
the permit is sought or issued, and such amendments shall be deemed
part of the original application and shall be filed therewith.
H. Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any
proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months
after the date of filing unless such application has been diligently
prosecuted or a permit shall have been issued, except that, for
reasonable cause, the Building Inspector may grant one or more
extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each.
A. Action on application. The Building Inspector shall examine or cause to
be examined all applications for permits and amendments thereto
within 48 hours' time after filing. If the applicant or the plans do not
conform to the requirements of all pertinent laws, he shall reject such
application in writing stating the reasons therefor. If he is satisfied that
the proposed work conforms to the requirements of the Town Building
Code and all laws and ordinances applicable thereto, he shall issue a
permit therefor as soon as possible.
B. Suspension of permit. Any permit issued shall become invalid if the
authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months
after the time of commencing the work.
C. Previous approvals. Nothing in the Town Building Code shall require
changes in the plans, construction or designated use of a building for
which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully
authorized and the construction of which shall have been actively
prosecuted within 90 days after and the entire building shall have been
completed as authorized within two years after the date of approval of
the application.
D. Signature on permit. The Building Inspector shall attach his signature
to every permit.
E. Approved plans. The Building Inspector shall stamp or endorse in
writing both sets of corrected plans "Approved," and one set of such
approved plans shall be retained by him and the other set shall be kept
at the building site, open to inspection of the Building Inspector or his
authorized representative at all reasonable times.
F. Revocation of permits. The Building Inspector may revoke a permit or
approval issued under the provisions of the Town Building Code in case
of any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application or
on the plans on which the permit or approval was based.
G. Approval in part. The Building Inspector may issue a permit for the
construction of foundations or any other part of a building or structure
§ 220-14 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 220-15
1:84
§ 220-16. Permit conditions.
before the entire plans and specifications for the whole building have
been submitted, provided that adequate information and detailed
statements have been filed complying with all the pertinent
requirements of the Town Building Code. The holder of such permit for
the foundations or other part of a building or structure shall proceed at
his own risk with the building operation and without assurance that a
permit for the entire structure will be granted.
H. Posting of permit and site plan. A true copy of the building permit shall
be kept on the site of operations open to public inspection during the
entire time of prosecution of the work and until the completion of the
same.
A. Payment of fees. No permit shall be issued until the fees have been
paid.
B. Compliance with code. The permit shall be a license to proceed with the
work and shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel or set
aside any of the provisions of the Town Building Code, except as
specifically stipulated by modification or legally granted variation as
described in the application.
C. Compliance with permit. All work shall conform to the approved
application and plans for which the permit has been issued and any
approved amendments thereto.
D. Compliance with plot plan. All new work shall be located strictly in
accordance with the approved plot plan.
E. Change in plot plan.
(1) No lot or plot shall be changed, increased or diminished in area
from that shown on the official plot plan unless a revised diagram
showing such changes accompanied by the necessary affidavit of
the owner or applicant shall have been filed and approved, except
that such revised plot plan will not be required if the change is
caused by reason of an official street opening, street widening or
other public improvement.
(2) Condominium plats. No permit shall be issued for any structure to
be constructed within a condominium plat recorded pursuant to
Ch. 703, Wis. Stats., unless:
(a) The Town Board has approved the plat or amended plat after
consideration by the Plan Commission.
(b) The structure complies with all covenants, bylaws and
restrictions contained in the recorded plat or amended plat.
F. Cleanliness; removal of debris. Every building shall be kept reasonably
clean, during construction and after construction, and shall be kept
§ 220-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-16
1:85
§ 220-17. Moving of buildings. [Amended 10-7-1997]
reasonably free from any accumulation of dirt, filth, rubbish, garbage,
excess building materials or other matter in or on the same or in the
yards, courts, passages, areas or alleys connected with or belonging to
the same. Streets shall be kept clear and clean of boards, nails or other
debris and shall be further kept clean of accumulation of dirt, mud or
ground. The holder of the permit, whether the owner of the premises
upon which construction is being undertaken or the general contractor
or any subcontractor on said building project, shall be responsible for
hauling all rubbish and debris away from the construction site at the
contractor's expense or the expense of the subcontractor or the owner,
as agreed between the parties, all at no cost to the Town of Grand
Chute. This subsection includes residential, commercial and industrial
construction and any remodeling of existing residential, commercial
or industrial properties. This subsection may be enforced as herein
provided or under public nuisances, under the abatement thereof.19
A. Permit required. No building shall be moved over the streets or roads of
the Town unless a permit has been granted by the Town Clerk.
B. Application. Any person wishing to move a building over the streets or
roads of the Town shall make application to the Building Inspector on a
form provided by the Building Inspector. Such application shall be
signed by the owner of the property to where the building is being
moved.
C. Permit to state requirements.
(1) Every permit issued shall state all conditions to be complied with
and designate the route to be taken and the limit of time for
removal.
(2) The moving of the building shall be continuous during all hours of
the day and day by day if the Town Board so orders until the moving
is completed, to cause the least possible obstruction to streets or
roads.
(3) No building shall be allowed to remain stationary overnight on any
street or road, crossing, or intersection.
(4) Red warning lights shall be placed conspicuously at both ends of
the building during the night.
(5) The mover of the building shall report daily to the Town Fire
Department and the Town police the location of the building on the
street or road.
19.Editor's Note: See Ch. 398, Nuisances. Original § 13.16, Subsection 7, Contractor's
agreement - removal of debris, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 220-16 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 220-17
1:86
(6) If a building being moved must remain stationary on a street or
road for any period of time, permission for such shall be obtained
from the designated authority and the Building Inspector, and the
building shall be so placed as to permit easy access to any fire
hydrant.
D. Permits to be granted. No permit shall be granted by the Town Clerk for
the moving of buildings over the streets or roads of the Town without
certain conditions being met.
(1) The axle load shall be such that there is no damage to the road
surface as determined by the Building Inspector.
(2) The building shall be of such length, height and width that in the
opinion of the Building Inspector it will not interfere with power
lines, trees, and other structures along the route to be traveled.
(3) No building shall be moved over a bridge in the Town.
(4) The applicant shall deposit with the Town Clerk a bond of $2,000
with acceptable surety running to the Town conditioned that he will
save and indemnify the Town against any costs, expenses, or
damages which may in any way accrue against the Town by reason
of moving and will hold the Town harmless against all liabilities,
judgments, costs, and expenses as a consequence of the granting of
a permit.
E. Inspector to be appointed.
(1) The mover of any building to whom a permit has been granted shall
notify the Building Inspector of the time when moving is to begin.
(2) The Building Inspector may appoint an inspector to be present
during the moving operations to supervise such moving. The
appointment of an inspector in no way relieves the mover from any
liability for damage that may be done during the moving operation.
The Building Inspector may also request the Town Department of
Public Works to trim the necessary trees along the route. The costs
of the inspector and tree trimmers shall be billed at actual cost to
the mover.20
F. Buildings moved within Town. No building shall be moved from one
location to another location within the Town limits without certain
conditions being met.
(1) The Building Inspector shall issue a building permit for the
relocation of said building in compliance with all building and
zoning regulations.
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 220-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-17
1:87
§ 220-18. Utility connections in buildings to be demolished or
removed.
Before a building can be demolished or removed, the owner or agent shall
notify all utilities having service connections within the building, such as
water, electric, gas, sewer and other connections. A permit to demolish or
remove a building shall not be issued until a release is obtained from the
utilities stating that their respective service connections and appurtenant
equipment, such as meters and regulators, have been removed or sealed
and plugged in a safe manner.
§ 220-19. Removal of buildings.
(2) A relocation shall not be made if there is a protest unless so
granted by a three-fourths vote of the Town Board. A protest of the
relocation shall be duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of
20% or more of the land immediately adjacent extending 100 feet
therefrom or by the owners of 20% or more of the land directly
opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the street or road
frontage of such opposite land.21
(3) No building shall be moved from one location to another location
within the Town if said building has been in existence more than
50% of its estimated life expectancy as set forth in Boeckh's
Manual of Appraisals Depreciation Table for Buildings.
(4) No building shall be moved from outside the corporate limits of the
Town to within the corporate limits of the Town unless approved by
the Town Clerk and the Building Inspector under Subsection F(1)
above.
(5) No building being moved from within the Town to outside the Town
shall require a building permit.
G. Moving of small buildings on trucks or trailers.
(1) Smaller buildings of one story in height and not more than 14 feet
wide including cornice may be moved on a truck or trailer equipped
with pneumatic tires.
(2) All conditions required for the moving of buildings shall be met
except for Subsection D(3). The following will replace it: A police
escort shall be required if a bridge is to be crossed.
A. Notice to adjoining owners. Only when written notice has been given by
the applicant to the owners of adjoining lots and to the owners of wired
or other facilities, the temporary removal of which may be necessitated
by the proposed work, shall a permit be granted for the removal of a
building or structure.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 220-17 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 220-19
1:88
§ 220-20. Fees.
B. Lot regulation. Whenever a building is demolished or removed, the
premises shall be maintained free from all unsafe or hazardous
conditions by the proper regulation of the lot, restoration of established
grades and the erection of the necessary retaining walls and fences in
accordance with the ordinances.
A. No permit to begin work for new construction, alteration, removal,
demolition or other building operation shall be issued until the fees
prescribed in this code shall have been paid to the Building Inspector,
nor shall an amendment to a permit, necessitating an additional fee
because of an increase in the estimated cost of the work involved, be
approved until the additional fee shall have been paid.
B. Special fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration,
removal or demolition and for all work done in connection with or
concurrently with the work contemplated by a building permit shall not
relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other
fees that may be prescribed by law or ordinance for water taps, sewer
connections, electrical permits, or the erection of signs and display
structures, marquees or other appurtenant structures, or fees for
inspections, certificates of occupancy or other privileges or
requirements, both within and without the jurisdiction of the Building
Inspector.22
C. New construction and alterations. The fee for a building permit shall be
based on the square feet of the structure or as otherwise prescribed in
the local ordinances, and the Building Inspector may establish by
approved rules a schedule of square foot rates for buildings and
structures where not established by the Town Board.
D. Moving of buildings. The fee for a building permit for the removal of a
building or structure from one lot to another or to a new location on the
same lot shall be as periodically adopted by the Grand Chute Town
Board and shall be paid to the Town Clerk.
E. Demolition. The fee for a permit for the demolition of a building or
structure shall be at the rate set by the Town for each building or
structure.23
F. Accounting. The Building Inspector shall keep an accurate account of
all fees collected for building permits, and such fees collected by him
shall be deposited monthly in the Town treasury or otherwise disposed
of as required by law.
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 220-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-20
1:89
§ 220-21. Certificate of occupancy.25
G. Refunds. In the case of a revocation of a permit or abandonment or
discontinuance of a building project, the volume of work actually
completed shall be computed and any excess fee for the uncompleted
work shall be returned to the permit holder, except that all penalties
that may have been imposed on the permit holder under the
requirements of the Town Building Code shall first be collected.
H. Fee schedule. The current Town Fee Schedule is on file at the Town
Clerk's office.24
A. New buildings. No building hereafter erected shall be used or occupied
in whole or in part until a certificate of occupancy shall have been
issued by the Building Inspector.
B. Buildings hereafter altered. No building hereafter enlarged, extended
or altered to change from one use group to another, in whole or in part,
and no building hereafter altered for which a certificate of occupancy
has not been heretofore issued shall be occupied or used until the
certificate shall have been issued by the Building Inspector certifying
that the work has been completed in accordance with the provisions of
the approved permit, except that any use or occupancy which was not
discontinued during the work of alteration shall be discontinued within
30 days after the completion of the alteration unless the required
certificate is secured from the Building Inspector.
C. Existing buildings. Upon written request from the owner of an existing
building, the Building Inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy,
provided that there are no violations of law or orders of the Building
Inspector pending and it is established after inspection and
investigation that the alleged use of the building has heretofore existed.
Nothing in the Town Building Code shall require the removal, alteration
or abandonment of, or prevent the continuance of the use and
occupancy of, a lawfully existing building unless such use is deemed to
endanger public safety and welfare.
D. Changes in use and occupancy. After a change of use has been made in
a building, the reestablishment of a prior use that would not have been
legal in a new building of the same type of construction is prohibited
unless all the applicable provisions of the Town Building Code are
complied with. A change from one prohibited use, for which a permit
has been granted, to another prohibited use shall be deemed a violation
of the Town Building Code.
E. Temporary occupancy. Upon the request of a holder of a permit, the
Building Inspector may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for a
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 220-20 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 220-21
1:90
§ 220-22. Violations and penalties.
§ 220-23. Stop-work order.
building or structure, or part thereof, before the entire work covered
by the permit shall have been completed, provided that such portion or
portions may be occupied safely prior to full completion of the building
without endangering life or public welfare.
F. Issuance of certificate. When a building or structure is entitled thereto,
the Building Inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy within 10
days after written application.
A. Notice of violation. The Building Inspector shall serve a notice of
violation or order on the person responsible for the erection,
construction, alteration, extension, repair, use or occupancy of a
building or structure in violation of the provisions of the Town Building
Code, or in violation of a detail statement or a plan approved
thereunder, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of the Town Building Code, and such order shall direct the
discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of
the violation.
B. Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is not complied with
promptly, the Building Inspector shall request the Town Attorney to
institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain,
correct or abate such violation of an approved plan or directive of the
Building Inspector or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of the Town Building Code.
C. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined in an amount as prescribed in the
Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules for each violation, together
with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such
forfeiture shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture is
paid, but not exceeding 90 days. Each day that a violation continues
shall be deemed a separate offense.
D. Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not preclude the Town Attorney from instituting
appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction, or to restrain,
correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a
building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct,
business or use of a building or structure in or about any premises.
A. Notice to owner. Upon notice from the Building Inspector that work on
any building or structure is being prosecuted contrary to the provisions
of the Town Building Code, such work shall be immediately stopped.
The stop-work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner
of the property involved or to the owner's agent or to the person doing
§ 220-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-23
1:91
§ 220-24. Unsafe buildings.
the work and shall state the conditions under which work may be
resumed.
B. Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work in or
about the building after having been served with a stop-work order,
except such work as he is directed to perform to remove a violation or
unsafe conditions, shall be liable to a penalty as provided in § 220-22C
of this article.
A. Right of condemnation. All buildings or structures that are or hereafter
shall become unsafe, unsanitary, or deficient in adequate exit facilities,
or which constitute a fire hazard, or which by reason of illegal or
improper use, occupancy or maintenance are otherwise dangerous to
human life or the public welfare, shall be deemed unsafe buildings or
structures. All unsafe buildings shall be taken down and removed or
made safe and secure, as the Building Inspector may deem necessary
and as provided in this section. A vacant building, unguarded or open at
door or window, shall be deemed a fire hazard and unsafe within the
meaning of the Town Building Code.26
B. Examination and record of damaged building. The Building Inspector
shall examine every building or structure reported as dangerous,
unsafe structurally or constituting a fire hazard, and he shall cause the
report to be filed in a docket of unsafe structures and premises, stating
the use of the building and the nature and estimated amount of
damages, if any, caused by collapse or failure.
C. Notice of unsafe building. If an unsafe condition is found in a building or
structure, the Building Inspector shall serve on the owner, agent or
person in control of the building or structure a written notice
describing the building or structure deemed unsafe and specifying the
required repairs or improvements to be made to render the building or
structure safe and secure or requiring the unsafe building or structure
or portion thereof to be demolished within a stipulated time. Such
notice shall require the person thus notified to declare within the
specified time to the Building Inspector his acceptance or rejection of
the terms of the order.
D. Restoration of unsafe building. A building or structure condemned by
the Building Inspector may be restored to safe condition, except that if
the damage or cost of reconstruction or restoration is in excess of 50%
of its replacement value, exclusive of foundations, such building shall
be made to comply in all respects with the requirements for materials
and methods of construction of buildings hereafter erected.
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 220-23 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 220-24
1:92
§ 220-25. Emergency measures.
E. Posting unsafe notice. If the person addressed with an unsafe notice
cannot be found within the Town after diligent search, then such notice
shall be sent by registered mail to the last known address of such
person and a copy of the unsafe notice shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on the premises, and such procedure shall be deemed the
equivalent of personal notice.
F. Disregard of unsafe notice. Upon refusal or neglect of the person served
with an unsafe notice to comply with the requirements of the order to
abate the unsafe condition, the Town Attorney shall be advised of all the
facts and he shall institute the appropriate action to compel
compliance.
A. Vacating buildings. When, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, there
is actual and immediate danger of failure or collapse of a building or
structure or any part thereof which would endanger life, or when any
structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the
occupation of the building, the Building Inspector is hereby authorized
and empowered to order and require the inmates and occupants to
vacate the same forthwith. He shall cause to be posted at each entrance
to such building a notice reading as follows: "This building is unsafe and
its use or occupancy has been prohibited by the Building Inspector,
Town of Grand Chute," and it shall be unlawful for any person to enter
such building or structure except for the purpose of making the
required repairs or of demolishing the same.
B. Temporary safeguards. When, in the opinion of the Building Inspector,
there is actual and immediate danger of collapse or failure of a building
or structure or any part thereof which would endanger life, he shall
cause the necessary work to be done to render such building or
structure or part thereof temporarily safe, whether or not the legal
procedure herein prescribed has been instituted.27
C. Closing streets. When necessary for the public safety, the Building
Inspector may temporarily close streets, buildings and structures and
places adjacent to such unsafe buildings and prohibit the same from
being used.
D. Emergency repairs. For the purposes of this section, the Building
Inspector shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the
required work as expeditiously as possible.
E. Costs of emergency repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of
emergency work shall be paid from the Town treasury on certificate of
the Building Inspector, and the Town Attorney shall institute
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 220-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-25
1:93
§ 220-26. (Reserved)28
appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe
building or structure was located for the recovery of such costs.
28.Editor's Note: Original § 13.26, Street identification numbering, was rescinded 9-21-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-15. See now Ch. 224, Buildings, Numbering of.
§ 220-25 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 220-26
1:94
ARTICLE II
Building Regulations
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as Ch. 14 of the 1997 Code]
§ 220-27. Permits required.
§ 220-28. Building permits and standards.
A. General permit requirement. No building, plumbing, electrical, heating,
ventilating or air-conditioning work shall be performed in the Town of
Grand Chute unless a permit therefor is obtained as required by the
provisions of this article.
B. Payment of fees. All fees shall be paid to the Building Inspector of the
Town of Grand Chute before the Inspector shall issue to the owner or
his agent any permit herein required.
C. Permit lapses. Any permit issued hereunder shall lapse and be void
unless the work for which the permit was obtained shall be commenced
within six months of the date of issuance.
D. Revocation. If the Building Inspector shall find at any time that the
ordinances, laws, orders, plans and specifications are not being
complied with and that the holder of the permit refuses to conform after
a written notice posted at the site of the work, the Building Inspector
shall revoke the permit. When any such permit is revoked, it shall be
unlawful to do any further work thereunder until the permit is reissued,
except such work as the Building Inspector may order to be done as a
condition precedent to the reissuance of the permit or as he may
require for the preservation of human life and safety or property.29
E. Records. The Building Inspector shall keep a record of all permits, fees
and inspections and shall make an annual report thereon to the Town
Board.
F. Deputy Building Inspector. A Deputy Building Inspector may be
appointed, subject to approval of the Town Board of the Town of Grand
Chute, to perform all necessary duties under the Building, Electrical,
and Plumbing Codes herein, including the issuing of permits. The Town
Board of the Town of Grand Chute shall have authority to appoint
Deputy Building Inspectors in place of the Building Inspector to
perform all functions required of the Building Inspector under the
Building, Electrical and Plumbing Codes herein.30
A. Building permits and inspection.
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 220-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-28
1:95
(1) Permit required. No building or any part thereof shall hereafter be
erected within the Town of Grand Chute or ground broken for the
same, except as hereinafter provided, until a permit therefor shall
first have been obtained from the Building Inspector by the owner
or his authorized agent. The term "building" as used in this section
shall include any building or structure and any enlargement,
alteration, heating or ventilating installation, moving or
demolishing, or anything affecting the fire hazards or safety of any
building or structure. No building permit shall be issued where a
culvert will be installed unless a permit for the proper size and type
of culvert first is obtained from the proper authority. No building
permit shall be issued for the erection of a building unless located
upon a dedicated highway, street or alley.31
(2) Application. Application for a building permit shall be made in
writing upon a form furnished by the Building Inspector and shall
state the name and address of the owner of the land and also of the
owner of the building, if different, and the legal description of the
land upon which the building is to be located and shall contain such
other information as the Building Inspector may require for
effective enforcement of this section.
(3) Plans. With such application there shall be submitted two complete
sets of plans and specifications, including a plot plan showing the
location of the proposed building with respect to adjoining streets,
alleys, lot lines and buildings. Plans for buildings required to
comply with the State Building Code shall bear a stamp of approval
from the Department of Safety and Professional Services. Such
plans and specifications shall be submitted in duplicate; one set
shall be returned after approval as hereinafter provided and the
other set shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk. All plans and
specifications shall be signed by the designer.
(4) Waiver of plans. If the Building Inspector finds that the character of
the work is sufficiently described in the application, he may waive
the filing of plans for alterations, repairs or moving, provided that
the cost of such work does not exceed $2,000.
(5) Approval of plans. If the Building Inspector determines that the
proposed building will comply in every respect with all ordinances
of the Town and all applicable laws and orders of the State of
Wisconsin, he shall officially approve and stamp one set of the plans
and return it to the owner and shall issue a building permit therefor
which shall be kept and displayed at the site of the proposed
building. After being approved, the plans and specifications shall
not be altered in any respect which involves any of the abovementioned
ordinances, laws and orders, or which involves the
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 220-28 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 220-28
1:96
safety of the building or occupants, except with the written consent
of the Building Inspector.32
(6) Minor repairs. The Building Inspector may authorize minor repairs
or alterations which do not change the occupancy, area, structural
strength, fire protection, exits, light or ventilation of the building
without issuing a building permit.33
(7) Inspection of work. The building contractor or owner shall notify
the Building Inspector when ready, and the Building Inspector shall
inspect all buildings based on State Building Code requirements.34
B. State Building Code adopted. [Amended 12-16-2003]
(1) The following Wisconsin Administrative Codes, their referenced
codes and standards, and subsequent revisions are adopted for
municipal enforcement by the Building Inspectors, who shall be
certified as commercial building inspectors by the State of
Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services. (Note:
Where plan review is conducted under the status of an agent
municipality, the review fees as established in Ch. Comm 2 shall be
enforced.)
(a) Chapter Comm 2, Fee Schedule.
(b) Chapters Comm 61 to 66, Wisconsin Commercial Building
Code.
(c) Chapters Comm 75 to 79, Buildings Constructed Prior to 1914.
(2) The following Wisconsin Administrative Codes, their referenced
codes and standards, and subsequent revisions are adopted for
municipal enforcement by the Building Inspectors, who shall be
certified as Uniform Dwelling Code inspectors by the State of
Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services:
Chapters Comm 20 to 25, Uniform Dwelling Code.
(a) The Uniform Dwelling Code is hereby adopted by reference as
part of this article with respect to all additions or remodeling of
existing dwellings.
(b) General requirements and applicable standards contained
within the Uniform Dwelling Code are also adopted by
reference as part of this article with respect to all residential
accessory buildings and structures.
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 220-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-28
1:97
C. Permit fees. See the Town Fee Schedule. Before a permit is issued to a
contractor, the owner or his agent, the fees shall be paid to the Town
Building Inspector at the same time the permit is issued.35
D. Hold harmless agreement. The developer responsible for installation of
public improvements as required by the Roadway Development
Agreement and Town Code shall execute a hold harmless agreement
prior to the Town issuing a building permit in the development. The
hold harmless agreement shall make the developer responsible for all
maintenance and liability for the public improvements until all public
improvements are completed and accepted by the Town Board and
Sanitary Districts. [Amended 7-15-2003]
E. Public improvement requirements for building permit and certificate of
occupancy. [Amended 7-15-2003]
(1) No building permit shall be issued for any construction of any
structure until sewer (or county-approved septic system), water (or
approved well), public street grading and paving, stormwater
collection system and stormwater detention system are installed
necessary to serve the structure for which the permit is required.36
(2) Staff may issue building permits prior to Town Board/Sanitary
District acceptance of the public improvements if the Town
Engineer has approved the public improvements and the developer
has executed a hold harmless agreement according to Subsection
D.
(3) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the Town Board
and Sanitary Districts have approved and accepted the public
improvements.
F. New methods and materials. All materials, methods of construction,
and devices designed for use in buildings or structures covered by this
article and not specifically mentioned in or permitted by this article
shall not be so used until approved in writing by the Department of
Safety and Professional Services of Wisconsin for use in buildings or
structures covered by the Wisconsin State Building Code, except
sanitary appliances, which shall be approved in accordance with the
State Plumbing Code issued by the State Department of Safety and
Professional Services. Such materials, methods of construction and
devices, when approved, must be installed or used in strict compliance
with the manufacturer's specifications and any rules or conditions of
use established by the State Department of Safety and Professional
Services. The data, test and other evidence necessary to prove the
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II). Original § 14.05, Plans to be submitted to Industrial Commission, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 220-28 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 220-28
1:98
§ 220-29. Electrical work.
merits of such material, method of construction or device shall be
determined by the Department of Safety and Professional Services.37
G. Unsafe buildings. Whenever the Building Inspector finds any building
or part thereof within the Town to be in his judgment so old, dilapidated
or so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise
unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use, and so that it would be
unreasonable to repair the same, he shall order the owner to raze and
remove such building or part thereof or, if it can be made safe by
repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary or to raze and remove at
the owner's option. Such order and proceedings shall be as provided in
§ 66.0413, Wis. Stats.
A. State law adopted. The Wisconsin State Electrical Code, Ch. Comm 16,
Wis. Adm. Code, is adopted by reference as a part of this article.
B. Administration.
(1) Duties of Building Inspector. The Inspector shall enforce all the
ordinances or laws relating to electrical installation, including any
lawful orders issued by the Department of Safety and Professional
Services or any other agency of the State of Wisconsin, and there is
hereby vested in the Department the necessary power and
authority to properly execute such duties. "Inspector" as used in
this article means the Building Inspector.
(2) Authority to discontinue electrical operations. The Inspector may
cause the turning off of all electrical currents to any equipment
which he finds to be in an unsafe condition and may cut or
discontinue electrical services in case of emergency and where
such electrical currents are dangerous to life or property or may
interfere with the work of the Fire Department. No person shall
reconnect any equipment thus cut off until written permission is
given by the Inspector.
(3) Periodic inspection. The Inspector periodically may make thorough
examinations of all the electrical wires and appliances installed
within the Town, and when such wires or appliances are found to be
in a dangerous or unsafe condition he shall notify the person
owning, using, operating, or installing the same to place them in a
safe condition. Any person failing or refusing to make the
necessary repairs or changes and have such completed within 15
days (or any longer period which may be deemed reasonably by the
Inspector) after the receipt of such notice shall forfeit and pay into
the Town treasury the prescribed sum for each day which shall
elapse after the expiration of said period, and the Inspector may
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 220-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-29
1:99
order the discontinuance of electrical service to such defective
wires or equipment until they have been repaired, removed, or
changed as directed by the Inspector, subject to the limitations of
this article.
C. Licenses.
(1) License required. No person shall perform the work of an electrical
contractor unless licensed by the State of Wisconsin. Qualifications
for an electrical contractor's license shall be defined by the State of
Wisconsin.
(2) Exemptions.
(a) Employees of electrical, telephone, telegraph and railway
utilities may perform the planning or superintending and
installation, operation and maintenance of equipment and
materials required for the operation of the business of such
utilities without a license, but when said employees perform
said work on property or premises of others, except when
making service connections and installing and testing
transformers, meters and other equipment ordinarily furnished
by and remaining the property of the utility, they shall be
licensed in the same manner provided for in this article.
(b) The operating engineers and their assistants in charge of
power generating plants, prime movers, and all auxiliary
equipment, and appliances connected therewith, shall be
exempt in the supervision, maintenance, and repairs and in the
operation of the electrical equipment under their jurisdiction.
(c) Plant electricians regularly employed by an employer may not
be licensed while doing electrical maintenance work that is
limited exclusively to the plant or shop of their employees.38
(d) A homeowner may personally wire his own single-family
dwelling, but a permit must be procured and work inspected
and approved in the same manner as for a licensed electrician.
An owner must prove his competence to conform to all rules
and regulations. "Homeowner" is a person owning and
occupying as his permanent address a single-family dwelling.
(3) Revocation of licenses. Any license under the provisions of this
article may be revoked by the designated authority if the licensee
violates any ordinance or law relating to electrical work or is guilty
of installing electrical construction which is a hazard to life or
property.
D. Permits.
38.Editor's Note: Original § 14.12, Subsection 2d, which immediately followed this subsection
and dealt with indentured apprentices, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 220-29 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 220-29
1:100
(1) When to issue. The Inspector shall issue permits for all electrical
installations for light, heat or power upon the filing of proper
application which shall be made on forms furnished by the
Inspector and shall describe the nature of the work as well as such
other information as may be required for inspection. In no case
shall any electrical work be started unless a permit has been
obtained, unless the same is exempt. The Inspector may require the
applicant to furnish plans and specifications covering the work to
be done. No permit shall be required for repairs made necessary
for the proper maintenance of an existing installation.
(2) Temporary work. On applying for a permit for temporary work a
specified period of time for which such wiring is to remain in
service must be stated. Service shall be cut off at the end of this
period and shall not again be connected without written permission
from the Inspector.
(3) Town electrical permit fees shall be as periodically adopted by the
Grand Chute Town Board and included in the Town Fee Schedule.
Fees shall be paid to the Town Building Inspector.39
E. Inspection. Upon the completion of the wiring of any building or before
any wiring is to be hidden from view, the person doing the same shall
notify the Inspector, and he shall inspect the installation within 48
hours of the time such notice is received. If, upon inspection, it is found
that such installation is fully in compliance with this article and does
not constitute a hazard to life or property, he shall approve the same
and authorize concealment of such wiring or connection for electrical
service. If the installation is incomplete or not strictly in accordance
with this article, he shall issue an order to the person installing the
same to remove all hazards and make the necessary changes or
additions within 10 days. Concealment of electrical work before
inspection or failure to comply with the order of the Inspector shall
constitute a violation of this article.
F. Construction requirements. No certificate of inspection shall be issued
unless the electric light, power, or heating installation and all other
electrical apparatus connected with it are in strict conformity with the
provisions of this article and the rules and regulations of the State
Electrical Code. Any person who shall make any additions, corrections,
alterations, or connections to the installation after approval of the
Inspector shall be responsible for the correct operation of the
installation.40
G. Arbitration. When the Inspector condemns all or part of the electrical
installation in any building, the owner, within five days after receiving
written notice from the Inspector, may file a petition in writing for
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 220-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-29
1:101
§ 220-30. Heating, ventilating and air conditioning.
review of said action of the Inspector to the Town Board, upon receipt
of which said Board shall at once proceed to determine whether said
electrical construction complies with this article and within three days
shall make a decision in accordance with its findings.
H. Liability of owner of electrical wiring and equipment. This article shall
not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability
of any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any electrical
equipment for damages to anyone injured or any property destroyed by
any defect therein, nor shall the municipality be held as assuming any
such liability by reason of inspection authorized herein or certificate
issued as herein provided.
A. License required.41
(1) No person shall engage in the business of installation, servicing,
repairing or cleaning of heating, ventilation or air-conditioning
equipment without obtaining any license required by state law
therefor.
(2) Firms, partnerships and corporations. A firm, partnership, or
corporation may perform or contract to perform the work
described in Subsection A(1) so long as it employs a person
licensed hereunder who shall have immediate supervision of such
work. If the licensee ceases to be employed by such firm,
partnership or corporation, a new licensee shall be employed
within 60 days.
(3) Heating contractor. A person licensed as required above and the
person, firm, partnership or corporation who or which employs
such licensee shall be a licensed heating contractor for purposes of
this article.
(4) Exception. The owner and occupant of his own home housing not
more than two families may do the work described in Subsection
A(1) in such home without a license, but he must obtain a permit
therefor and such work must be inspected and approved by the
Building Inspector.
B. Permits.
(1) Taking out permit for another prohibited. No licensee shall take out
a permit for work to be done by another contractor. Violation of this
subsection shall be cause for revocation of the contractor's permit,
and the Building Inspector may refuse the work.
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 220-29 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 220-30
1:102
§ 220-31. Plumbing.
(2) When permit required. A permit shall be required for new
installations and additions and alterations to any type of heating,
ventilating and air-conditioning installation and any type of duct
work.
(3) Town heating and ventilation permit fees shall be as periodically
adopted by the Grand Chute Town Board and included in the Town
Fee Schedule.42
C. Inspection.
(1) The Building Inspector shall examine and approve, when correct,
all plans and specifications for the performance of any work
governed by this article, point out in what respect such plans or
specifications are defective or in violation of this article, inspect all
work done in this area that requires inspection, and stop work
being done in violation of this article. The Inspector shall have the
right to enter upon a premises or into any building or enclosure
where he has reasonable cause to believe work is being done.
(2) In any new building or addition, immediately upon completion and
prior to use of those portions of the installation which are
thereafter concealed or covered, the heating contractor must notify
the Inspector. No person shall lath, plaster or cover any such work
before inspection has been made. The Inspector must make
inspection within two working days after notice for inspection,
excepting Sundays or holidays. All other inspections (such as old
work) shall be made immediately upon notification of completion of
such work.43
A. State code adopted. The State Plumbing Code, Chs. Comm 81 to 87,
Wis. Adm. Code, and Ch. 145, Wis. Stats., are hereby adopted as part of
this article. The provisions thereof and of this article shall govern all
plumbing, private sewage disposal and drainage work, and no
plumbing, private sewage disposal and drainage work shall be done
except in accordance with said codes and this article.
B. Report of existing insanitary installations. When directed by the Health
Officer or upon written and signed complaint of any person to the
Health Officer that work covered by this article is contrary to the
ordinances of the Town or is a menace to health, the Building Inspector
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
43.Editor's Note: The following original sections, which immediately followed this section,
were repealed 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30: § 14.21, Gravity warm air system, § 14.22,
Forced warm air winter air conditioning, § 14.23, Warm air ceiling panel systems, § 14.24,
Perimeter heating, § 14.25, Hot water and steam heating equipment, § 14.26, Electric
heating, § 14.27, Oil burner and oil burner equipment for single and two family
residences, § 14.28, Stokers and stoker fired heating, and § 14.29, Minimum requirements
for the installation of gas fired equipment.
§ 220-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-31
1:103
shall investigate the cause for complaint on said premises. He shall
report his findings in writing to the Health Officer, suggesting such
changes and corrections as are necessary to put the same in proper
sanitary condition. The Building Inspector may also make such report at
his own discretion or upon written and signed complaint made to him.
The Health Officer thereupon shall direct such changes and corrections
to be made as he deems necessary and fix a time for having the same
done.
C. Inspection of vacant properties and relocated buildings.
(1) All rentable properties, upon becoming vacant, may be inspected
by the Building Inspector and their sanitary condition determined.
If the plumbing or any work covered by this article is in an
insanitary condition or a menace to health or safety, the Building
Inspector shall report to the Health Officer, and the premises shall
be repaired and put in a sanitary condition before a new occupant
takes possession.
(2) The plumbing in buildings moved from one lot or location to
another shall be inspected by the Building Inspector and, when
found necessary, tested in a manner satisfactory to said Building
Inspector at the expense of the owner. If plumbing is found unsafe
or insanitary, the same shall be repaired or remodeled and made to
reasonably comply with this article.
D. Discharging of drains and sewers.
(1) No person shall discharge domestic sewage, industrial wastes or
septic tank effluent onto the surface of the ground, into any
drainage ditch, or into the river or any stream, or into any storm
sewer or drain, or permit the same to be so discharged.
(2) Roof leaders, surface drains, groundwater drains, foundation
footing drains, and other clear water drains shall be connected
wherever possible with a storm sewer, but they shall not be
connected to a building sewer which discharges into a sanitary
sewer or private sewage treatment plant. Air-conditioning and
clear water drains not described herein shall also discharge to
storm drains or sewers unless special permission is obtained from
the Building Inspector where an unnecessary hardship would result
and the spirit of this subsection will be observed. If stormwater or
clear water is being discharged into a sanitary sewer, the Building
Inspector shall give the offending person 15 days' notice to
disconnect. Failure to disconnect after such notice shall authorize
the Building Inspector to cause disconnection and assessment of
the costs of such disconnection against the property involved. The
Building Inspector may, in the alternative, institute action for
violation of this subsection.
(3) Sump pumps. [Added 7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-09]
§ 220-31 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 220-31
1:104
(a) New installations. In all new construction, such approved sump
pump shall discharge into a storm sewer where such is
available or can be made available. In areas where storm sewer
is not available, the sump pump shall discharge onto the
surface at least three feet from the building foundation.
Discharge from the sump pump shall be directed either toward
the rear lot line or toward the street and shall not be directed
as to flow onto adjacent property. Discharge from the sump
pump shall not create a nuisance. The sump pump discharge
shall be considered a nuisance in situations including, but not
limited to, such discharge creating icing problems on a Town
street or sidewalk, damaging a Town street or sidewalk,
creating ponds of standing water, or flowing over adjoining
property.
(b) Existing installations.
[1] All sump pumps shall discharge into a storm sewer where
such is available or can be made available if, in the opinion
of the Director of Public Works or Chief Building Inspector,
the sump pump discharge creates a nuisance. The sump
pump discharge shall be considered a nuisance in
situations including, but not limited to, such discharge
creating icing problems on a Town street or sidewalk,
damaging a Town street or sidewalk, creating ponds of
standing water, or flowing over adjoining property. If such
a nuisance is created, the Chief Building Inspector or his/
her designee shall issue a connection order, in accordance
with this section, that the property connect the sump
pump discharge to the storm sewer. The expense incurred
to connect to the storm sewer is the responsibility of the
property owner.
[a] Issuance of a connection order. The Chief Building
Inspector or his/her designee shall issue a written
order that a property drain its sump pump discharge
into a storm sewer.
[b] Connection order; extensions. A connection order may
be served, in person or by first class mail, upon either
the owner of the property or its occupant. The order
shall provide that the connection to the storm sewer
shall be made within 45 days after its issuance. Upon
reasonable written request made by the owner, time
extensions may be granted for ordered connections at
the discretion of the Building Inspector.
[2] Where sump discharge is not creating a nuisance and a
storm sewer is available, a connection order shall be
issued to the owner of the property to connect the sump
§ 220-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-31
1:105
pump discharge to the storm sewer at the time of the sale
of the property.
E. Permits and fees.
(1) When permit is required; fees.
(a) Town plumbing permit fees shall be as prescribed in the Town
Fee Schedule. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
(b) Any person desiring to do plumbing shall, before beginning
active work, file with the Building Inspector, upon application
blanks furnished by the Town, a description of the property and
the nature of the work to be done.
(2) Permit restrictions; cancellation and withholding of permits.
(a) No permit for plumbing in a new or relocated building shall be
issued until:
[1] The Building Inspector is satisfied that all unused sewer
and water services to the premises are sealed.
[2] A sewer permit and building permit have been issued.
(b) No plumbing or sewer permit shall be granted to anyone who
has failed to comply with this article. No permit shall be issued
to any person or to any master plumber against whom an order
issued by the Building Inspector is pending. No permit shall be
issued to any person who has been in the past found violating
or has willfully violated this article. Bad faith or unreasonable
delay in the performance of any work covered by this article or
failure to respond promptly to official communications shall be
deemed sufficient reason for withholding permits, and the
master plumber shall be held responsible for the violation of
these regulations by himself or any of his employees.
(c) All permits are good for a continuous performance of the work
named thereon; permits shall automatically expire when work
ceases for a period of 60 days without good and reasonable
cause for the same, and a permit shall automatically expire on
completion of the work for which it was issued.
(d) The Building Inspector may cancel the permit on any job for
violation of the license law or codes and ordinances and stop
work in any case where installation is not being made in
compliance with this article.
(e) The Building Inspector may cancel a permit upon written
request of a master plumber or the owner for which work is
being done, provided that acceptable arrangements shall first
be made for reissue of the permit to another master plumber
for proper completion of the work, and the original permit shall
§ 220-31 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 220-31
1:106
§ 220-32. Tests.
not be canceled until a master plumber applies for and is
granted a permit to complete the work. The procedure for
requested cancellation and reissue of permits shall be as
follows:
[1] If the master plumber does not complete the entire
installation for which he received a permit, he shall
immediately notify the Building Inspector in writing
requesting cancellation and detailing the extent of the
work he has done.
[2] The person who has hired the master plumber may request
cancellation in writing and shall then specify the name of
the master plumber he is employing to finish the work.
[3] The work shall be stopped until a permit has been issued
for completion.
F. Notice for inspection. The Building Inspector shall be notified for
inspection in accordance with requirements of this article and of the
State Plumbing Code. Notification shall include the owner's name,
correct address of the property, and name of the master plumber. No
work shall be enclosed on any floor level before approval of the Building
Inspector. Such inspection and approval shall not in any case constitute
a guarantee against imperfection by either the municipality or the
Building Inspector.44
A. Unless based on accepted engineering design, all new building
materials, appliances, equipment, systems or methods of construction
not provided for in this article shall be subjected to tests that simulate
the actual conditions which occur in normal use. Such tests shall be
made at the expense of the applicant at an independent testing
laboratory, and copies of the test results shall be kept on file in the
office of the Building Inspector.
B. The Building Inspector may accept duly authenticated reports from
recognized authoritative sources in respect to the use of any new
materials, methods or systems of construction complying with
applicable specifications and standards of accepted engineering
practices or any such new materials, methods, or systems of
construction approved by the Department of Safety and Professional
Services, State of Wisconsin.
44.Editor's Note: Original §§ 14.36 to 14.49, Gas Equipment Code, and § 14.50, New materials
and methods, which immediately followed this section, were repealed at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 220-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-33
1:107
§ 220-33. Prefabricated dwellings or accessory buildings.
Prefabricated assemblies not capable of design by accepted engineering
analysis shall be subjected to tests. When prefabricated assemblies are
not readily accessible for inspection at the site, the registered engineer or
architect or other authorized approved representative of the manufacturer
shall furnish a certified report of inspection. All tests and inspection records
shall be accessible to the Building Inspector at all times during fabrication
and erection of the building or assembly unit, or such records as he may
designate shall be filed with him.
§ 220-34. Identification of products.
All materials shall be identified by the approval label, the grade mark, the
trademark, or by other approved manufacturer's identification.
§ 220-35. Abatement of violations; penalty.
§ 220-36. Failure to obtain permit.45
It shall be unlawful to commence work prior to obtaining a permit therefor.
Triple fees shall be charged if work is commenced prior to the issuance of a
permit to do so.
§ 220-37. Encroachments on public property not authorized by
building permit.
The issuance of a building permit by the Building Inspector does not convey
the right to occupy any street, alley, right-of-way, or sidewalk or part thereof
either temporarily or permanently, nor does it permit any other
encroachments upon public property during the construction permitted by
such permit.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, use, occupy, or maintain any
building or structure in violation of any provisions of this article or to
cause, permit or suffer any such violations to be committed. It shall be
the responsibility of the offender to abate the violation as expeditiously
as possible, and each day that such violation is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a
forfeiture as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules,
together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment
thereof shall be imprisoned for a period of not less than one day nor
more than six months or until such forfeiture and costs are paid.
B. If, in any action, a permit was issued, it shall not constitute a defense,
nor shall any error, oversight, or dereliction of duty on the part of the
Building Inspector constitute a defense.
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 220-33 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 220-38
1:108
§ 220-38. Additional permits required.
Permits for the following construction or installations shall be required
prior to such construction or installation:
§ 220-39. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation that shall violate any of the provisions of
this article shall forfeit an amount as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture
and Deposit Schedule and the costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment of the fine and costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the
county jail until such fine and costs are paid, but not to exceed 60 days.
Each day of violation of a provision of this article shall constitute a separate
offense. This section and the penalties herein shall be in addition to
penalties and remedies provided for the enforcement of regulations and
codes established by the Wisconsin Administrative Code and the Wisconsin
Statutes in those provisions adopted or applied by this article.
A. Signs, canopies and billboards. It shall be unlawful for any person to
erect, alter or relocate within the Town any sign or other advertising
structure without first obtaining a permit therefor and paying a permit
fee. Fees shall be per the Town Fee Schedule. All illuminated signs shall
be subject to the provisions of the Electrical Code and the permits and
fees required therein.46
B. Swimming pools. A permit is hereby required for the installation of any
permanent exterior structure designed to contain water for the purpose
of bathing or swimming. Permanent exterior structures or pools are
defined as being so designed to contain water or its equivalent on a
year-round basis or are of such a nature as to not be readily assembled
or disassembled. This subsection does not apply to water reservoirs or
tanks which are completely enclosed and are designed only for the
purpose of water storage. Permit fees hereunder shall be as prescribed
in the Town Fee Schedule. Fees shall be paid to the Building Inspector
upon issuance of the permit.
C. Siding.47
D. Patios.48
E. Decks.49
F. Fences.50
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II). Original § 14.58, Subsection 2, Fuel storage tanks, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
47.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
48.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
49.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
50.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 220-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-39
1:109
Chapter 224
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 220. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 468.
§ 224-1. Purpose and intent.
This chapter is established to ensure clarity and consistency in the
assignment and display of address numbers within the Town in order to
provide for:
§ 224-2. Town Address Coordinator.
The Town Address Coordinator, hereafter referred to as "Coordinator," shall
be the GIS Technician in the Department of Community Development.
§ 224-3. Assigning address numbers.
A. The effective and efficient delivery of police, fire, and other emergency
services;
B. The coordination of addresses with Outagamie County and adjacent
local jurisdictions; and
C. Clear navigation for citizens, visitors, and organizations engaged in the
delivery of goods and services.
A. The Coordinator shall issue address numbers to all principal structures
within the Town, following these provisions:
(1) Single-family residential structure: each principal structure shall
be assigned a separate number.
(2) Duplex or similar residential structure: each dwelling unit shall be
assigned a separate number.
(3) Apartment building or other similar multiunit residential structure:
each principal structure shall be assigned a separate number; the
parcel owner shall be responsible for numbering the individual unit
spaces within each principal structure in a manner approved by the
Coordinator.
(4) Nonresidential structure: each principal structure shall be
assigned a separate number. For structures divided into individual
unit spaces available for rent or purchase, each unit with a ground
floor entrance shall be assigned a separate number; numbers shall
generally increase at a rate of one odd or even number per 20 feet
of frontage.
§ 220-39 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 224-3
1:110
§ 224-4. Changing address numbers.
§ 224-5. Displaying address numbers.
B. Address numbers shall be consistent with the Outagamie County grid
system. All properties east and north of a roadway shall be even
numbers, while properties west and south of a roadway shall be odd
numbers.
(1) For streets that are not perfectly straight, a general but clear
pattern of address numbers shall be visible.
(2) A cul-de-sac shall be numbered as other roads, except that an even
and an odd number shall abut at a point along the turning circle.
(3) Roads that loop or circle shall be numbered in a manner that keeps
even numbers on one side and odd numbers on the other to avoid a
mid-block change.
C. In unique situations where numbering will not conform, in practicality,
with the specifications of this chapter, the Coordinator shall coordinate
the addressing in a manner that maintains the intent and purpose of
this chapter.
A. The Coordinator shall have the authority to change an address number
of a structure if it is out of sequence, does not run consecutively with
adjacent structures, or otherwise conflicts with the Outagamie County
grid system.
B. The Coordinator shall have the authority to change an address number
of a structure adjoining a public right-of-way where a new road is
constructed or an existing easement is named and the most appropriate
address number is on the newly named road.
C. The Coordinator shall notify, in writing, the resident or property owner
of a structure that must change its address number.
D. After a resident or property owner has changed the address number of
a structure, the Coordinator shall inform the appropriate parties of the
new address number.
A. Each principal building shall display its assigned number along the
street frontage on which the address is assigned.
(1) When a duplex or similar residential structure is located on a
corner lot, each dwelling unit shall display its assigned number
along the frontage on which the primary driveway or entrance is
located.
(2) For nonresidential structures divided into individual unit spaces
available for rent or purchase, each unit with a ground floor
entrance shall also display its address numbers on at least one rear
or accessory service entrance.
§ 224-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-5
1:111
§ 224-6. Administration and enforcement.
Chapter 230
CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO SERVICE
B. All address numbers shall be designed and posted in a manner so as to
be clearly legible from the street to which the address is assigned. All
numbers shall be:
(1) Arabic numerals no less than four inches in height.
(2) Composed of a permanent and conspicuous color that contrasts to
the background color of the structure to which they are attached.
C. When a structure with an assigned address number is located more
than 100 feet from the center line of the road on which it is located, or if
the view of the structure is obstructed by trees, shrubs, fences, or other
structures, the address number shall be displayed on a freestanding
post, mailbox, or other structure on the property as close as possible to
the public right-of-way.
A. Should any resident or property owner violate the provisions of this
chapter, the Coordinator shall notify said resident or property owner in
writing, either by certified mail or hand delivery to a competent adult
currently residing on the property. The notice shall indicate the nature
of the violation and the action necessary to correct it.
B. A resident or property owner notified of a violation shall have 90 days
from receipt of written notice to correct such violation.
C. A resident or property owner notified of a violation may submit an
appeal, in writing, of such violation solely to the Town Board.
D. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
due conviction thereof, forfeit an amount as prescribed in the Uniform
Forfeiture and Bond Schedules for each such offense, together with the
costs of prosecution, and in default of the payment of such forfeiture
and costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail until said forfeiture and
costs of prosecution are paid, but not to exceed 30 days.51
E. In addition to imposition of a fee for services constituting a special
charge against the real estate imposed under this chapter, the Town
may pursue injunctive relief against the owner in the Circuit Court for
Outagamie County. All legal costs and attorney fees incurred by the
Town for enforcement of this chapter, pursuant to any remedy available,
shall be payable to the Town by the owner of the premises. Judgment for
such obligations may be obtained by the Town in either the Small
Claims Court or Circuit Court for Outagamie County.
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 224-5 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 230-1
1:112
§ 230-1. Adoption of statutory provisions.
Cable television and video service shall be governed by §§ 66.0420 and
66.0421, Wis. Stats., as amended from time to time, and §§ 66.0420 and
66.0421, Wis. Stats., are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of
this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
Chapter 241
CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Smoking ban — See Ch. 398.
§ 230-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-1
1:113

ARTICLE I
Cigarette License
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as §§ 9.03 and 9.12 of the 1997 Code; amended
12-19-2006]
§ 241-1. License required.
No person shall in any manner, directly or indirectly, manufacture, sell,
exchange, dispose of or give away or keep for sale any cigarettes without
first obtaining a license therefor from the Town Clerk in the manner
provided in § 134.65, Wis. Stats. This section shall not apply to jobbers or
manufacturers doing interstate business with customers outside Wisconsin.
§ 241-2. Fee.
The fee for such cigarette license shall be as prescribed in the Town Fee
Schedule, and the Treasurer's receipt therefor must be presented to the
Clerk before he/she shall issue any license hereunder.
§ 241-3. Form of license; expiration.
All cigarette licenses shall be signed by the Town Clerk and indicate thereon
the name of the licensee and the place where he/she is authorized to
conduct the licensed business and shall expire on June 30 next succeeding
the date of issue.
§ 241-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-30]
A. A first violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a
fine as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules,
together with the costs of prosecution, and on default of the payment of
any such fine and/or costs of prosecution such person shall be
committed to the county jail of Outagamie County until such fine and
costs are paid, but not to exceed 90 days.
B. Any person violating this article who shall previously have been
convicted of a violation of this article shall, upon proof and conviction
thereof, forfeit an amount as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and
Bond Schedules, together with the costs of prosecution, and on default
of the payment of any such fine and costs of prosecution, or either of
them, such convicted person shall be committed to and confined within
the county jail of Outagamie County, Wisconsin, until such fine and
costs of prosecution are paid, but not to exceed six months.
C. Each day of violation under this article shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
§ 241-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-4
1:115

ARTICLE II
Purchase or Possession by Minors
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as § 7.21 of the 1997 Code; amended in its
entirety 10-19-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-16]
§ 241-5. Adoption of statutory provisions.
§ 241-6. Electronic delivery devices. [Added 4-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-0552]
A. The provisions of § 254.92, Wis. Stats., regarding the possession or
purchase of cigarettes and tobacco products by persons under the age
of 18, exclusive of any penalty contained therein, are hereby adopted by
reference and made an offense punishable as a violation of this Code.
B. The provisions of § 134.66, Wis. Stats., regarding the sale or gift of
cigarettes or tobacco products, exclusive of any penalty contained
therein, are hereby adopted by reference and made an offense
punishable as a violation of this Code.
A. Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meaning ascribed to them, except where the
context indicates a different meaning:
ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE — Any product containing or
delivering nicotine, lobelia, or any other substance intended for human
consumption that can be used by a person to simulate smoking in
the delivery of nicotine or, any other substance through inhalation of
aerosol, mist, or vapor from the product. The term includes, but is
not limited to, devices manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as
electronic cigarettes or cigars, electronic pipes, personal vaporizers,
electronic nicotine delivery systems, vape pens, or electronic hookahs.
An electronic cigarette (e-cig or e-cigarette), personal vaporizer (PV),
or electronic nicotine delivery system (ENDS) is a battery-powered
vaporizer which has the feel of tobacco smoking. They produce a mist
rather than cigarette smoke. In general, a heating element vaporizes a
liquid solution known as e-liquid. E-liquids usually contain a mixture of
propylene glycol, glycerin, nicotine, and flavorings.
E-LIQUID — A liquid mixture that may contain nicotine, as well as
varying compositions of propylene glycol, glycerin, and flavorings,
which is designed to be heated in an electronic delivery device to create
an aerosol or vapor that can be inhaled.
B. Prohibitions.
(1) The prohibition against the purchase or possession of cigarettes or
nicotine or tobacco products by a person under 18 years of age,
established in § 254.92, Wis. Stats., and adopted in § 241-5A,
52.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former § 241-6 as § 241-7.
§ 241-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-6
1:117
§ 241-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article may be subject to
a forfeiture of an amount prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond
Schedules, as established by the Town Board, and the costs of prosecution.
In addition to the forfeiture, a juvenile in violation of § 241-5A may be
subject to one or more of the dispositions established in § 938.343, Wis.
Stats.
above, shall apply to the purchase or possession of electronic
delivery devices and e-liquids.
(2) The prohibition against the sale or gift of cigarettes or nicotine or
tobacco products to a person under 18 years of age, established in
§ 134.66, Wis. Stats., and adopted in § 241-5B, above, shall apply to
electronic delivery devices and e-liquids.
C. Signage. A retailer shall post a sign in areas within his or her premises
where electronic delivery devices or e-liquids are sold to consumers
stating that the sale of any electronic delivery device or e-liquid
products to a person under the age of 18 is unlawful under this section.
§ 241-6 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 241-7
1:118
Chapter 246
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 475. Zoning — See Ch. 535.
§ 246-1. Authority.
The Town of Grand Chute is authorized to prepare and adopt a
Comprehensive Plan as defined in §§ 62.23(2) and (3), 60.22(3) and 66.1001,
Wis. Stats.
§ 246-2. Public participation.
The Town of Grand Chute adopted a written procedure designed to foster
public participation in every step of the development of the Comprehensive
Plan.
§ 246-3. Public hearing.
The Town of Grand Chute held a public hearing on the Comprehensive Plan
in compliance with the requirements set forth in § 66.1001, Wis. Stats.
§ 246-4. Plan Commission action.
The Town of Grand Chute Plan Commission, by majority vote recorded in its
official minutes, has recommended to the Town Board the adoption of the
document titled "Town of Grand Chute Comprehensive Plan 2010 - 2030"
containing the elements required in § 66.1001, Wis. Stats.
§ 246-5. Plan adopted.
The Town Board of Supervisors of the Town of Grand Chute, Outagamie
County, Wisconsin, does by this chapter adopt the document titled "Town of
Grand Chute Comprehensive Plan 2010 - 2030."53
§ 246-6. Comprehensive Outdoor Recreation Strategy adopted.
[Added 12-17-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-22]
The Town Board of Supervisors of the Town of Grand Chute, Outagamie
County, Wisconsin, does by this section adopt the document titled "Grand
Chute Comprehensive Outdoor Recreation Strategy" as an element of the
Comprehensive Plan.
Chapter 252
53.Editor's Note: The Comprehensive Plan is on file at the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 241-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-6
1:119
DANCES AND DANCE HALLS
§ 252-1. License required.
§ 252-2. Application for annual license.
Applications for annual licenses shall be made at least 15 days before
issued. If no objection to the issuance of such license shall be made, the
Clerk shall issue a license to the applicant.
§ 252-3. Objections; review by Town Board.
If written objections are made to the issuance of either type of license,
they shall be filed with the Town Clerk at any time before the issuance of
a license. The Clerk shall forthwith present the entire matter to the Town
Board at a special or regular meeting for its consideration, and no license
shall be issued unless authorized by the Town Board. In case the Town
Board shall refuse to order the issuance of a license, the license fee shall
be returned to the applicant by the Town Clerk. However, nothing herein
shall be construed to prevent the Town Board, for cause, from revoking such
license at any time prior to the holding of said dance or public ball.
A. No person shall hold any public dance or hold classes in dancing within
the limits of the Town until the dance hall in which the same may be
held shall first have been licensed for such purposes. Application for
each public dance shall be in writing and shall be filed with the Town
Clerk at least 48 hours before the proposed date for holding the same.
B. There shall be two types of licenses issued, a one-day license and an
annual license. The fee for each type of license shall be as prescribed in
the Town Fee Schedule. Annual licenses shall expire June 30 of each
year, and the license fee shall not be prorated for licenses issued during
the year.54
C. Issuance of licenses shall be as follows:
(1) A license fee as prescribed in the Town Fee Schedule shall be paid
at the time of the filing of the application for a one-day license.55
(2) The Clerk shall withhold the issuing of such license until 24 hours
before the holding of said dance or public ball. If no objection to the
issuance of such license shall be made, the Clerk shall issue a
license to the applicant permitting him to hold such dance.
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 246-6 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 252-4
1:120
§ 252-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC DANCE or PUBLIC DANCE HALL — Any dance hall to which the
public generally may gain admission with or without payment of a fee.
"Public dance hall" as used herein means any room, place or space in which
a public dance may be held or hall in which classes in dancing are held and
instruction in dancing is given for hire.
§ 252-5. Health and fire regulations.
No license for a public dance hall shall be issued until it shall be found that
such hall complies with and conforms to all ordinances and health and fire
regulations of the Town and that it is properly ventilated and supplied with
a sufficient toilet convenience and is a safe and proper place for the purpose
for which it is to be used.
§ 252-6. Sanitation, public safety and good order.
§ 252-7. Powers and duties of Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police or any member of his Department may enter or cause
to be entered any dance hall in which a dance is being held or conducted
and arrest any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, and no
person shall obstruct, resist, or interfere with the police in the performance
of any act authorized by this chapter.
§ 252-8. Violations and penalties.57
A. All public dance halls shall be kept at all times in a clean, healthful and
sanitary condition, and all stairways and outer passages and all rooms
connected with the dance hall shall be kept open and well lighted. Any
police or fire official shall cause the place, hall or room where any dance
is held or given to be vacated whenever any provision of any ordinance
with regard to public dances and public halls is being violated or
whenever any indecent act shall be committed or when any disorder of
a gross, violent or vulgar character shall take place.56
B. No person, proprietor or association of persons shall give, conduct,
permit or allow in any dance hall in the Town any obscene, immoral,
indecent or lewd act, dance or conduct. Indecent act, disorderly
conduct (disorder of a gross, violent or vulgar character), obscenity,
lewdness, and obscene, immoral, indecent or lewd act, dance or
conduct shall be as defined in Chapter 335, Article II, and Chapter 415
of this Code.
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 252-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-8
1:121
Chapter 259
DIRECT SELLERS, AUCTIONS AND CLOSEOUT SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk dealers — See Ch. 349. Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers — See
Ch. 412.
A. A first violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules,
together with the costs of prosecution, and on default of the payment of
any such fine and/or costs of prosecution such person shall be
committed to the county jail of Outagamie County until such fine and
costs are paid, but not to exceed 90 days.
B. Any person violating this chapter who shall previously have been
convicted of a violation of this chapter shall, upon proof and conviction
thereof, forfeit an amount as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and
Bond Schedules, together with the costs of prosecution, and on default
of the payment of any such fine and costs of prosecution, or either of
them, such convicted person shall be committed to and confined within
the county jail of Outagamie County, Wisconsin, until such fine and
costs of prosecution are paid, but not to exceed six months.
C. Each day of violation under this chapter shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
§ 252-8 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 252-8
1:122
ARTICLE I
Auctions and Closeout Sales
§ 259-1. Notice required.
§ 259-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUCTION — A sale transaction conducted by means of oral or written
exchanges between an auctioneer and prospective purchasers of goods or
real estate that consist of a series of invitations made by the auctioneer
to the prospective purchasers for offers for the purchase of goods or real
estate that culminate in the acceptance by the auctioneer of the highest or
most favorable offer made by one of the prospective purchasers.
CLOSEOUT SALE — A sale transaction conducted by a person or a business,
at retail, for the purpose of closing out merchandise or the sale of
merchandise which is advertised or implied as a closing out or going out of
business sale which results in the termination of that business.
§ 259-3. Exemptions.
This article does not apply to any of the following:
A. Auctions and closeout sales are hereby deemed to be unlawful unless
notice of said auction or closeout sale is given in writing by the
auctioneer or person or business conducting said auction or closeout
sale to the Town of Grand Chute not less than 15 days before the
occurrence of said auction or closeout sale.
B. The written notice of auction or closeout sale shall be sufficient if it
contains and identifies the date, the hours and the location where the
auction or closeout sale will take place and identifies the owners or
consignors of personal property or real estate to be sold. The written
notice shall be received by the Town Clerk at least 15 days prior to the
auction or sale.58
A. An auction conducted by or under the direction of an official of the
United States or of this state or a county, city, village or town in this
state.
B. An auction required by a court order or judgment.
C. A sale of goods or real estate required by law to be a sale by auction.
D. An auction conducted by the owner of the goods or real estate for sale if
the owner has held the goods or real estate for his or her personal use
for at least one year immediately preceding the date of the auction.
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 259-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-3
1:123
§ 259-4. Violations and penalties.
Failure to give notice as required under this article of any auction or
closeout sale shall result in a penalty as prescribed in the Uniform
Forfeiture and Bond Schedules for each day of each failed notice.
E. An auction conducted by or under the direction of a religious, fraternal
or benevolent society, a school or a nonprofit organization.
F. An auction conducted by or under the direction or a political
organization or candidate if the proceeds of the auction will be used for
political purposes.
G. An auction in which the total appraised value of the goods or services
for sale is less than $500.
H. Fur auctions and fur auctioneers licensed by the Department of Natural
Resources under Ch. 29, Wis. Stats.
I. Motor vehicle auction dealers licensed by the Department of
Transportation under Subchapter VIII of Ch. 218, Wis. Stats.
J. A person, other than a licensee as defined in § 452.01(5), Wis. Stats.,
who conducts an auction or manages or has primary responsibility for
handling sales proceeds, down payments, earnest money deposits or
other trust funds received at or as a result of an auction while lawfully
practicing within the scope of a license, permit or certificate granted to
that person by a state governmental agency other than the Department
of Safety and Professional Services.59
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 259-3 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 259-4
1:124
ARTICLE II
Direct Sellers
§ 259-5. Registration required.
It shall be unlawful for any direct seller to engage in direct sales within the
Town of Grand Chute without being registered for that purpose as provided
herein.
§ 259-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — Includes any benevolent, philanthropic,
patriotic or eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation,
or one purporting to be such.
DIRECT SELLER — Any individual who, for him/herself or for a partnership,
association or corporation, sells goods, or takes sales orders for the later
delivery of goods, at any location other than the permanent business place
or residence of said individual, partnership, association or corporation,
and shall include but not be limited to peddlers, solicitors and transient
merchants. The sale of goods includes donations required by the direct
seller for the retention of goods by a donor or prospective customer.
GOODS — Includes personal property of any kind and shall include goods
provided incidental to services offered or sold.
PERMANENT MERCHANT — A direct seller who, for at least one year prior
to the consideration of the application of this article to said merchant, has
continuously resided in this Town or has continuously resided in this Town
and now does business from his/her residence.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Town of Grand Chute Police Department.
§ 259-7. Exemptions.
The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this article:
A. Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products or bakery goods
to regular customers on established routes.
B. Any person selling goods at wholesale to dealers in such goods.
C. Any person selling agricultural products which such person has grown.
D. Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders away
from the established place of business for goods regularly offered for
sale by such merchant within this county and who delivers such goods
in his/her regular course of business.
E. Any person who has an established place of business where the goods
being sold are offered for sale on a regular basis and in which the buyer
§ 259-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-7
1:125
§ 259-8. Registration procedure. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-40]
has initiated contact with and specifically requested a home visit by
said person.
F. Any person who has had, or one who represents a company which has
had, a prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit
arrangement, with the prospective customer.
G. Any person selling or offering for sale a service unconnected with the
sale or offering for sale of goods.
H. Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of any court
and any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law.
I. Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable organization who
engages in direct sales for or on behalf of said organization, provided
that there is submitted to the Town Police Department proof that such
charitable organization is registered under § 440.42, Wis. Stats. Any
charitable organization not registered under § 440.42, Wis. Stats., or
which is exempt from the statute's registration requirements, shall be
required to register under this article.
J. Any person who claims to be a permanent merchant but against whom
complaint has been made to the Town Police Department that such
person is a transient merchant, provided that there is submitted to the
Town Police Department proof that such person has leased for at least
one year or purchased the premises from which he/she is conducting
business or proof that such person has conducted such business in this
Town for at least one year prior to the date complaint was made.
A. Applicants for registration must complete and return to the office of the
Town Clerk a registration form furnished by the Clerk's office, which
shall require the following information:
(1) Name, permanent address and telephone number, and temporary
address, if any.
(2) Age, height, weight, and color of hair and eyes.
(3) Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm,
association or corporation that the direct seller represents or is
employed by or whose merchandise is being sold.
(4) Temporary address and telephone number from which business will
be conducted, if any.
(5) Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the
goods offered and any services offered.
(6) Proposed method of delivery of goods, if applicable.
§ 259-7 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 259-8
1:126
§ 259-9. Investigation. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-40]
(7) Make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by the
applicant in the conduct of his/her business.
(8) Last cities, villages, and towns, not to exceed three, where the
applicant conducted similar business.
(9) Place where the applicant can be contacted for at least seven days
after leaving this Town.
(10) Statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any
crime or ordinance violation related to the applicant's transient
merchant business within the last five years; the nature of the
offense and the place of conviction.
B. Applicants shall present to the Town Clerk for examination:
(1) A driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be
reasonably required.
(2) A state certificate of examination and approval from the Sealer of
Weights and Measures where the applicant's business requires use
of weighing and measuring devices approved by state authorities.
(3) A state health officer's certificate where the applicant's business
involves the handling of food or clothing and is required to be
certified under state law, such certificate to state that the applicant
is apparently free from any contagious or infectious disease, dated
not more than 90 days prior to the date the application for license is
made.
C. At the time the registration is returned, a fee shall be paid (per the Fee
Schedule adopted by the Town Board and revised from time to time) to
the Town Clerk to cover the cost of processing said registration.
(1) The applicant shall sign a statement appointing the Town Clerk his/
her agent to accept service of process in any civil action brought
against the applicant arising out of any sale or service performed
by the applicant in connection with the direct sales activities of the
applicant, in the event that the applicant cannot, after reasonable
effort, be served personally.
(2) Upon payment of said fee and the signing of said statement, the
Town Clerk shall register the applicant as a direct seller and date
the entry. Said registration shall be valid for a period of six months
from the date of entry, subject to subsequent refusal as provided in
§ 259-9B below.
A. Upon receipt of each application, the Town Clerk may make and
complete an investigation of the statements made in such registration.
§ 259-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-9
1:127
§ 259-10. Appeal.
Any person denied registration may appeal the denial through the appeal
procedure provided by ordinance or resolution of the Town Board or, if none
has been adopted, under the provisions of §§ 68.07 through 68.16, Wis.
Stats.
§ 259-11. Prohibited practices; disclosure requirements.
B. The Town Clerk shall refuse to register the applicant if it is determined,
pursuant to the investigation above, that the application contains any
material omission or materially inaccurate statement; complaints of a
material nature have been received against the applicant by authorities
in the last cities, villages and towns, not exceeding three, in which the
applicant conducted similar business; the applicant was convicted of a
crime, statutory violation or ordinance violation within the last five
years, the nature of which is directly related to the applicant's fitness to
engage in direct selling; or the applicant failed to comply with any
applicable provision of § 259-9B above.
A. Prohibited practices.
(1) A direct seller shall be prohibited from calling at any dwelling or
other place between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. except by
appointment; calling at any dwelling or other place where a sign is
displayed bearing the words "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors" or
words of similar meaning; calling at the rear door of any dwelling;
or remaining on any premises after being asked to leave by owner,
occupant or other person having authority over such premises.
(2) A direct seller shall not misrepresent or make false, deceptive or
misleading statements concerning the quality, quantity or
character of any goods offered for sale, the purpose of his/her visit,
his/her identity or the identity of the organization he/she
represents. A charitable organization direct seller shall specifically
disclose what portion of the sale price of goods being offered will
actually be used for the charitable purpose for which the
organization is soliciting. Said portion shall be expressed as a
percentage of the sale price of the goods.
(3) No direct seller shall impede the free use of sidewalks and streets
by pedestrians and vehicles. Where sales are made from vehicles,
all traffic and parking regulations shall be observed.
(4) No direct seller shall make any loud noises or use any soundamplifying
device to attract customers if the noise produced is
capable of being plainly heard outside a one-hundred-foot radius of
the source.
(5) No direct seller shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in or
around the area in which he/she is conducting business.
§ 259-9 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 259-11
1:128
§ 259-12. Revocation of registration.
§ 259-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of violating any provisions of this article shall forfeit
an amount as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules plus
costs of prosecution. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Disclosure requirements.
(1) After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to
a prospective customer, a direct seller shall expressly disclose his/
her name, the name of the company or organization he/she is
affiliated with, if any, and the identity of goods or services he/she
offers to sell.
(2) If any sale of goods is made by a direct seller, or any sales order for
the later delivery of goods is taken by the seller, the buyer shall
have the right to cancel said transaction if it involves the extension
of credit or is a cash transaction of more than $25, in accordance
with the procedure as set forth in § 423.203, Wis. Stats. The seller
shall give the buyer two copies of a typed or printed notice of that
fact. Such notice shall conform to the requirements of
§ 423.203(1)(a), (b) and (c), (2) and (3), Wis. Stats.
(3) If the direct seller takes a sales order for the later delivery of
goods, he/she shall, at the time the order is taken, provide the
buyer with a written statement containing the terms of the
agreement, the amount paid in advance, whether full, partial or no
advance payment is made, the name, address and telephone
number of the seller, the delivery or performance date and whether
a guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so, the terms thereof.
A. Registration may be revoked by the Town Board, after notice and
hearing, if the registrant made any material omission or materially
inaccurate statement in the application for registration, made any
fraudulent, false, deceptive or misleading statement or representation
in the course of engaging in direct sales, violated any provision of this
article or was convicted of any crime or ordinance or statutory violation
which is directly related to the registrant's fitness to engage in direct
selling.
B. Written notice of the hearing shall be served personally on the
registrant at least 72 hours prior to the time set for the hearing. Such
notice shall contain the time and place of the hearing and a statement
of the acts upon which the hearing will be based.
§ 259-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-13
1:129
Chapter 275
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 220.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 463.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 475.
§ 259-13 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 259-13
1:130
ARTICLE I
General Requirements
§ 275-1. Authority; effect on other laws.
§ 275-2. Findings of fact.
The Town of Grand Chute Board finds that runoff from land disturbing
construction activity carries a significant amount of sediment and other
pollutants to the waters of the state in the Town of Grand Chute.
§ 275-3. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to further the maintenance of safe and
healthful conditions; prevent and control water pollution; prevent and
control soil erosion; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control
building sites, placement of structures and land uses; preserve ground
cover and scenic beauty; and promote sound economic growth by
minimizing the amount of sediment and other pollutants carried by runoff or
discharged from land disturbing construction activity to waters of the state
in the Town of Grand Chute.
§ 275-4. Applicability and jurisdiction.
A. This chapter is adopted by the Town of Grand Chute Board under the
authority granted by § 60.627, Wis. Stats. This chapter supersedes all
provisions of an ordinance previously enacted under § 60.62, Wis.
Stats., that relate to construction site erosion control. Except as
otherwise specified in § 60.627, Wis. Stats., the provisions of § 60.62,
Wis. Stats., apply to this chapter and to any amendments to this
chapter.
B. The provisions of this chapter are deemed not to limit any other lawful
regulatory powers of the same governing body.
C. The Town of Grand Chute Board hereby designates the Plan
Commission and the Community Development Department to
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
D. The requirements of this chapter do not preempt more stringent
erosion and sediment control requirements that may be imposed by any
of the following:
(1) Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative rules,
permits or approvals, including those authorized under §§ 281.16
and 283.33, Wis. Stats.
(2) Targeted performance standards promulgated in rules by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under § NR 151.004,
Wis. Adm. Code.
A. Applicability.
§ 275-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-4
1:131
(1) Where not otherwise limited by law, this chapter applies to all
construction sites, unless the site is otherwise exempt pursuant to
§ 275-4A(2) or (3):
(a) A permit is required for a construction site with 4,000 square
feet or greater of land disturbing construction activity. The
responsible party shall comply with all applicable provisions of
this chapter for a permitted site, including the performance
standards pursuant to § 275-7B, the permit requirements
pursuant to § 275-8, and the plan requirements pursuant to
§ 275-9.
(b) A permit is not required for a construction site with less than
4,000 square feet of land disturbing construction activity.
However, the responsible party shall comply with all applicable
provisions of this chapter for a nonpermitted site, including the
performance standards pursuant to § 275-7A.
(c) Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in
§ 275-4A(1)(a) and (b), a permit is required for a construction
site with less than 4,000 square feet of land disturbing
construction activity if the administering authority determines
that permit coverage is needed in order to improve chapter
compliance, meet targeted performance standards, or protect
waters of the state. If it is determined that a permit is required,
the responsible party shall comply with all applicable
provisions of this chapter pertaining to a permitted site,
including the performance standards pursuant to § 275-7B, the
permit requirements pursuant to § 275-8, and the plan
requirements pursuant to § 275-9.
(d) Utility work and other disturbances of a continuous distance of
100 feet of road ditch, nonagricultural grass waterway or other
nonagricultural land area where drainage occurs in a
watercourse.
(2) This chapter does not apply to the following:
(a) Nonpoint discharges from agricultural activity areas.
(b) Nonpoint discharges from silviculture activities.
(3) A construction site exempted by federal statutes or regulations
from the requirement to have a national pollutant discharge
elimination system permit issued under 40 CFR 122, for land
disturbing construction activity, shall comply with the performance
standards pursuant to § 275-7A if less than one acre of land
disturbing construction activity. The performance standards
pursuant to § 275-7B, permit requirements pursuant to § 275-8,
and plan requirements pursuant to § 275-9 are not applicable.
§ 275-4 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 275-4
1:132
§ 275-5. Definitions.
B. Jurisdiction. This chapter applies to land disturbing construction
activity on construction sites located within the boundaries and
jurisdiction of the Town of Grand Chute.
C. Exclusions. This chapter is not applicable to activities conducted by a
state agency, as defined under § 227.01(1), Wis. Stats., but also
including the office of district attorney, which is subject to the state plan
promulgated or a memorandum of understanding entered into under
§ 281.33(2), Wis. Stats.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the following shall apply as indicated
throughout the chapter:
(1) The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation, as well as an
individual.
(2) The present tense includes the future tense, and the singular
includes the plural.
(3) The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive.
(4) The word "used" or "occupied" also means intended, designed or
arranged to be used or occupied.
B. Definition of terms. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms
are defined:
ADMINISTERING AUTHORITY — A governmental employee or their
designees empowered under § 60.627, Wis. Stats., to administer this
chapter. For the purpose of this chapter, it is the Town of Grand Chute
Community Development Department under guidance from the Plan
Commission.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY AREA — The part of the farm where there
is planting, growing, cultivating and harvesting of crops for human or
livestock consumption and pasturing or outside yarding of livestock,
including sod farms and silviculture. Practices in this area may include
waterways, drainage ditches, diversions, terraces, farm lanes,
excavation, filling and similar practices. The agricultural activity area
does not include the agricultural production area.
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION AREA — The part of the farm where
there is concentrated production activity or impervious surfaces.
Agricultural production areas include buildings, driveways, parking
areas, feed storage structures, manure storage structures, and other
impervious surfaces. The agricultural production area does not include
the agricultural activity area.
ATLAS 14 — The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA) Atlas 14 Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States,
Volume 8 (Midwestern States), published in 2013.
§ 275-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-5
1:133
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Structural or nonstructural
measures, practices, techniques or devices employed to avoid or
minimize soil, sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the
state. Also referred to as "BMPs."
BUSINESS DAY — A day the office of the administering authority is
routinely and customarily open for business.
CEASE-AND-DESIST ORDER — A court-issued order to halt land
disturbing construction activity that is being conducted without the
required permit.
COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE — A development or
sale where multiple separate and distinct land disturbing construction
activities may be taking place at different times on different schedules
but under one plan. A common plan of development or sale includes,
but is not limited to, subdivision plats, certified survey maps, and other
developments.
CONSTRUCTION SITE — An area upon which one or more land
disturbing construction activities occur, including areas that are part of
a larger common plan of development.
DESIGN STORM — A hypothetical discrete rainstorm characterized
by a specific duration, temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return
frequency and total depth of rainfall. The TP-40, Type II, twenty-fourhour
design storms for the Town of Grand Chute are: one-year, 2.2
inches; two-year, 2.5 inches; five-year, 3.3 inches; ten-year, 3.8 inches;
twenty-five-year, 4.4 inches; fifty-year, 4.9 inches; and one-hundredyear,
5.3 inches. The Atlas 14, MSE4, twenty-four-hour design storms
for the Town of Grand Chute are: one-year, 2.14 inches; two-year, 2.45
inches; five-year, 3.01 inches; ten-year, 3.51 inches; twenty-five-year,
4.24 inches; fifty-year, 4.85 inches; and one-hundred-year, 5.50 inches.
DEVELOPMENT — Residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, or
other land uses and associated roads.
DIVISION OF LAND — The creation from one or more parcels or
building sites of additional parcels or building sites where such creation
occurs at one time or through the successive partition within a five-year
period.
EROSION — The process by which the land's surface is worn away by
the action of wind, water, ice or gravity.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A comprehensive plan
developed to address pollution caused by erosion and sedimentation of
soil particles or rock fragments during construction.
EXTRATERRITORIAL — The unincorporated area within three miles of
the corporate limits of a first-, second-, or third-class city, or within 1.5
miles of a fourth-class city or village.
FINAL STABILIZATION — The point in time when all land disturbing
construction activities at the construction site have been completed and
§ 275-5 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 275-5
1:134
that a uniform perennial vegetative cover has been established, with a
density of at least 70% of the cover, for the unpaved areas and areas not
covered by permanent structures, or that employ equivalent permanent
stabilization measures.
GOVERNING BODY — Town Board of Supervisors, County Board of
Supervisors, City Council, Village Board of Trustees or Village Council.
LAND DISTURBING CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Any man-made
alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the topography or
existing vegetative or nonvegetative soil cover that may result in runoff
and lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of pollutants
into the municipal separate storm sewer or waters of the state. Land
disturbing construction activity includes clearing and grubbing,
demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading
activities, and soil stockpiling. Also referred to as "disturbance."
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE — The highest level of
performance that is achievable but is not equivalent to a performance
standard identified within this chapter. "Maximum extent practicable"
applies when the permit applicant demonstrates to the administering
authority's satisfaction that a performance standard is not achievable
and that a lower level of performance is appropriate. In making the
assertion that a performance standard is not achievable and that a
level of performance different from the performance standard is the
maximum extent practicable, the permit applicant shall take into
account the best available technology, cost effectiveness, geographic
features, and other competing interests such as protection of public
safety and welfare, protection of endangered and threatened resources,
and preservation of historic properties. Also referred to as "MEP."
MSE4 DISTRIBUTION — A specific precipitation distribution developed
by the USDA, NRCS, using precipitation data from Atlas 14.
OFF SITE — Located outside the property boundary described in the
permit application.
ON SITE — Located within the property boundary described in the
permit application.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A narrative or measurable number
specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or practice.
PERMIT — A written authorization by the administering authority to
the applicant, granting permission to conduct land disturbing
construction activity or to discharge post-construction runoff to waters
of the state.
PERMIT ADMINISTRATION FEE — A sum of money paid to the
administering authority by the permit applicant for the purpose of
recovering the expenses incurred by the authority in administering the
permit.
POLLUTANT — Has the meaning given in § 283.01(13), Wis. Stats.
§ 275-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-5
1:135
POLLUTION — Has the meaning given in § 281.01(10), Wis. Stats.
PROTECTIVE AREA — An area of land that commences at the top of
the channel of lakes, streams and rivers, or at the delineated boundary
of wetlands, as measured horizontally from the top of the channel or
delineated wetland boundary to the closest impervious surface. For the
purposes of this chapter, a protective area does not include any area of
land adjacent to any stream enclosed within a pipe or culvert, such that
runoff cannot enter the enclosure at this location.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Any entity holding fee title to a property or
performing services to meet the performance standards of this chapter
through a contract or other agreement.
RUNOFF — Stormwater or precipitation, including rain, snow or ice
melt or similar water, that moves on the land surface via sheet or
channelized flow.
SEDIMENT — Settleable solid material that is transported by runoff,
suspended within runoff, or deposited by runoff away from its original
location.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER — A conveyance or system of conveyances,
including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs,
gutters, ditches, constructed channels or storm drains, which meets all
of the following criteria:
SILVICULTURE ACTIVITIES — Activities including tree nursery
operations, tree harvesting operations, reforestation, tree thinning,
prescribed burning, and pest and fire control. Clearing and grubbing of
an area of a construction site is not a silviculture activity.
SITE — The entire area included in the legal description of the property
on which the land disturbing construction activity is proposed in the
permit application.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued by the administering authority
that requires all construction activity on the site be stopped.
TARGETED PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A performance standard
that will apply in a specific area where additional practices beyond
those contained in this chapter are necessary to meet water quality
standards. A total maximum daily load is an example of a targeted
performance standard.
(1) Is designed or used for collecting water or conveying runoff.
(2) Is not part of a combined sewer system.
Is not part of a publicly owned wastewater treatment works that
provides secondary or more stringent treatment.
(3)
(4) Discharges directly or indirectly to waters of the state.
§ 275-5 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 275-5
1:136
TECHNICAL STANDARD — A document that specifies design,
predicted performance, and operation and maintenance specifications
for a BMP, material, device or method.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD — The amount of pollutants, specified
as a function of one or more water quality parameters, that can be
discharged per day into a water quality limited segment and still ensure
attainment of the applicable water quality standard. Also referred to as
"TMDL."
TP-40 — The Technical Paper No. 40, Rainfall Frequency Atlas of the
United States, published in 1961.
TR-55 — The United States Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service (previously Soil Conservation Service),
Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Second Edition, Technical
Release 55, June 1986, which is incorporated by reference for this
chapter.
TYPE II DISTRIBUTION — A rainfall type curve as established in the
United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service,
Technical Paper 149, published 1973, which is incorporated by
reference for this chapter. The Type II curve is applicable to all of
Wisconsin and represents the most intense storm pattern.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Has the meaning given in § 283.01(20), Wis.
Stats.
§ 275-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-5
1:137

ARTICLE II
Technical Requirements
§ 275-6. Technical standards.
§ 275-7. Performance standards.
A. Design criteria, standards and specifications. All BMPs required to
comply with this chapter shall meet the design criteria, standards and
specifications based on any of the following:
(1) Design guidance and technical standards identified or developed
by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under
Subchapter V of Ch. NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code.
(2) Technical standards and other guidance identified within the Town
of Grand Chute Erosion and Sediment Control Reference Guide.
(3) Soil loss prediction tools, such as the Revised Universal Soil Loss
Equation 2 (RUSLE2), that estimate the sediment load leaving the
site under varying land and management conditions may be used to
show compliance with the sediment performance standards
pursuant to § 275-7B of this chapter.
(4) In this chapter, average annual basis is calculated using the
appropriate annual rainfall or runoff factor, also referred to as the
"R factor," or an equivalent design storm using a Type II
distribution, with consideration given to the geographic location of
the site and the period of disturbance.
B. Other standards. Other technical standards not identified in this
chapter may be used, provided that the methods have been approved by
the administering authority.
A. Nonpermitted sites.
(1) Responsible party. The landowner of the construction site, or other
person contracted or obligated by other agreement with the
landowner to implement and maintain construction site BMPs, is a
responsible party and shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) Requirements. At each site where land disturbing construction
activity is to occur, BMPs shall be used to prevent or reduce all of
the following:
(a) The deposition of soil from being tracked onto streets by
vehicles.
(b) The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into
stormwater inlets.
§ 275-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-7
1:139
(c) The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into adjacent
waters of the state.
(d) The discharge of sediment from drainageways that flow off the
site.
(e) The discharge of sediment by dewatering activities.
(f) The discharge of sediment eroding from soil stockpiles existing
for more than seven days.
(g) The discharge of on-site chemicals, cement and other building
compounds and materials into waters of the state or off-site
separate storm sewers during the construction period.
However, projects that require the placement of these
materials in waters of the state, such as constructing bridge
footings or BMP installations, are not prohibited by this
chapter.
(3) Location. BMPs shall be located so that treatment occurs before
runoff enters waters of the state and off-site separate storm sewers.
However, projects that require BMP placement in waters of the
state, such as a turbidity barrier, are not prohibited by this chapter.
(4) Implementation. The BMPs used to comply with the requirements
of this chapter shall be implemented as follows:
(a) Erosion and sediment control practices shall be constructed or
installed before land disturbing construction activities begin.
(b) Erosion and sediment control practices shall be maintained
until final stabilization.
(c) Final stabilization activity shall commence when land
disturbing construction activities cease and final grade has
been reached on any portion of the site.
(d) Temporary stabilization activity shall commence when land
disturbing construction activities have temporarily ceased and
will not resume for a period exceeding 14 calendar days.
(e) BMPs that are no longer necessary for erosion and sediment
control shall be removed by the responsible party.
(5) Alternate requirements. The administering authority may establish
erosion and sediment control requirements more stringent than
those set forth in this chapter if the administering authority
determines that an added level of protection is needed to protect
resources.
B. Permitted sites.
(1) Responsible party. The landowner or other person performing
services to meet the performance standards of this chapter,
§ 275-7 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 275-7
1:140
through a contract or other agreement with the landowner, is a
responsible party and shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) Plan. A written erosion and sediment control plan shall be
developed and implemented by the responsible party in accordance
with § 275-9 of this chapter and shall meet all other applicable
requirements contained herein.
(3) Requirements. The erosion and sediment control plan shall meet all
of the following:
(a) The plan shall use BMPs to prevent or reduce all of the
following:
[1] The deposition of soil from being tracked onto streets by
vehicles.
[2] The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into
stormwater inlets.
[3] The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into
adjacent waters of the state.
[4] The discharge of sediment from drainageways that flow off
the site.
[5] The discharge of sediment by dewatering activities.
[6] The discharge of sediment eroding from soil stockpiles
existing for more than seven days.
[7] The discharge of sediment from erosive flows at outlets
and in downstream channels.
[8] The discharge of on-site chemicals, cement and other
building compounds and materials into waters of the state
or off-site separate storm sewers during the construction
period. However, projects that require the placement of
these materials in waters of the state, such as constructing
bridge footings or BMP installations, are not prohibited by
this chapter.
[9] The discharge of untreated wash water from vehicle and
wheel washing into waters of the state or off-site separate
storm sewers.
(b) For sites with one acre or more of land disturbing construction
activity, the plan shall meet the following sediment
performance standards:
[1] BMPs that, by design, discharge no more than five tons per
acre per year, or to the maximum extent practicable, of the
§ 275-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-7
1:141
sediment load carried in runoff from initial grading to final
stabilization.
[2] Except as provided in § 275-7B(6), the administering
authority may not require any person to employ more
BMPs than are needed to meet the five-tons-per-acre-peryear
sediment performance standard in order to comply
with the maximum extent practicable. Erosion and
sediment control BMPs may be combined to meet the
sediment performance standard. The administering
authority may give credit toward meeting the sediment
performance standard for limiting the duration and/or
area of land disturbing construction activity or for other
appropriate mechanisms.
[3] Notwithstanding the provisions in § 275-7B(3)(b)[1] and
[2], if BMPs cannot be designed and implemented to meet
the five-tons-per-acre-per-year sediment performance
standard, the plan shall include a written, site-specific
explanation of why the sediment performance standard
cannot be met and how the sediment load will be reduced
to the maximum extent practicable.
(c) The plan shall incorporate all of the following preventative
measures:
[1] Maintenance of existing vegetation, especially adjacent to
surface waters, whenever possible.
[2] Minimization of soil compaction and preservation of
topsoil.
[3] Minimization of land disturbing construction activity on
slopes of 20% or more.
[4] Development of spill prevention and response procedures.
(4) Location. BMPs shall be located so that treatment occurs before
runoff enters waters of the state and off-site separate storm sewers.
However, projects that require BMP placement in waters of the
state, such as a turbidity barrier, are not prohibited by this chapter.
(5) Implementation. The BMPs used to comply with the requirements
of this chapter shall be implemented as follows:
(a) In accordance with the plan developed pursuant to § 275-9, the
erosion and sediment control practices shall be constructed or
installed before land disturbing construction activities begin.
(b) Erosion and sediment control practices shall be maintained
until final stabilization.
§ 275-7 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 275-7
1:142
§ 275-8. Permitting requirements, procedures and fees.
(c) Final stabilization activity shall commence when land
disturbing construction activities cease and final grade has
been reached on any portion of the site.
(d) Temporary stabilization activity shall commence when land
disturbing construction activities have temporarily ceased and
will not resume for a period exceeding 14 calendar days.
(e) BMPs that are no longer necessary for erosion and sediment
control shall be removed by the responsible party.
(6) Targeted performance standards. The administering authority may
establish numeric water quality requirements that are more
stringent than those set forth in § 275-7B(3) in order to meet
targeted performance standards, total maximum daily loads, and/or
water quality standards for a specific water body or area. The
numeric water quality requirements may be applicable to any
permitted site, regardless of the size of land disturbing
construction activity.
(7) Alternate requirements. The administering authority may establish
erosion and sediment control requirements more stringent than
those set forth in this chapter if the administering authority
determines that an added level of protection is needed to protect
resources. Additionally, the administering authority may establish
erosion and sediment control requirements less stringent than
those set forth in this chapter if the administering authority
determines that less protection is needed to protect resources.
However, the alternative requirements shall not be less stringent
than those requirements promulgated in rules by Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources under Ch. NR 151, Wis. Adm.
Code. The established additional requirements shall be provided to
the applicant in writing.
A. Permit required. When a permit is required, no responsible party may
undertake a land disturbing construction activity without prior
approval of an erosion and sediment control plan for the site and
receipt of a permit from the administering authority.
B. Permit application and fees. When a permit is required, any responsible
party desiring to undertake a land disturbing construction activity shall
submit to the approving authority a permit application made on a form
provided by the administering authority for that purpose. Unless
otherwise excepted by this chapter, a permit application must be
accompanied by an erosion and sediment control plan that meets the
requirements set forth in § 275-9 and a nonrefundable permit
administration fee established by the Town of Grand Chute as set forth
in § 275-10.
§ 275-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-8
1:143
C. Review and approval of permit application. The administering authority
shall review any permit application that is submitted with an erosion
and sediment control plan and the required fee. The following approval
procedure shall be used:
(1) If the permit application and plan are approved, the administering
authority shall issue the permit.
(2) If the permit application or plan is disapproved, the administering
authority shall state, in writing, the reasons for disapproval.
(3) The administering authority may request additional information
from the applicant. If additional information is submitted, the
administering authority shall inform the applicant that the plan is
either approved or disapproved.
D. Financial guarantee. As a condition of approval and issuance of the
permit, the administering authority may require the applicant to
deposit a surety bond, cash escrow, or irrevocable letter of credit to
guarantee a good faith execution of the approved erosion and sediment
control plan and any permit conditions. The financial guarantee shall be
in an amount determined by the administering authority to be the
estimated cost of construction and the estimated cost of maintenance of
the practices called for in the erosion and sediment control plan. The
administering authority may require the site to be certified by a
licensed professional engineer. The financial guarantee shall grant the
administering authority the authorization to use the funds to complete
the erosion and sediment control practices if the responsible party
defaults or does not properly implement the approved erosion and
sediment control plan, upon written notice by the administering
authority that the requirements of this chapter have not been met.
(1) The administering authority shall release the portion of the
financial guarantee established under this chapter, less any costs
incurred by the administering authority to complete installation of
practices, upon submission of as-built plans by a licensed
professional engineer. The administering authority may make
provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the financial guarantee
based on the completion of various development stages.
E. Permit requirements. All permits issued under this chapter shall be
subject to the following conditions, and holders of permits issued under
this chapter shall be deemed to have accepted these conditions. The
administering authority may suspend or revoke a permit for violation of
a permit condition, following written notification to the responsible
party. An action by the administering authority to suspend or revoke
this permit may be appealed in accordance with the provisions in
§ 275-13 of this chapter.
(1) Notify the administering authority within 48 hours of commencing
any land disturbing construction activity.
§ 275-8 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 275-8
1:144
(2) Obtain permission, in writing, from the administering authority
prior to any modification of the erosion and sediment control plan,
pursuant to § 275-9B of this chapter.
(3) Install all BMPs as identified in the approved erosion and sediment
control plan.
(4) Maintain all road drainage systems, stormwater drainage systems,
BMPs and other facilities identified in the erosion and sediment
control plan.
(5) Repair any siltation or erosion damage to adjoining surfaces and
drainage ways resulting from land disturbing construction
activities, and document repairs in weekly inspection reports.
(6) Conduct construction site inspections at least once per week and
within 24 hours after a precipitation event of 0.5 inch or greater.
Repair or replace erosion and sediment control BMPs as necessary
within 24 hours of an inspection or notification that repair or
replacement is needed. Maintain, at the construction site, weekly
written reports of all inspections. Weekly inspection reports shall
include all of the following: date, time and location of the
construction site inspection; the name of the individual who
performed the inspection; an assessment of the condition of erosion
and sediment controls; a description of any erosion and sediment
control BMP implementation and maintenance performed; and a
description of the present phase of land disturbing construction
activity at the construction site.
(7) Allow the administering authority to enter the site for the purpose
of inspecting for compliance with the erosion and sediment control
plan or for performing any work necessary to bring the site into
compliance with said plan. Keep a copy of the erosion and sediment
control plan, stormwater management plan, amendments, weekly
inspection reports, and permit at the construction site until permit
coverage is terminated.
(8) The permit applicant shall post the certificate of permit coverage in
a conspicuous location at the construction site.
F. Permit conditions. Permits issued under this chapter may include
conditions established by the administering authority, in addition to the
requirements set forth in § 275-8E, where it is determined necessary to
assure compliance with the performance standards set forth in § 275-7.
G. Permit duration. Permits issued under this chapter shall be valid for a
period of 180 days from the date of issuance or the length of the
building permit or other construction authorizations, whichever is
longer. The administering authority may extend the period one or more
times for up to an additional 180 days. The administering authority may
require additional BMPs as a condition of the extension if they are
determined necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter.
§ 275-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-8
1:145
§ 275-9. Erosion and sediment control plan.
H. Maintenance. The responsible party shall maintain all BMPs necessary
to meet the requirements of this chapter until the site has undergone
final stabilization.
I. Alternate requirements. The administering authority may prescribe
requirements less stringent for applicants seeking a permit for a
construction site with less than one acre of land disturbing construction
activity.
A. Plan requirements. The erosion and sediment control plan required
under the provisions of § 275-7B shall comply with the Town of Grand
Chute Erosion and Sediment Control Reference Guide and contain, at a
minimum, the following information:
(1) Name, address, and telephone number of the landowner and
responsible parties.
(2) A legal description of the property proposed to be developed.
(3) A site map with property lines, disturbed limits, and drainage
patterns.
(4) Total area of the site and total area of the construction site that is
expected to be disturbed by construction activities.
(5) Performance standards applicable to the site.
(6) Proposed best management practices.
(7) Erosion and sediment control plan narrative.
(8) Construction sequence and construction schedule.
(9) The erosion and sediment control plan shall include, at a minimum,
the items specified in the Town of Grand Chute Erosion and
Sediment Control Reference Guide and RUSLE2.
B. Amendments. The applicant shall amend the erosion and sediment
control plan if any of the following occur:
(1) There is a change in design, construction, operation, maintenance
or schedule at the site, which has the reasonable potential for the
discharge of pollutants to waters of the state or off-site separate
storm sewers, and which has not otherwise been addressed in the
plan.
(2) The actions required by the plan fail to reduce the impacts of
pollutants carried by construction site runoff.
(3) The administering authority notifies the applicant of changes
needed in the plan.
§ 275-8 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 275-9
1:146
C. Alternate requirements. The administering authority may prescribe
requirements less stringent for applicants seeking a permit for a
construction site with less than one acre of disturbance.
§ 275-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-9
1:147

ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 275-10. Fee schedule.
Fees referred to in this chapter shall be established by the Town of Grand
Chute Board and may be modified from time to time. A schedule of the fees
established by the Town Board shall be available for review upon request.
§ 275-11. Inspection.
The administrative authority may enter and inspect any site at which land
disturbing construction activities are being carried out, pursuant to the
provisions of § 66.0119(1), (2) and (3), Wis. Stats.
§ 275-12. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. The administering authority may post a stop-work order if any of the
following occurs:
(1) Any land disturbing construction activity is being undertaken
without a permit at a site for which a permit is required, pursuant
to § 275-4A of this chapter.
(2) The erosion and sediment control plan is not being implemented in
a good faith manner.
(3) The conditions of the permit are not being met.
(4) Any land disturbing construction activity is in violation of the
requirements in this chapter.
B. The administering authority may revoke a permit issued under this
chapter if the responsible party does not cease activity as required in a
stop-work order or fails to comply with the erosion and sediment
control plan or any permit conditions.
C. The administering authority is authorized to request that the Town
Attorney obtain a cease-and-desist order in any court of jurisdiction if
the responsible party, after being issued a stop-work order, fails to
cease land disturbing construction activity that is in violation of the
requirements in this chapter.
D. The administering authority may retract a stop-work order issued
pursuant to § 275-12A or a permit revocation pursuant to § 275-12B.
E. After posting a stop-work order pursuant to § 275-12A, the
administering authority may issue a notice to the responsible party of
its intent to perform work necessary to comply with the requirements of
this chapter. The administering authority may enter upon the land and
perform the work or other operations necessary to bring the condition
of said land into compliance. The costs of any work performed by the
administering authority, plus interest at the rate authorized by the
§ 275-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-12
1:149
§ 275-13. Appeals.
§ 275-14. Variances.
In any particular case where a landowner can show that, by reason of
exceptional topography or other physical condition, strict compliance with
any requirement of this chapter would cause unnecessary hardship, the
Plan Commission may grant a variance from the provisions of this chapter,
provided such relief may be granted without detriment to the public good
and without impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter or the
desirable general development of the Town of Grand Chute. No variance
shall be granted by the Commission that is contrary to provisions of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code or the Wisconsin Statutes.
Town of Grand Chute Board, shall either be billed to the responsible
party or recovered from the financial guarantee provided for that
purpose. In the event a responsible party fails to provide the required
payment amount and no financial guarantee has been established, or
where such a financial guarantee is insufficient to cover these costs, the
administering authority shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls and
collect the money as a special charge against the property, pursuant to
Subchapter VII of Ch. 66, Wis. Stats.
F. Any person, firm, association, or corporation who does not comply with
the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided
in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules per offense, together
with the costs of prosecution. Each day that the violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense.
G. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter may also be enforced by
injunction in any court with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary to
prosecute for forfeiture or a cease-and-desist order before resorting to
injunctional proceedings.
A. Appeals. The Town of Grand Chute Plan Commission, created pursuant
to § 16-2 of The Town of Grand Chute Municipal Code, shall hear and
decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order,
decision or determination made by the administering authority in
administering this article. The Plan Commission shall also use the rules,
procedures, duties, and powers authorized by statute in hearing and
deciding appeals. Upon appeal, the Plan Commission may authorize
variances from the provisions of this article that are not contrary to the
public interest and where, owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the article will result in unnecessary hardship.
B. Who may appeal. Appeals to the Plan Commission may be taken by any
aggrieved person or by any office, department, board, or bureau of the
Town of Grand Chute affected by any decision of the administering
authority.
§ 275-12 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 275-15
1:150
§ 275-15. Limitations on municipal responsibility.
Nothing in this chapter creates or imposes, nor shall be construed to create
or impose, any greater obligation or responsibility on the Town of Grand
Chute than those minimum requirements specifically required by State of
Wisconsin Statutes and Department of Natural Resources regulations.
§ 275-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-15
1:151
Chapter 279
ESCORTS AND ESCORT SERVICES
§ 279-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ESCORT — Any person who, for a fee, commission, salary, hire, profit,
payment or other consideration, accompanies or offers to accompany
another person to or about social affairs, entertainment or places of
amusement or consorts with another person about any place of public resort
or within any private quarters or agrees to privately model lingerie, perform
a striptease or perform in a nude or seminude state for another person or
persons.
ESCORT SERVICE — Service provided by any person who, for a fee,
commission, salary, hire, profit, payment or other consideration, furnishes
or offers to furnish names of persons who may accompany other persons
to or about social affairs, entertainment or places of amusement, or who
may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any
private quarters or agrees to privately model lingerie, perform a striptease
or perform in a nude or seminude state for another person or persons.
PERSON — Any individual and is also extended and applied to associations,
clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate.
§ 279-2. Exemptions.
This chapter does not apply to businesses, agencies and persons licensed by
the State of Wisconsin or the Town of Grand Chute pursuant to a specific
statute or ordinance, and employees employed by a business so licensed,
where such business performs an escort or an escort service function as
a service merely incidental to the primary function of such profession,
employment or business and does not hold itself out to the public as an
escort or an escort service.
§ 279-3. License required.
A. No escort service shall operate or provide service in the Town of Grand
Chute without first obtaining an escort service license issued by the
Town.
B. No person shall escort in the Town of Grand Chute unless employed by
an escort service licensed by the Town and properly registered
pursuant to this chapter.
C. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which desires to operate
or provide services from more than one location must have a license for
each location.
§ 275-15 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 279-3
1:152
§ 279-4. Application for license.
D. No license or interest in a license may be transferred to any person,
partnership or corporation.
E. No person may advertise indicating that an escort service is available in
the Town of Grand Chute unless that service possesses a valid license.
No escort service may, in any manner, advertise its services as licensed
by the Town of Grand Chute.
F. No escort service shall provide a person with the actual services of an
escort at its establishment address, except when the escort service has
met the standards and requirements of adult establishments and is in
possession of a special exception permit as required in § 535-40A of this
Code.
A. Any person desiring to secure a license under this chapter shall make
application to the Town Clerk.
B. The application for a license shall be on a form approved by the Town
Clerk. An applicant for a license (which shall include each partner and
limited partner of a partnership applicant, each officer and director of a
corporate applicant, each stockholder holding 10% or more of the stock
or beneficial ownership, and every other person who is interested
directly in the ownership or operation of the business) shall furnish the
following information under oath:
(1) Name and address, including all aliases.
(2) Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age.
(3) All residential addresses of the applicant for the past 10 years.
(4) The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for 10
years immediately preceding the date of application.
(5) Whether the applicant previously operated in this or any other
state, county or city under an escort service license or similar
business license and whether the applicant has ever had such a
license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor and the business
entity or trade name under which the applicant operated that was
subject to the suspension or revocation.
(6) All convictions and pending charges of felony, misdemeanor or
ordinance violations, except minor traffic violations.
(7) Fingerprints and photograph registration with the Grand Chute
Police Department.
(8) The address of the escort service to be operated by the applicant.
(9) If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall specify the
name of the corporation, the date and state of incorporation, the
§ 279-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-4
1:153
§ 279-5. Standards for license issuance.
name and address of the registered agent and all officers and
directors of the corporation.
C. Additional information. Each service shall furnish the following
information under oath at the time of application:
(1) The trade name of the escort service. An escort service may
operate under only one trade name per license.
(2) The complete address of the proposed business location with a
copy of the deed, lease, or other document pursuant to which the
applicant occupies or will occupy such premises.
(3) The service's federal employer identification number.
(4) A written plan setting forth:
(a) Description of the nature of the business to be conducted and
services to be offered.
(b) Hours that the service will be open to the public.
(c) Copies of contracts to be used with escorts and customers.
D. The application shall require payment of the appropriate fee at the time
it is submitted. The amount of the fee shall be determined by the Town
Board and on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
E. Upon receipt of an application, the matter will be presented to the
Licensing Committee for review and recommendation to the Town
Board.
A. To receive a license to operate an escort service, an applicant must
meet the following standards:
(1) If the applicant is an individual:
(a) The applicant shall be at least 18 years of age.
(b) Subject to Ch. 111, Wis. Stats., the applicant shall not have
been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere, or no contest, to
a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution,
obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction.
(c) The applicant shall not have been convicted of a felony,
misdemeanor or ordinance violation which substantially
relates to the licensed activity.
(d) The applicant shall not have been found to have previously
violated this chapter within five years immediately preceding
the date of the application.
(2) If the applicant is a corporation:
§ 279-4 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 279-5
1:154
(a) All officers, directors and others required to be named under
§ 279-4 shall be at least 18 years of age.
(b) Subject to Ch. 111, Wis. Stats., no officer, director or other
person to be named under § 279-4 shall have been convicted of
or pleaded nolo contendere, or no contest, to a felony or any
crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or
other crime of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction.
(c) No officer, director or other person required to be named
under § 279-4 shall have been convicted of a felony,
misdemeanor or ordinance violation which substantially
relates to the licensed activity.
(d) No officer, director or other person required to be named
under § 279-4 shall have been found to have previously
violated this chapter within five years immediately preceding
the date of the application.
(3) If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture or any other type of
organization where two or more persons have a financial interest:
(a) All persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint
venture or other type of organization shall be at least 18 years
of age.
(b) No persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint
venture or other type of organization shall, subject to Ch. 111,
Wis. Stats., have been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere,
or no contest, to a felony or any crime involving moral
turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual
nature in any jurisdiction.
(c) No persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint
venture or other type of organization shall have been convicted
of a felony, misdemeanor or ordinance violation which
substantially relates to the licensed activity.
(d) No person having a financial interest in the partnership, joint
venture or other type of organization shall have been found to
have violated any provision of this chapter within five years
immediately preceding the date of the application.
B. No license shall be issued unless the Grand Chute Police Department
has investigated the applicant's qualifications to be licensed, as
outlined in Subsection A(1) to (3) above above.
C. If any charges are currently pending which, if resulting in a conviction,
would disqualify the applicant pursuant to Subsection A(1), (2) or (3)
above, the Licensing Committee may postpone action on the application
until such time as the charge is resolved.
§ 279-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-6
1:155
§ 279-6. Renewal of license.
§ 279-7. Denial of application.
§ 279-8. Suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of license.
A. Every license issued pursuant to this chapter will terminate on
December 31 following its issuance, unless sooner revoked. Application
for renewal shall be on a form provided by the Town Clerk.
B. No renewal application will be considered filed in the office of the Town
Clerk unless it is accompanied by the appropriate fee at the time it is
submitted. The amount of the renewal fee shall be determined by the
Town Board and on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
A. If, upon review of the application, the Licensing Committee
recommends denial of the license, the Town Clerk shall notify the
applicant by mail of the denial and the reason therefor. The letter shall
include the date and time of the review by the Licensing Committee and
the right of the applicant to appear before the Committee.
B. The Committee shall hear any person for or against the granting of the
license and shall report its recommendation to the Town Board, which
shall grant or deny the license.
A. Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended for not less
than 10 days nor more than 90 days, or revoked, for causes outlined in
this section, unless otherwise provided by state statutes or ordinances
of the Town of Grand Chute. Causes for suspension or revocation
include:
(1) Violation by the licensee or his agent or employee of any law of the
United States or State of Wisconsin relating to the particular trade,
occupation, or business so licensed.
(2) Violation by the licensee or his agent or employee of this chapter or
of any other ordinance, regulation or bylaw of the Town of Grand
Chute relating to the particular trade, occupation, or business so
licensed, including but not limited to all plumbing, building,
electrical, and heating codes and parking lot regulations.
(3) Violation by the licensee or his agent or employee of any statute,
ordinance or law when the circumstances of the violation, arrest, or
conviction substantially relate to the licensed activity.
B. The same provisions shall apply to denial of an application for renewal
of a license issued under this chapter.
C. Any violation of the requirements of this chapter shall be grounds for
revocation of a license issued under this chapter.
D. The procedure for revocation or suspension of a license shall be as
follows:
§ 279-6 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 279-8
1:156
§ 279-9. Responsibilities of escort service operator.
(1) A complaint shall be made in writing by the Chief of Police or by
any person to the Town Board.
(2) A copy of the complaint, accompanied by a notice or summons
signed by the Town Clerk stating the time and place when and
where the complaint will be heard before the Town Board, shall be
served on the licensee named in the complaint.
(3) The summons shall command the licensee to appear before the
Town Board on a day and place named in the summons, not less
than three days and not more than 10 days from the date of
issuance, and show cause why his license should not be revoked or
suspended.
(4) At the time and place named in such notice or summons, the
licensee may appear in person with or without counsel and shall be
fully heard by the Town Board in his defense on the complaint and
the proof which may be submitted in support thereof.
(5) After such hearing, the Town Board shall determine whether cause
for revocation or suspension exists. If such cause is found to exist,
the Town Board may revoke or suspend the license.
A. The operator of an escort service shall maintain a register of all
employees or independent contractors, showing the name and aliases
used by the employee, home address, birth date, sex, telephone
numbers, social security number and date of employment and
termination. The above information on each employee shall be
maintained in the register on the premises for a period of three years
following termination.
B. Every escort and escort service shall:
(1) Provide to each patron a written contract and receipt of payment
for services. The contract shall clearly state the type of services to
be performed, the length of time such services shall be performed,
the total amount of money such services shall cost the patron, and
any special terms or conditions relating to the services to be
performed.
(2) Maintain a legible written record of each transaction of any escort
furnished to or arranged for on behalf of any person or customer.
The record shall show the date and hour of each transaction, the
name, address and telephone number of the person requesting an
escort, and the name of every escort furnished.
C. The operator of an escort service shall make the register of employees,
along with any other records required to be maintained under this
chapter, available immediately for inspection by police upon demand of
§ 279-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-9
1:157
§ 279-10. Registration of operators, employees and independent
contractors.
a member of the Grand Chute Police Department at all reasonable
times.
D. Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the
operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization,
knowledge or approval of the operator or as a result of the operator's
negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct. The operator
shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if
the operator committed the act or caused the omission.
E. Any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the
operator for purposes of determining whether the operator's license
shall be revoked, suspended or renewed.
F. No person shall escort or agree to escort a person under the age of 18
years.
A. All operators or employees working for any escort service and
independent contractors shall, prior to beginning employment or
contracted duties, be required to register with the Town Clerk. During
the registration process, the person shall:
(1) Provide name, address, birth date, any aliases used, telephone
numbers, dates of employment and names of employers.
(2) Submit to photographs, fingerprinting, and background
investigation by the Grand Chute Police Department.
B. The applicant shall pay a fee at the time of registration. The amount of
the fee shall be determined by the Town Board and on file in the office
of the Town Clerk.
C. To be registered as an escort in the Town of Grand Chute, the applicant
must satisfy the following conditions:
(1) The applicant shall be at least 18 years of age.
(2) Subject to Ch. 111, Wis. Stats., the applicant shall not have been
convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere, or no contest, to a felony
or any crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or
other crime of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction.
(3) The applicant shall not have been convicted of a felony,
misdemeanor or ordinance violation which substantially relates to
the licensed activity.
§ 279-9 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 279-10
1:158
§ 279-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person found to have violated any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to a forfeiture as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond
Schedules.
Chapter 291
FIRES AND FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 61.
Building construction — See Ch. 220.
Fireworks — See Ch. 295.
Hazardous substances — See Ch. 310.
Housing standards — See Ch. 317.
Nuisances — See Ch. 398.
§ 291-1. Authority of Fire Department at fires.
(4) The applicant shall not have been found to have previously violated
this chapter within five years immediately preceding the date of the
application.
D. Upon successful completion of the background investigation and
approval by the Town Board, the applicant shall be issued a photo
identification card that permits the applicant to function as an escort in
the Town of Grand Chute, subject to all federal and state laws and
ordinances of the Town.
E. The photo identification card shall be kept available while performing
escort services for production upon request by members of the Grand
Chute Police Department.
F. All identification cards shall expire on December 31 in the year of
issuance.
G. Any escort employed by more than one escort service shall submit a
separate registration for each service by which the escort is employed.
A. The Fire Chief or designee in command at any fire is hereby vested with
full and complete police authority at fires. The Fire Chief or Department
designee may cause the arrest of any person failing to give the right-ofway
to any piece of fire apparatus in responding to an emergency call.
[Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
B. The Fire Chief or designated commanding officer may prescribe certain
limits in the vicinity of any fire within which no persons, excepting fire
personnel and police personnel and those admitted by order of any
officer and the Department, shall be permitted to come. The fire officer
in command shall have the power to cause the removal of any property
§ 279-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-1
1:159
§ 291-2. Intent.
It is the intent of this chapter to prescribe regulations consistent with
recognized standard practice for the safeguarding, to a reasonable degree,
of life and property from the hazards of fire and explosion arising from the
storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices
and from conditions hazardous to life and property in the use or occupancy
of buildings or premises.
§ 291-3. Adoption of state and national codes. [Amended 6-18-2002;
8-3-2004; 1-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-01; 12-16-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-12; 12-21-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-25; 12-20-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-30; 12-4-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-21]
whenever it shall become necessary for the preservation of such
property from fire or to prevent the spreading of fire or to protect the
adjoining property, and during the progress of any fire he/she shall
have the power to order the removal or destruction of any property
necessary to prevent the further spread of the fire and the authority to
preserve evidence of arson. He/she shall also have the power to cause
the removal of all wires or other facilities and the turning off of all
electricity or other services where the same impedes the work of the
Department during the progress of a fire. [Amended 12-20-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-30]
C. It shall be lawful for any fire personnel while acting under the direction
of the Fire Chief or other officer in command to enter upon the premises
adjacent to or in the vicinity of any building or other property then on
fire for the purpose of extinguishing such fire, and in case any person
shall hinder, resist or obstruct any fire personnel in the discharge of
their duty as is hereinbefore provided, the person so offending shall be
deemed guilty of resisting fire personnel in the discharge of their duty.
D. Every person who shall be present at a fire shall be subject to the orders
of the Fire Chief or officer in command and may be required to render
assistance in fighting the fire or in removing or guarding property. Such
officer shall have the power to cause the arrest of any person or persons
refusing to obey said orders.
E. No person shall willfully injure in any manner any hose, hydrant or fire
apparatus belonging to the Town of Grand Chute, and no vehicle shall
be driven over an unprotected hose of the Fire Department when laid
down on any street, private driveway or other place to be used at any
fire or alarm of fire without the consent of the Fire Department officials
in command.
A. Codes adopted; enforcement.
(1) The Wisconsin state codes listed in this section are hereby adopted
by reference and made a part of the Town of Grand Chute Fire
Prevention Code. For the purposes of this section, these provisions
§ 291-1 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 291-3
1:160
are adopted to enable the Fire Department to note any violations
of such codes and to report those violations to the appropriate
community service inspectors. The Fire Inspectors shall have the
authority to cite such violations on fire inspections.
(a) Fire Prevention Code SPS 314, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(b) Buildings Constructed Prior to 1914, Wisconsin Administrative
Code.
(c) Wisconsin State Electrical Code, Wisconsin Administrative
Code.
(d) Wisconsin Commercial Building Code, Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
(e) Elevators, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(f) Flammable and Combustible Liquids, Wisconsin Administrative
Code.
(2) Overall enforcement responsibility for the provisions of Subsection
A(1)(a) through (f) will be the responsibility of the Fire Chief/
designated Fire Inspectors. The Building Inspector has the primary
responsibility of the building during and after construction while
the Fire Inspectors have primary responsibility of care and
maintenance after the building construction is completed. Primary
responsibility for particular sections of the above provisions shall
be as indicated in the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
B. The International Fire Code 2015 Edition, hereinafter "IFC," is hereby
adopted as though fully set forth herein, with the following exceptions:
(1) Sections 105 and 108 of Chapter 1, Administration, of the IFC are
not included as part of the adoption of the IFC.
(2) Chapter 57 Flammable and Combustible Liquids, is not included as
part of the adoption of the IFC. This chapter is covered by Ch.
Comm 10, Wis. Adm. Code.60
(3) Section 307 of Chapter 3, General Requirements, of the IFC is not
included as part of the adoption of the IFC. This section is covered
by§ 291-5 of this chapter.
(4) Section 603.8 of Chapter 6, Building Services and Systems, is not
included as part of the adoption of the IFC. This section is covered
by § 291-5 of this chapter.
C. The editions of the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) codes
and standards are adopted by reference in Chapter 80 of the IFC and,
along with Appendices B through G and I, are made a part of the Town
60.Editor's Note: See now Ch. ATCP 93, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 291-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-3
1:161
§ 291-4. Fire inspections. [Amended 4-9-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-09;
12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30; 7-3-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-11;
12-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-2015; 5-7-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-10;
12-4-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-21]
of Grand Chute Fire Prevention Code with the same force and effect as
though set forth herein in full.
D. Any fire prevention problem not herein addressed by code or adopted
standards will be addressed on the basis of current accepted National
Fire Prevention Association standards.
E. Conflicting provisions. Whenever any of the provisions of the codes
enumerated in Subsections A, B and C conflict, the strictest provisions
shall apply.
F. Violations.
(1) Any violation of any provision of the codes enumerated in
Subsection A shall be a violation of this Code.
(2) Penalties for violation of this section will follow Ordinance No.
2008-12 in the Fee Schedule.
A. The Fire Chief shall hold the office of Deputy Fire Inspector under
§ 101.14(2), Wis. Stats, who shall perform the same duties and have the
same powers as the Fire Inspectors.
B. Notice to remove fire hazard: citation.
(1) Whenever in the Town any inspection by the Deputy Fire Inspector
or his authorized personnel reveals a fire hazard, the Deputy Fire
Inspector or his authorized personnel may serve a notice, in
writing, upon the owner or occupant of the property giving said
owner or occupant orders to remove said hazard. In the event that
said fire hazard is not removed within the time specified, it shall be
deemed a nuisance and the Deputy Fire Inspector or his authorized
personnel shall have the same removed by the Town and the cost of
removal reported to the Town Clerk and by him/her spread on the
tax roll as a special charge against the property.
(2) This section shall empower the Fire Chief and designated
subordinates with citation power to enforce any and all ordinances
under this chapter.
(3) Fees.61
(a) Routine annual or semiannual inspection: no fee.
61.Editor's Note: For the most current fees, consult the Town Fee Schedule on file in the
Town Clerk's office.
§ 291-3 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 291-4
1:162
(b) First and second revisit from annual or semiannual inspection
whereby a fire inspection report form was issued stating one or
more violations of a Town of Grand Chute ordinance has
occurred: no fee.
(c) Third and subsequent revisits from the fire inspection report
form stating one or more violations of a Town of Grand Chute
ordinance has occurred and all violations have not been
remedied within the time provided in said fire inspection
report form: fees assessed and/or citation issued.
(d) Revisit from citation issued and each visit thereafter until such
time all the violations are remedied: fees assessed and/or
citation issued.
C. The Fire Inspectors (Fire Marshal and/or authorized personnel) of the
Fire Department shall make the inspections required by § 101.14 Wis.
Stats., and shall comply with the provisions thereof. The Fire Inspector
shall make complaint for any violation of this section.
(1) The Fire Inspectors (Fire Marshal and/or authorized personnel) of
the Fire Department shall inspect or cause to be inspected all
premises on a periodic basis and shall make such orders as may be
necessary for the enforcement of the laws and ordinances
governing the same and for the safeguarding of life and property
from fire.
(a) "Periodic basis" shall mean all occupancies in the jurisdiction
shall be inspected on an annual basis or more frequently as
needed as determined by the Fire Chief or designee as
provided for in the Department of Safety and Professional
Services (DSPS) § SPS 314.01(13)(b)5.
D. It shall be the duty of the Fire Inspectors and the Deputy to enforce the
provisions of the codes adopted pursuant to § 291-3 of this chapter. He/
she shall keep records of inspections made as required by this chapter
and shall keep complete records of all permits, issued by the Fire Chief
or Inspector, issued pursuant to ordinances adopted by the Town Board.
E. Acceptance tests and completion.
(1) Fire detection and alarm systems, fire-extinguishing systems, fire
hydrant systems, fire standpipe systems, fire pump systems,
private fire service mains and all other fire protection systems and
appurtenances thereto shall be subject to acceptance tests as
contained in the installation standards and as approved by the Fire
Code Official. The Fire Code Official shall be notified at least 48
hours before any required acceptance testing.
(2) It shall be unlawful to occupy any portion of a building or structure
until the required fire detection, alarm and suppression systems
§ 291-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-4
1:163
have been tested and approved. A fee as prescribed in the Town
Fee Schedule shall be paid for required inspection.
(3) Fees.
(a) Fire suppression system installation site inspection.
[1] For 20 to 150 heads: See Fee Schedule.62
[2] For 151 to 300 heads: See Fee Schedule.
[3] For 301 to 450 heads: See Fee Schedule.
[4] For 451 to 600 heads: See Fee Schedule.
[5] For over 600 heads: See Fee Schedule.
(b) Fire protection system other than sprinklers.
[1] New installation inspection: See Fee Schedule.
F. Fire Department compliance inspection.
(1) No person shall occupy a building or structure covered under Ch.
SPS 350-365, Wis. Adm. Code, the Wisconsin Commercial Building
Code, or the locally adopted IFC used by or for public assembly,
industrial, institutional, multifamily, office, or mercantile purposes
until the owner of such building or structure has applied for a
permit and the building or structure has been inspected by the Fire
Department if any of the following conditions exist:
(a) New building.
(b) New business reoccupies a vacant building.
(c) Substantial additions, renovations or remodels of an existing
building.
(2) A permit fee as prescribed in the Town Fee Schedule shall be paid
for required inspection. If a permit is not applied for before work
begins a penalty/citation may be issued.
(3) Fees.63
(a) Fire Department compliance inspection: See Fee Schedule.
G. Issuance and posting.
(1) The Fire Chief or his designee shall review all applications
submitted and determine compliance with applicable provisions of
this Code and issue or revoke permits based on his findings as
required.
62.Editor's Note: See now Ch. ATCP 93, Wis. Adm. Code.
63.Editor's Note: See now Ch. ATCP 93, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 291-4 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 291-4
1:164
§ 291-5. Outdoor burning and refuse burning. [Amended 6-5-2007;
12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30; 12-4-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-21]
(2) A copy of the permit shall be posted or otherwise readily accessible
at each place of operation or carried by the permit holder as
specified by the Fire Department.
H. Violation. Failure to obtain a permit required under§ 291-4 of this Code
will result in the imposition of forfeitures in accordance with the Fire
Department Bond Schedule under the Code. Payment of any fee shall
not relieve any person of the penalties that may be imposed for violation
of this chapter.
A. Purpose. This section is intended to promote public health and to
safeguard the health, comfort, living conditions, safety and welfare of
the citizens of the Town of Grand Chute due to the air pollution and fire
hazards of open burning.
B. Applicability. This section applies to all outdoor burning and refuse
burning within the Town of Grand Chute.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BARBECUE GRILL/BBQ SMOKERS — Open or closed grills or BBQ
smokers that are fueled by one or more of the following: electricity,
natural gas, LP gas, wood chips, pellets or charcoal.
BARBECUE PIT — The same meaning as "recreational fire."
BONFIRE — An outdoor fire utilized for joy, exultation, amusement, or
ceremonial purposes that is larger than three feet wide by three feet
long with flames exceeding a height of two feet.
BURN BARREL — A standard burn barrel is a metal fifty-five-gallon
open head drum, modified to burn household trash or yard waste.
CLEAN WOOD — Natural wood (including small tree branches without
foliage) that has not been painted, varnished or coated with a similar
material, has not been pressure treated with preservatives and does
not contain resins or glues as in plywood or other composite wood
products.
CODE OFFICIAL/FIRE CODE OFFICIAL — The Fire Chief, Fire
Marshal, Code Enforcement Officer, or other designated authority
charged by the Town of Grand Chute with the duties of administration
and enforcement of the Code, or a duly authorized representative.
COMPETENT PERSON — One who is capable of identifying existing
and predictable hazards in the surroundings and who has authorization
to take prompt corrective measures to eliminate them.
GRASSLAND HABITAT — An area of land exceeding one acre in size
where native prairie and/or grassland plants are planted for wildlife
§ 291-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-5
1:165
habitat. "Grassland habitat" does not include ornamental plantings
planted primarily for aesthetics.
OPEN BURNING — Kindling or maintaining a fire where the products
of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing
through a stack or chimney, and not contained in any pit or enclosure.
OUTDOOR FIREPLACE — A nonportable device designed and intended
to contain and control outdoor wood fires. Outdoor fireplaces are
normally constructed of stone, concrete, or other noncombustible
material.
PORTABLE/STATIONARY FIRE PIT — A device designed and intended
to contain and control outdoor wood or LP/Natural gas fires & used for
recreational purposes.
PRAIRIE GARDEN — An area of land not to exceed one acre in size
used for the aesthetic planting of native prairie and/or grassland plants.
"Prairie garden" does not include ornamental and/or nonnative
plantings planted primarily for aesthetics.
RECREATIONAL FIRE — A small outdoor fire intended for recreation,
personal enjoyment, or cooking.
REFUSE — Any waste material except clean wood.
YARD/GARDEN WASTE — Leaves, garden plants, brush, grass
clippings, dead shrubs/trees, and branches with foliage.
D. General. A person shall not start or maintain or authorize to be started
or maintained any open burning unless conducted and approved in
accordance with this section.
E. Materials that may not be burned. The areas in this section where
burning is authorized allow for the burning of clean wood only. The
burning of garbage, trash, refuse, recyclables, flammable/combustible
liquids in any form, and construction debris is not allowed. Accelerants
or chemicals shall not be used to kindle any fires.
F. Burning - Burning leaves, brush, and other vegetative debris in areas of
the Town zoned agricultural is allowed under the following conditions.
(1) Burning must be at least 50 feet from any form of a building or
structure, combustible material of any form, or property line.
(2) Burning shall not be conducted when the wind direction shall cause
combustibles or ignited materials to be carried by the wind towards
any form of a building or structure or combustible material of any
form.
(3) Burning should only occur during daylight hours.
(4) Burning shall be done in small, controllable piles no larger than 10
feet wide by 10 feet long by four feet high.
§ 291-5 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 291-5
1:166
(5) Burning shall be conducted only following payment of the permit
fee, issuance of, and in accordance with the agricultural burning
permit.
G. Fires for clearing lots or accumulations of debris.
(1) Outdoor fires specifically for clearing lots or accumulations of
debris are allowed under the following conditions:
(a) Burning must be at least 50 feet from any form of a building or
structure, combustible material of any form, or property line.
(b) Burning shall not be conducted when the wind direction shall
cause combustibles or ignited materials to be carried by the
wind toward any form of a building or structure or combustible
material of any form.
(c) Burning shall only occur during daylight hours.
(d) Burning shall be done in small, controllable piles no larger
than 10 feet wide by 10 feet long by four feet high.
(e) Burning shall be conducted only following the inspection of the
site where burning is to occur, payment of the permit fee, and
issuance of and in accordance with the commercial burning
permit.
(2) Issuance of this type of permit will be considered extremely rare
and shall only be allowed when there is an obvious need and/or
benefit to the community.
H. Burn barrels. No person, firm, association, or corporation shall build,
maintain, or operate a burn barrel in the Town of Grand Chute.
I. Incinerators.
(1) Commercial and industrial incinerators and chimneys shall be
constructed in accordance with NFPA 82, Standard on Incinerators
and Waste and Linen Handling Systems and Equipment, the
International Building Code, the International Mechanical Code,
and the International Fuel Gas Code.
(2) Incinerators shall be equipped with an effective means for
arresting sparks.
(3) Where the Code Official determines that burning in incinerators
will create an undue fire hazard, such burning shall be prohibited.
(4) Burning shall take place only during hours approved by the Code
Official.
(5) The Code Official is authorized to require incinerator use to be
discontinued immediately if the Code Official determines that
smoke emissions are offensive to occupants of surrounding
§ 291-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-5
1:167
property of if the use of the incinerator is determined by the Code
Official to constitute a hazardous condition.
J. Recreational fires. Recreational fires, barbecue pits, portable/
stationary fire pits, and outdoor fireplaces are permitted on properties
zoned agriculture, commercial, industrial, PPD or residential (occupied
by a single- or two-family residence) under the following conditions:
(1) Recreational fires shall be at least 15 feet from any form of a
building or structure, combustible material of any form, or property
line.
(2) No person shall start or maintain any recreational fire or barbecue
pit between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Monday through
Sunday.
(3) Recreational fires, barbecue pits, and outdoor fireplaces shall be
contained in an area not to exceed three feet wide by three feet
long or a circle larger than 3 feet in diameter. The flames of the fire
shall be no higher than two feet.
(4) Yard/garden waste is not allowed to be burned. Only clean dry
wood and small tree branches without foliage is allowed to be
burned.
(5) All recreational fires and barbecue pits, excluding portable fire pits
and outdoor fireplaces as defined, shall be dug into the ground at
least six but not more than 12 inches and surrounded on the
outside, above ground level, by a noncombustible material
extending at least six inches above grade.
(6) Portable fire pits and outdoor fireplaces shall be used in
accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations, within the
above requirements, and shall be placed on a noncombustible
surface that is at least 1.5 times larger the size of the portable fire
pit. LP or natural gas-fired units shall be installed and inspected
per manufacturer's instructions and applicable code IFC/IBC code
requirements. Inspections, when required by the Fire Chief or the
Fire Chief's designees, shall be conducted by Fire and Building
Code Officials.
(7) Sky lanterns. It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite, set aloft,
launch or use an ignited sky lantern, wish lantern or other similar
device that is allowed to float while or after having been ignited.
(8) Recreational fires shall be conducted only following issuance of and
in accordance with the recreational fire permit. If the applicant is
not the owner of the property, the applicant must certify that
permission has been granted by the property owner.
K. Bonfires.
§ 291-5 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 291-5
1:168
(1) Bonfires are allowed only if approved by and in accordance with
provisions established by the Code Official.
(2) Bonfires shall be at least 50 feet from any form of a building or
structure, combustible material of any form, or property line.
(3) Bonfires shall not be lit or started when the wind direction shall
cause combustibles or ignited materials to be carried by the wind
toward any form of a building or structure or combustible material
of any form.
(4) Bonfires shall be conducted only following the inspection of the site
where burning is to occur, payment of the permit fee, and issuance
of and in accordance with the bonfire permit.
L. Barbecue grills/BBQ smokers.
(1) Barbecue grills and BBQ smokers may be started and maintained
without a permit.
(2) Multifamily dwellings.
(a) Barbecue grills may not be started, used, or stored above the
first floor occupancy in all multifamily dwellings more than one
story in height.
(b) Barbecue grills may not be started or used within 15 feet of a
multifamily dwelling more than one story in height.
(c) Exception. Electric barbecue grills may be started, used, and
stored above the first floor occupancy in all multifamily
dwellings more than one story in height.
M. Prescribed burns.
(1) Prescribed burns for prairie and/or wildlife habitat management
are allowed by permit issuance only.
(2) Prairie garden prescribed burns shall be conducted only following
inspection of the site where burning is to occur, payment of the
permit fee, and issuance of and in accordance with the prescribed
burn permit.
(3) Prescribed burns for grassland habitat shall be conducted only
following Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR)
approval, inspection of the site where burning is to occur, payment
of the permit fee, issuance of a prescribed burn permit, and in
accordance with the prescribed burn permit and DNR regulations
and requirements.
(4) Prescribed burns shall only occur during daylight hours.
N. Fire Department training burns. Notwithstanding Subsection E of this
section, the Grand Chute Fire Department may burn any materials
§ 291-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-5
1:169
deemed necessary for firefighting training if the training burn complies
with all applicable requirements.
O. Burning permits.
(1) No person shall start or maintain any open burning without a
burning permit issued by the Code Official. Barbecue grills & BBQ
smokers shall be exempt from the permitting process.
(2) Burning permits are available at either Fire Station (when staff are
available in-quarters) and are nontransferable to any other person
or any other location. Recreational fire permits will also be
available online.
(3) Any open burning shall comply with all other applicable provisions
of this section.
(4) An agricultural burning permit is valid from January 1 until
December 31 of the current year.
(5) A bonfire permit shall be good for one date only. If the bonfire is
cancelled due to inclement weather, the permit may be reissued at
no cost at the discretion of the Code Official.
(6) An annual recreational fire permit is valid from January 1 until
December 31 of the current year.
(7) A prescribed burn permit is only valid for a specified period of time,
not to exceed two weeks.
(8) A commercial burning permit is only valid for a specified period of
time, not to exceed two weeks.
(9) Holders of agricultural burning, prescribed burn, or commercial
burning permits shall notify the Grand Chute Fire Department each
day the burn is to be conducted before said burn occurs.
(10)No materials may be burned upon any street, curb, gutter or
sidewalk or on the ice of a lake, pond, stream or water body.
(11)No materials shall be burned when the wind exceeds 10 miles per
hour {nine knots) as determined by the Automated Weather
Observation Station (AWOS) at Outagamie County Regional
Airport. Burning permits of any kind are considered temporarily
revoked when wind speeds exceed 10 miles per hour (nine knots).
Permitted burning can resume once the wind speed drops below
the allowable limits.
(12) All fires shall not create smoke that causes a public nuisance,
complaints from neighbors, or a visibility hazard on any form of
transportation route. "Public nuisance" is defined as set forth in
Chapter 398 of the Town Code.
§ 291-5 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 291-5
1:170
(13) All persons who start or maintain a fire shall have the property
owner's permission before doing so.
(14) All fires shall not be left unattended at any time and shall be
supervised by a competent person of at least 18 years of age until
the fire is extinguished.
(15) All permitted fires shall have fire-extinguishing equipment readily
available as may be necessary for the total control of the fire.
(16) When weather conditions warrant, the Fire Chief or designee may
declare a burning moratorium (burning ban) and temporarily
suspend previously issued burning permits for all burning.
(17) The issued burning permit shall be posted or otherwise readily
accessible for inspection by the Fire Chief, Code Official, or police
officer.
(18) A burning permit issued under this section shall require
compliance with all applicable provisions of this section and any
additional special restrictions deemed necessary to ensure public
health and safety.
P. Liability. A person utilizing or maintaining an outdoor fire shall be
responsible for all fire suppression costs and any other liability
resulting from damage caused by the fire.
Q. Right of inspection. The Code Official may inspect any property for the
purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this section.
If the owner or occupant of the premises denies access to the property
for this purpose, a special inspection warrant may be obtained in
accordance with § 66.0119, Wis. Stats.
R. Emergency powers of the Fire Chief. When the Fire Chief or designee
determines that there are environmental conditions likely to produce a
serious threat of fire to life and property, it shall be the duty of the Fire
Chief or designee to impose a burning moratorium (burning ban) and/or
burning restrictions. All bans and/or restrictions shall be lifted when
the environmental conditions change so that a serious threat of fire is
no longer present.
S. Enforcement and penalties.
(1) The Code Official is authorized to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
(2) Any party who has started or maintains any agricultural burn,
bonfire, recreational fire or barbecue pit, prescribed burn, or any
commercial burning as permitted shall pay any and all costs
incurred by the Fire Department for any service-related call as a
result of a fire not in compliance with these requirements, if
deemed necessary by the Fire Chief or designee.
§ 291-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-5
1:171
§ 291-6. Extended fire-suppression services. [Added 10-7-1997]
In the course of its fire-suppression activities, the Grand Chute Fire
Department may find it necessary to acquire goods and services from other
Town departments, other fire departments (some with which the Town does
not have mutual aid agreements), and private contractors and vendors.
These services may be normally sought by the affected property owner or
may be necessary due to the unique circumstances of a fire. These services
are beyond the normal capabilities of the Fire Department and shall be
known as "extended fire-suppression services." Said extended services shall
be subject to billing to property owners.
(3) Any open burning not in compliance with all the terms of this
section may, in addition to any other penalties, result in the
temporary or permanent revocation of the permit(s).
(4) The penalty for violation of any portion of this section shall be a
forfeiture as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond
Schedules. Penalties are doubled for second and subsequent
offenses.
T. Fees. Fees shall be established for the permits performed under this
section and shall be payable to the Town. Such fees shall accompany
each application for such permit. For current fees, refer to the most
current fee schedule.64
A. The Town of Grand Chute shall bill affected property owner(s) for the
following extended fire-suppression services:
(1) Charges from other fire departments with which the Town of Grand
Chute does not have a mutual aid agreement.
(2) Charges for refilling water tanker trucks for properties located
outside the area of the Town Sanitary Districts. The Sanitary
District shall provide the original load of water on the Fire
Department tanker trucks at no charge to the Town.
(3) Equipment charges for:
(a) Equipment owned by Town departments other than the Fire
Department.
(b) Rental equipment from outside vendors.
(4) Refueling service charges and fuel cost for: [Amended
12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
(a) Rental equipment as described in Subsection A(3)(b).
(b) Equipment supplied by mutual/automatic aid fire departments
and fire departments with which the Town does not have a
64.Editor's Note: See now Ch. ATCP 93, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 291-5 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 291-6
1:172
§ 291-7. Tents and other membrane structures. [Added 4-7-2005]
mutual/automatic aid agreement (and does not include any fuel
charges in their equipment charges).65
(5) Charges for private ambulance service on site beyond the
maximum amount of standby time provided at no charge.
(6) Contractual services and supplies to access or secure property
(e.g., locksmith, lumber, etc.).
(7) Standard Town administrative handling charge if the investigation
by the Town Fire Chief concludes that said fire was caused by
negligence.
B. Any dispute over the charges billed by the Fire Department may be
appealed to the Town Board of Supervisors.
A. Tents and air-supported, air-inflated or tensioned membrane structures
having an area in excess of 200 square feet and canopies in excess of
400 square feet shall not be erected, operated or maintained for any
purpose without first obtaining a permit and approval from the Fire
Official.
B. Tents, air-supported, air-inflated or tensioned membrane structures
and canopies shall meet the requirements of current adopted local
code. [Amended 12-21-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-25; 12-20-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-30]
C. Tents, air-supported, air-inflated or tensioned membrane structures
and canopies shall be inspected by the Fire Official or Fire Inspector
prior to occupancy. A tent permit may be granted to persons, firms or
corporations, provided that an application is filed with the Town Fire
Department. The Fire Official may issue a tent permit on being satisfied
that the tent or membrane structure meets the requirements contained
in current adopted local code. Issued permit shall be posted on location.
A fee as prescribed in the Town Fee Schedule shall be paid for required
inspections. [Amended 12-21-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-25;
12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
D. Time requirement. A site inspection must be scheduled with the Fire
Department Inspection Division 48 hours in advance of the event.
Erection of the tent must comply with approved site and floor plans that
may be requested.
E. Failure to follow any portion of this Code may result in double the
permit fee. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
65.Editor's Note: Original § 5.07, Subsection (1)(e), which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30 .
§ 291-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-8
1:173
§ 291-8. Testing of manual fire alarm systems. [Added 8-3-2004;
12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30; 12-4-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-21]
§ 291-9. Key lock box system. [Added 5-19-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-11 (§ 5.10 of the 1997 Code)]
A. Multifamily dwellings, hotels, motels, schools, and commercial
businesses with manual pull station unsupervised local fire alarm
systems, with pull stations accessible to occupants and the general
public, shall have the alarm system tested at least once a month, and a
record of the tests shall be kept on site at a location accessible to the
inspection authority. Exception: Unsupervised (local) or supervised
systems having two or less pull station(s), which are located by the fire
alarm control panel, remote annunciator, or in a different remote
location generally not accessed by the general public, used by alarm
technicians for testing purposes, are exempt from this testing
requirement.
B. All supervised manual fire alarm systems are also exempt from the
monthly testing requirement.
C. No alarm system designed to transmit emergency messages directly to
a central station monitoring agency shall be tested or demonstrated
without first notifying the central station monitoring agency.
D. If any provision of this section is determined to be invalid or
unconstitutional, or if the application of any provision of this subsection
to any person or circumstance is invalid or unconstitutional, such
invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the above provisions or
applications of this section which can be given effect without the invalid
or unconstitutional provision or its application.
A. Where required.
(1) The Code Official shall require a key lock box to be installed on a
structure where immediate access is necessary to verify the
existence of a fire or other emergency. This shall include, but not be
limited to:
(a) Commercial or industrial structures protected by an automatic
alarm system or automatic suppression system.
(b) Multifamily residential structures that have restricted access
through locked doors and have a common corridor for access
to living units.
(c) Nursing care facilities.
(2) As of July 1, 2009, all newly constructed commercial, industrial,
and residential multifamily structures shall have a key lock box
installed at time of construction, except for those properties listed
in Subsection C.
§ 291-8 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 291-9
1:174
(3) All newly constructed structures subject to this section shall have
the key lock box installed and operational prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.66
B. Retroactivity. As of January 1, 2010, all commercial, industrial, and
residential multifamily structures to which Subsection A(1)(a) to (c) are
applicable shall have a key lock box installed, except for those
properties listed in Subsection C.
C. Nonapplicability to particular dwellings.
(1) This section shall not apply to owner-occupied one- and two-family
dwellings and owner-occupied condominiums.
(2) This section shall not apply to duplexes on a residentially zoned
parcel.
(3) Owners of single- and two-family occupancies are encouraged to
participate voluntarily utilizing a residential security box.
D. Key availability.
(1) The responsible party of a structure required to have a key lock box
shall, at all times, keep a key in the lock box that will allow for
access to the structure.
(2) The key lock box shall contain at least the following:
(a) Key(s) to locked points of egress, whether in the interior or
exterior of such structures.
(b) Key(s) to any other areas as required by the Code Official.
(3) All keys shall be labeled so as to be easily identifiable.
E. Type of key lock box. The Code Official shall designate the type of key
lock box system to be implemented within the Town and shall have the
authority to require all structures to use the designated system.
F. Modification of rules and regulations. The Code Official shall be
authorized to implement rules and regulations for the use of the lock
box system.
G. Alert decals. Alert decals, approved by the Code Official, to alert fire
companies of the presence of security features covered by this section
will be displayed on any outside doors or windows as designated by the
Code Official.
H. Cost. The cost of purchasing and installing, along with any cost
associated with implementation of the program at a specific property,
will be born by the responsible party.
66.Editor's Note: Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30.
§ 291-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-9
1:175
§ 291-10. False alarms. [Added 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
See Chapter 185, Alarm Systems, Article I, False Alarms.
§ 291-11. Interfering with firefighting. [Added 12-20-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-30]
Section 941.12, Wis. Stats., is adopted by reference and incorporated in this
section as if fully set forth herein.
§ 291-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
due conviction thereof, forfeit an amount as prescribed in the Uniform
Forfeiture and Bond Schedules for each such offense, together with the
costs of prosecution, and in default of the payment of such forfeiture and
costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail until said forfeiture and costs of
prosecution are paid, but not to exceed 30 days.
§ 291-13. Appeals process. [Added 12-4-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-21]
I. Installation.
(1) The key lock box shall be mounted at or near the main entrance or
such other location required by the Code Official.
(2) The lock box shall be located at a height of not less than four feet
and not more than six feet above final grade.
(3) If the structure is equipped with a fire alarm system, the Grand
Chute Fire Department recommends that the key box have a key
box tamper switch connected to the fire alarm control panel.
Tampering with or opening of the box should produce a supervisory
signal.
J. Security padlocks. When a property is protected by a locked fence or
gate and where immediate access to the property is necessary for
lifesaving or fire-fighting purposes, the Code Official may require a
security padlock to be installed.
K. Security caps. When a structure is protected by an automatic sprinkler
system or standpipe system and the Fire Department connection is
exposed to undue vandalism, the Code Official may require that a Fire
Department connection security cap(s) be installed.
L. Violations. Any violation of this section is hereby declared to be an
offense punishable pursuant to § 291-12. Continued violation may result
in revocation of the certificate of occupancy by the Building Official.
A. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 68.16 the Town expressly opts out of the
administrative review procedures contained in Ch. 68, Wis. Stats. The
§ 291-9 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 291-13
1:176
Town hereafter provides its own alternative due process procedure for
administrative review.
B. If an application for a permit is denied, or a permit issued under this
Chapter 291 is suspended, revoked, or nonrenewed (the initial
decision), the applicant or permit holder may appeal said initial
decision by submitting a letter to the Town Clerk, within 14 days of the
initial decision, requesting an appeal, and stating the grounds therefor.
C. If an appeal is timely requested, the Town Board shall schedule and
hold a hearing. The Town Clerk shall serve the appellant with notice of
said hearing date, time, and location, by mail at the appellant's address
listed on the permit application or by personal service at least 10 days
before the hearing date.
D. If an appeal is not timely requested, the initial decision become binding
on the applicant/permit holder.
E. Said hearing and final decision shall be processed as follows:
(1) The Town Board shall regulate the hearing process and issue a final
decision on the appeal. No Board members may participate that
participated in making the initial decision. The Town Board may
affirm, reverse, or modify the initial decision.
(2) The Town may cause the proceedings to be taken by a stenographer
or a recording device, the expense of which shall be borne by the
Town, which shall be transcribed if the final decision is appealed to
Circuit Court.
(3) If no stereographer or recording device is utilized, the Town Clerk
shall make minutes of the proceeding including reason(s) for the
Town Official's original decision, reason(s) the appellant appealed,
and reason(s) for the Town Board's final decision.
(4) The Town Official(s) who issued the initial decision shall testify
under oath, and present evidence, in support of his or her decision.
The appellant, or his or her attorney, may cross examine the
person(s) who issued the initial decision.
(5) The appellant may testify under oath, and present evidence, in
support of his/her position. The Town Official(s) who issued the
initial decision, or Town attorney, may cross examine the appellant,
and the Town may also present rebuttal testimony/evidence to the
testimony/evidence of the appellant.
(6) The Town Board shall close the hearing, then make an oral final
decision at the hearing or may issue a written final decision within
10 days of said hearing, stating the reason(s) for its decision.
F. The party aggrieved by the final decision may appeal the final decision
to the Outagamie County Circuit Court by certiorari within 30 days of
service of the final decision. Service of the final decision is complete
§ 291-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-13
1:177
Chapter 295
FIREWORKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 291.
Nuisances — See Ch. 398.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 409.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 415.
§ 295-1. Definition.67
The term "fireworks" as used in this chapter shall be defined as stated in
§ 167.10, Wis. Stats.
§ 295-2. Sale or disposal of fireworks.68
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to offer for sale at
retail or to sell at retail, to loan, barter, deliver or give away, or in any
other way to dispose of within the Town of Grand Chute any fireworks as
defined in § 295-1 of this chapter except to holders of permits as provided
in § 295-4 of this chapter. A seller's permit may be granted to persons,
firms or corporations, provided that an application is filed with the Town
Fire Department. The Fire Official may issue a seller's permit, which shall
be posted on location, on being satisfied that the structure meets the
requirements contained in current adopted local code. A fee as prescribed
in the Town Fee Schedule shall be paid for required inspections.
§ 295-3. Purchasing or using fireworks.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to purchase at retail,
use, fire, set off, discharge, or set in motion or to ignite within the limits of
the Town of Grand Chute any fireworks as described in § 295-1, except as
provided in § 295-4.
upon the issuance of a final decision orally at the hearing, or upon the
Clerk mailing a written final decision of the Board, by certified mail
to applicant/permit holder at the address contained within the mostrecent
permit application.
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 291-13 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 295-4
1:178
§ 295-4. Permit issued by Fire Chief.69
Special permission may be granted to persons, firms, or corporations for
the purchase of fireworks as described in § 295-1 and their use at a public
gathering or special event (see § 456-1), provided that an application is filed
with the Town Clerk setting forth the name of the applicant and the time
and place of the exhibition. The Town Clerk shall forthwith notify the Chief
of the Town Fire Department of such application for special permission to
use fireworks, and the Town Fire Chief, on being satisfied that the applicant
will use the fireworks in a public exhibition and being further satisfied that
all reasonable precautions will be exercised with regard to protection of the
lives and property of all persons, may issue a permit which shall permit the
use of fireworks at the time and place and in the manner set out in the
application.
§ 295-5. Violations and penalties.70
Chapter 310
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 291.
Fireworks — See Ch. 295.
Nuisances — See Ch. 398.
Sewers — See Ch. 440.
Waste management — See Ch. 520.
A. A first violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules,
together with the costs of prosecution, and on default of the payment of
any such fine and/or costs of prosecution such person shall be
committed to the county jail of Outagamie County until such fine and
costs are paid, but not to exceed 90 days.
B. Any person violating this chapter who shall previously have been
convicted of a violation of this chapter shall, upon proof and conviction
thereof, forfeit an amount as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and
Bond Schedules, together with the costs of prosecution, and on default
of the payment of any such fine and costs of prosecution, or either of
them, such convicted person shall be committed to and confined within
the county jail of Outagamie County, Wisconsin, until such fine and
costs of prosecution are paid, but not to exceed six months.
C. Each day of violation under this chapter shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 295-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-5
1:179
§ 310-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CLEANUP — An operation where any solid, liquid, vaporous, or gaseous
substance that creates a known, potential or suspected material, safety or
health hazard, public nuisance, or a deleterious effect upon the environment
is removed, contained, incinerated, neutralized, stabilized, cleared up, or
in any manner processed, handled or disposed of with the primary goal of
restoring the site to its pre-incident condition or, secondarily, to make the
site harmless to people and the environment. This language is consistent
with the definition of "cleanup operation" in 29 CFR 1910.120.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE — A response effort by trained employees from
outside the immediate incident area or by other designated responders to
a known, potential or suspected substance release that results, or is likely
to result, in an uncontrolled release of a known, potential or suspected
material, safety, health or environmental hazard. The intent of defining
"emergency response" in this chapter is to allow trained personnel to
implement and coordinate assessment, containment, cleanup and
restoration operations of substance releases within an incident command
system in accordance with 29 CFR 1910.120.
ENTITY — Each and every individual, agent, firm, company, partnership,
corporation, business establishment, or other enterprise.
STRICT LIABILITY — Liability without fault. Specifically, each and every
entity responsible for containment of a solid, liquid, vaporous or gaseous
substance at the point of release into the ecosystem of the Town of Grand
Chute, including owners, controllers, and possessors of those substances,
shall assume joint and several responsibility for pecuniary liabilities of those
releases for containment, cleanup, restoration expenses and associated
administrative fees, legal fees, and court costs. The intent of incorporating
strict liability in this chapter is to reject matters of care, negligence,
knowledge, ignorance, good faith, bad faith, or any other justification as
a cause or reason for being a responsible entity in a substance release
incident.
§ 310-2. Emergency response.
The release into the ecosystem of the Town of Grand Chute of any solid,
liquid, vaporous, or gaseous substance that creates a known, potential
or suspected material, safety, health or environmental hazard or public
nuisance within the Town of Grand Chute, except those occurring during
sanctioned waste disposal, hazardous material collection or landfill
activities, shall be considered such a hazard, unless determined otherwise
by the on-scene incident commander, and be a condition that warrants an
emergency response.
§ 295-5 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 310-3
1:180
§ 310-3. Containment, cleanup and restoration.
The entity responsible for containment of a solid, liquid, vaporous or
gaseous substance at the point of release into the ecosystem of the Town
of Grand Chute, including owners, controllers, and possessors of those
substances, except those specifically sanctioned to perform waste disposal,
hazardous material collection or landfill activities, which presents a known,
potential or suspected material, safety, health, or environmental hazard
or public nuisance shall begin immediate actions to clean and clean up
the offending substance and restore the site to its original condition upon
direction of any emergency management, law enforcement or Fire
Department representative having jurisdictional authority. Should an entity
fail to comply for any reason or be incapable of completing the requirements
of this section in a time frame that is acceptable to the incident commander,
emergency management, law enforcement or Fire Department
representative having jurisdictional authority, such public official(s) may
order containment, cleanup, and site restoration actions to be taken by
public or private agencies.
§ 310-4. Strict liability.
No person or entity shall release into the ecosystem of the Town of Grand
Chute any solid, liquid, vaporous or gaseous substance that creates a
known, potential or suspected material, safety, health or environmental
hazard or public nuisance within the Town of Grand Chute, except those
occurring during sanctioned waste disposal, hazardous material collection
or landfill activities. The entity responsible for containment of a solid,
liquid, vaporous or gaseous substance at the point of release into the
ecosystem of the Town of Grand Chute, including owners, controllers, and
possessors of those substances, shall be strictly liable, jointly and severally,
for all reasonable and necessary expenses, as determined by the Town of
Grand Chute Fire Department or the Outagamie County Local Emergency
Planning Committee (LEPC), for those releases, per § 310-3, plus legal fees
and court costs associated with enforcement and collection activities under
this chapter.
§ 310-5. Reimbursement.
A. Agencies involved in the containment, cleanup and restoration of
substance releases shall be allowed to recoup reasonable and necessary
expenses for those activities, including but not limited to personnel
hours, equipment hours, supplies, equipment losses, administrative
costs, legal fees and court costs, per § 310-3. Agencies seeking
reimbursement under this section shall develop charge-back criteria for
substance release response operations and submit that criteria to the
Outagamie County Local Emergency Planning Committee (LEPC) for
claims review determinations. Agencies seeking reimbursement under
this section shall submit claims stating their expenses to the
responsible entity with a copy to the Outagamie County LEPC within 30
days of the incident date. Claims for reimbursement received after 30
§ 310-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-5
1:181
§ 310-6. Site access.
Access to any site, public or private, where there is a known, potential or
suspected substance release will be provided to the incident commander,
emergency management, law enforcement or Fire Department
representative having jurisdictional authority for purposes of implementing
and coordinating assessment, containment, cleanup, and restoration
operations.
§ 310-7. Public protection.
Should any substance release occur that indicates a material, safety, health
or environmental hazard to the public or any person or persons at, near,
or around the incident site and the situation appears to be so critical
that immediate action must be taken to protect safety, health, or the
environment, the incident commander or emergency management, law
enforcement or Fire Department representative having jurisdictional
authority on the scene may order an evacuation of the area or take other
appropriate measures as determined necessary. Personnel involved in the
containment, cleanup, and site restoration of substance releases per § 310-3
shall be trained to the standards required for their functional
responsibilities, except that such personnel shall be allowed to perform
necessary defensive actions upon the release of substances per § 310-3
to a point where such releases are controlled, contained or otherwise not
presenting an unreasonable safety, health or environmental risk and to a
point where personnel health and safety of the responders are not placed at
unnecessary risk.
days of the incident date may not be reviewed or approved by the
Outagamie County LEPC, except in cases of protracted site restorations
or extenuating circumstances, as determined by the Outagamie County
LEPC.
B. The Outagamie County LEPC shall review claims submitted in
accordance with this section and determine those expenses that were
reasonable and necessary under § 310-3. The agencies seeking
reimbursement shall provide those entities that are strictly liable with
written notice of final determinations under this section. If an individual
or entity receiving notice objects to the amount of claimed expenses,
that individual or entity may petition the Outagamie County LEPC in
writing within 10 days of receiving such notice that the Outagamie
County LEPC review its determinations. Such request must state
specific objections to claimed expenses and offer concise rationale for
those objections. The Outagamie County LEPC may modify its
determination and shall notify the entity of the results of its review. The
Outagamie County LEPC shall be allowed to recoup expenses for
processing claims under this section. The entity that is strictly liable
under § 310-3 shall make direct reimbursement to each agency that
submitted a claim in accordance with this section.
§ 310-5 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 310-8
1:182
§ 310-8. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Chapter 315
HOTELS AND MOTELS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Finance and taxation — See Ch. 57.
§ 315-1. Purpose.
A. Enforcement. The chief law enforcement official or his designated
representative of jurisdiction shall have authority to issue citations for
violations of this chapter. Citations shall be in a form that is in
accordance with § 66.0113, Wis. Stats.
B. Forfeitures. Entities that fail to comply with this chapter shall be
subject to citations, per Subsection A of this section, and to forfeitures
in accordance with the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules, in
addition to reimbursements per § 310-5 of this chapter.
C. Civil liability. Any entity in violation of this chapter shall be liable to the
Town of Grand Chute for any expenses incurred by the Town of Grand
Chute for loss or damage sustained by the Town of Grand Chute or its
agents by reason of such violation, including legal fees and court costs
for enforcement and collection under this chapter.
D. Obstruction of agents. No person shall obstruct, hinder or delay the
Town of Grand Chute or any of its agents in the enforcement of an
order, rule, regulation or plan issued pursuant to the authority
contained in this chapter.
A. The Town through the Town of Grand Chute Police Department has
determined that various hotels/motels within the Town have accounted
for an excessive number of police calls, including prostitution activity,
drug trafficking, other crimes, and disorderly conduct disturbances.
B. The Town through the Town of Grand Chute Police Department has
identified from past experience that working with area hotels/motels in
a collaborative effort provides a more effective means of addressing
issues involving prostitution activity, drug trafficking, other crimes, and
disorderly conduct disturbances.
C. The creation of this hotel/motel ordinance by the Town of Grand Chute
will provide improved accountability by owners/operators of hotel/
motel businesses with a focus on improving health and safety issues for
guests, hotel/motel employees, and the Grand Chute community, by
requiring owners/operators to obtain licenses to operate hotels/motels
in the Town, by imposing penalties for inappropriate activities, and by
§ 310-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-1
1:183
§ 315-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise expressly stated, the
following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed
to them by this section:
CALLS FOR SERVICE (CFS) — Includes, but is not limited to, any and all
calls to emergency services (police, fire, and/or medical) that result in a
representative being dispatched or directed to the hotel/motel. This shall
include any calls for service within the surrounding neighborhood that,
through information or investigation, can be traced to the hotel/motel staff
and/or registered guest(s) and/or visitor(s). Calls for service also include
any self-initiated activity and/or investigation based on the observation(s) of
an emergency services representative.
DRUG-RELATED ARRESTS — Include, but are not limited to, arrests that
involve the manufacture, cultivation, importation, transportation,
possession, possession for sale, sale, furnishing, administering, or giving
away, or providing a place to use or fortification of a place involving, any
controlled drug, narcotic or drug paraphernalia.
HOTEL/MOTEL — A building or group of buildings in which the public may
obtain accommodations for a consideration including, without limitation,
such establishments as inns, motels, hotels, tourist homes, tourist houses or
courts, lodging houses, rooming houses, summer camps, apartment hotels,
resort lodges and cabins and any other buildings in which accommodations
are available to the public, except accommodations rented for a continuous
period of more than one month and accommodations furnished by any
hospitals, sanitariums, or nursing homes, or by corporations or associations
organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or educational
purposes provided that no part of the net earnings of such corporations and
associations inured to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.
HOTEL/MOTEL OPERATION — The occupancy of any guestroom or use of
any hotel/motel facility regardless of compensation or remuneration.
LICENSING COMMITTEE — The committee of individuals appointed by the
Town Board from time to time for issuing licenses authorized by the Town
of Grand Chute Ordinances.[Amended 9-3-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-16]
MANAGER/AGENT — Any person who, in connection with the activities of a
hotel/motel, manages the hotel/motel business's operations, including such
things as, but not limited to, the collection of rental charges, issuing of keys,
direction of personnel, assigning of rooms to guests, handling guest affairs,
and overseeing security. The term shall also include resident manager and
assistant manager.
OWNER/OPERATOR — Any person, firm, association, partnership, limited
liability company, or corporation, which is the record owner, part owner,
providing an opportunity for owners/operators to mitigate those
penalties by voluntary cooperation with the Town Police Department.
[Amended 9-3-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-16]
§ 315-1 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 315-2
1:184
lessee, receiver, sublessee, or franchisee of real property as listed on the
last equalized assessment roll as maintained by the Town of Grand Chute
Assessor at which a hotel/motel business is operated, which offers and
accepts payment for rooms, guest rooms, sleeping accommodations, or
board and lodging, and retains the right of access to, and control of, the
dwelling unit on behalf of himself/herself or any entity listed above.
PROSTITUTION-RELATED ARRESTS — Includes, but is not limited to,
arrests that involve prostitution or prostitution-related crimes, in violation
of Wisconsin Statutes, including, but not limited to, § 944.30, Prostitution,
§ 944.31, Patronizing Prostitutes, § 944.32, Soliciting Prostitutes, § 944.33
Pandering, or § 944.34 Keeping Place of Prostitution, and Town of Grand
Chute municipal ordinances adopting the aforementioned state statutes.
§ 315-3. License to operate required. [Amended 9-3-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-16]
No hotel/motel shall operate in the Town without a license issued to the
owner/operator by the Town Board pursuant to this chapter. Licenses shall
be valid for one year, from July 1 through June 30 of the following year, and
shall require renewal on an annual basis. Any hotel or motel in operation
without a valid license issued pursuant to this chapter shall cease
operations.
§ 315-4. Application for license. [Amended 9-3-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-16]
A. The annual license to operate a hotel/motel shall be applied for to the
Town Clerk by the owner/operator of each hotel/motel.
B. Owner/operator seeking issuance or renewal of a license by July 1 shall
submit their application by April 15 with the applicable license fee, as
identified in the Town's fee schedule.
C. All owner/operators applying to the Town Clerk for a license to operate
a hotel/motel shall file with the Clerk a sworn application on forms
provided by the Town and containing information as follows:
(1) Current Wisconsin Seller's license and federal ID number.
(2) The name of the owner/operator, corporation, partnership, limited
liability company, if any, of the hotel/motel; the name and address of
its agent for service.
(3) The name, address, and phone number of the manager/agent.
(4) The trade name, address, and phone number of the hotel/motel,
and the emergency contact phone information for the hotel/motel.
(5) Proof of liability insurance, including the carrier, policy number,
agent's name, address and phone number or a statement of selfinsurance.
§ 315-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-4
1:185
§ 315-5. Report of changes to application. [Amended 9-3-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-16]
Every owner/operator of a hotel/motel shall report any change in the
information upon which the license has been granted, including but not
limited to any change in the manager/agent or, owner/operator to the Town
Clerk in writing within five business days after the change has occurred.
A change in the information on the application is subject to review by the
Licensing Committee and may be grounds for suspension or revocation of
the license to operate.
§ 315-6. Display of license. [Amended 9-3-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-16]
The owner/operator of a hotel/motel shall display the license to operate in
an open and conspicuous place on the premises.
§ 315-7. Nontransferability.
(6) Proof of an annual license issued pursuant to § 254.64, Wis. Stats.,
as well as an inspection report completed by an environmental
health specialist/sanitarian, certifying that the facility is in
compliance with Outagamie County public health requirements.
(7) Proof of compliance with Town of Grand Chute Municipal Code,
§ 57-4, Hotel and motel room tax.
(8) Any such other information as the Town Board requires.
D. All applications will be reviewed by the Licensing Committee. Upon
review, applications will be forwarded to the Town Board with a
recommendation for approval or denial. The Town Board will receive
the recommendation to approve or deny the license and take action as
appropriate at a regular meeting of the Town Board.
A. Each license to operate issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
separate and distinct from all others and shall not be transferable from
the owner/operator to whom it was issued to any other owner/operator.
[Amended 9-3-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-16]
B. Whenever an owner/operator sells or transfers title to, or assigns the
lease of or subleases, a hotel/motel, the owner/operator shall notify the
Town Clerk in writing within five business days of such transfer.
C. When a change of operator occurs at an existing hotel/motel, the new
operator shall apply for a license to operate within 10 business days of
opening of escrow. If the prior operator's license to operate the hotel/
motel was denied or revoked, a provisional license to operate may be
issued with special conditions designated by the Town Clerk.
[Amended 9-3-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-16]
§ 315-4 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 315-8
1:186
§ 315-8. Complaints seeking suspension, revocation, and
nonrenewal of license. [Amended 9-3-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-16]
§ 315-9. Grounds for denial, suspension, revocation or nonrenewal
of license. [Amended 9-3-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-16]
The license to operate a hotel/motel may be denied, suspended from five to
30 days, revoked, or nonrenewed for any of the following reasons:
A. The Town Chairman, Town Clerk, or Chief of Police may file with the
Licensing Committee and Town Clerk a written complaint against any
owner/operator holding a license to operate a hotel/motel in the Town
of Grand Chute at any time that said license is in existence, seeking
suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal of the license.
B. The complaint shall set forth the factual grounds for seeking
suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal as such grounds are set forth in
§ 315-9 below. A copy of the complaint shall be served by certified mail,
return receipt requested, or personal service, on the owner/operator at
the owner/operator's address shown on the most recent application for
license on file pursuant to this chapter.
C. The owner/operator shall file, by mail or personal delivery, a written
response to the complaint with the Licensing Committee within 14 days
of receipt. Failure to file an answer shall render the allegations in the
complaint deemed true for purposes of imposition of penalties.
D. The Licensing Committee shall make a written recommendation to the
Town Board. The Town Board shall make a decision regarding
suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal, and issue written notice of the
decision to the owner/operator.
E. The owner/operator may appeal the decision under § 315-10 below, and
imposition of the penalty determined by the decision shall be stayed
pending completion of the appeal process.
A. The owner/operator or manager/agent has multiple criminal
misdemeanor convictions that relate to the hotel/motel or has been
convicted of a felony that relates to the licensed activity. This
subsection shall not apply to corporations, limited liability companies,
or partnerships, but shall apply to all officers, directors of any such
corporations and members of any such limited liability companies, and
partners of any such partnerships.
B. The owner/operator or manager/agent provides incomplete, false, or
misleading information on the application, or pursuant to background
checks and questions, if any, submitted on behalf of the Town to either
the owner/operator or the manager/agent.
C. Delinquent taxes, assessment, and claims. No new license or license
renewal shall be issued under this chapter and any current license may
be suspended or revoked for any premises, owner/operator, manager/
§ 315-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-9
1:187
agent, or person for which or for whom taxes, assessments, or other
claims due to the Town, Sanitary District, State of Wisconsin,
Outagamie County, or bank are delinquent and not paid. Included
within the definition of delinquent taxes, delinquent assessments, or
other delinquent payments due to the Town, Sanitary District, State
of Wisconsin, Outagamie County or bank shall be any delinquency
(unpaid) for special assessments, personal property taxes, real estate
taxes, hotel/motel taxes, failure to pay any adjudicated fines or
penalties, failure to pay current fees or moneys due to the Town,
Sanitary District, State of Wisconsin, Outagamie County or bank of any
kind or nature, etc.
D. The owner/operator, manager/agent, or hotel/motel property has an
unabated notice of violation of the Town of Grand Chute Municipal
Code in excess of 30 days.
E. Such other relevant facts as the Licensing Committee may discover or
deem applicable or necessary in the course of the review of the
application of, or complaint against, the owner/operator, manager/
agent, or hotel/motel such as:
(1) Incidence of drug-related CFS, or arrests;
(2) Incidence of prostitution-related CFS, or arrests;
(3) Incidence of multiple ordinance violations; and
(4) Excessive number or nature of CFS (Appendix A).71
F. Noncompliance with federal or state law or Town of Grand Chute
Municipal Code.
G. Good cause in the discretion of the Town Board showing that the
operation of the hotel/motel is such that has, is, or will negatively
impact the health, safety and/or welfare of its guests, the residents or
businesses of the surrounding community, or the Town due to any of the
foregoing factors listed above.
H. In processing a revocation, suspension or nonrenewal, a representative
of the Licensing Committee shall prepare an investigative report that
details the circumstances that led to the recommendation for
suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal. It may include any or all of the
foregoing factors, or following factors that are applicable:
(1) Frequency of violations, arrests, or CFS;
(2) Seriousness of violations, arrests, or CFS in relation to the threat or
impact upon public health, safety or welfare;
(3) History of the violations, arrests, or CFS;
71.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 315-9 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 315-9
1:188
§ 315-10. Appeal process; notice of hearing.
§ 315-11. Effective date of decision; posting of notice.
(4) Good-faith efforts taken by the responsible party to correct, reduce
and/or alleviate violations, arrests, or CFS;
(5) Any activity, action or effort taken by the responsible party to
obstruct or interfere with correction of the problem;
(6) The impact of the violations, arrests, or CFS on the surrounding
property and community;
(7) The financial impact to the Town;
(8) Factors shown on Appendix A.72
A. If the license is denied, suspended, revoked, or nonrenewed by decision
of the Town Board, the Town Clerk shall provide the owner/operator a
letter stating the reasons for such denial, suspension, revocation, or
nonrenewal. [Amended 9-3-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-16]
B. Any owner/operator may appeal the above Town Board decision by
submitting a letter requesting an appeal to the Town Clerk within 14
days of receipt of the notice of decision. The letter should state in detail
the grounds for requesting reversal of the decision and shall be signed
by the owner/operator. The Clerk shall submit the letter and appeal
request to the Licensing Committee for further review.
C. If the Licensing Committee recommends reversal of the decision, the
reversal recommendation shall be forwarded to the Town Board for
consideration. If the Licensing Committee recommends upholding the
decision or the Town Board rejects the Licensing Committee's
recommendation for reversal, the owner/operator may request a
hearing before the Town Board.
D. The request for hearing before the Town Board shall be made in writing
to the Town Clerk within 14 days of notification of the Town Board's
final decision, and the hearing will be conducted before the Town Board
within 30 days of receipt of such request. Notice of the hearing will be
given to the owner/operator by certified mail sent to the address of the
owner/operator shown on the owner/operator application for license.
[Amended 9-3-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-16]
E. The Town Board has ultimate authority to affirm or reverse its original
decision to deny, suspend, revoke, or nonrenew the license following
the hearing, and shall provide the reasons for such denial to the owner/
operator in writing by regular mail sent to the owner/operator's address
shown on the application within 10 days of the hearing. [Amended
9-3-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-16]
72.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 315-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-11
1:189
§ 315-12. Removal or tampering with posted notice. [Amended
9-3-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-16]
A posted notice of revocation, suspension or nonrenewal of a license to
operate may be removed only by an authorized Town official. Any removal,
covering, defacing, altering or tampering by unauthorized persons may be
prosecuted as a misdemeanor under § 946.72(2), Wis. Stats.
§ 315-13. Surrender of license following revocation or suspension.
[Amended 9-3-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-16]
Whenever a license to operate has been revoked or suspended by the Town,
the operator of the hotel/motel for which such license was issued shall
surrender such license to the Town Clerk, or his/her designee, forthwith.
The hotel/motel operation shall cease all operations immediately following
of the posting of the notice of revocation or suspension of the license to
operate.
§ 315-14. Violations and penalties; voluntary mitigation.
A. Any revocation, suspension or nonrenewal of a license shall not take
effect for a period of 30 days following the first decision of the Town
Board, during which time any party aggrieved by this decision may
appeal to the Circuit Court for Outagamie County pursuant to
procedures set forth in Ch. 68, Wis. Stats. [Amended 9-3-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-16]
B. Upon confirmation and final decision issued by the Town Board, the
Chief of Police or his/her designee shall post a copy or copies of the
notice of suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal of license to operate at
the hotel/motel, following expiration of the thirty-day time limit set
forth below if no appeal is taken under Ch. 68, Wis. Stats. [Amended
9-3-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-16]
C. The notice shall not be posted if an appeal is taken under Ch. 68, Wis.
Stats. until such appeal process has concluded. Suspension, revocation,
or nonrenewal shall be stayed pending a decision by the Circuit Court,
and may then be imposed by the Town Board in accordance with the
Circuit Court decision.
A. It is unlawful to operate a hotel/motel without a valid license to operate
or to fail to comply with any of the requirements established by this
chapter. Violations of this chapter shall be subject to enforcement by
any and all remedies listed in Grand Chute Municipal Code.
Furthermore, this chapter may be enforced by injunctive relief
prosecuted through the Circuit Court for Outagamie County in the
event the hotel/motel owner/operator fails to comply with directives to
cease operations issued by Town officials declaring the hotel/motel to
be in violation of this chapter. [Amended 9-3-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-16]
§ 315-11 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 315-14
1:190
§ 315-15. Reissuance of license after suspension, revocation, or
nonrenewal. [Amended 9-3-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-16]
B. In addition to the foregoing remedies, owner/operators shall be subject
to civil forfeitures of $1,000 per day for operating a hotel/motel without
a license, each day being a separate offense. The Town Board may bring
action in the name of the Town against the owner/operator to reduce
such forfeitures to a civil judgment for purposes of collection from the
owner/operator in addition to any other remedy available at law or in
equity. [Amended 9-3-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-16]
C. The owner/operator may mitigate penalties authorized herein, and may
also mitigate and delay imposition of, or shorten the term of, the
suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal pursuant to such conditions as
recommended by the Town Police Department and approved by the
Licensing Committee for recommendation to the Town Board for final
approval.
A. A license that is suspended shall not be reissued until the term of
suspension has expired, which shall be a minimum of five days and a
maximum of 30 days, unless the period of suspension is either delayed
or shortened by the Town Board due to voluntary mitigation action by
the owner/operator, and such mitigation action is approved by the Town
Board.
B. A license to operate that is revoked shall not be reissued for a period of
one year from the date of such revocation, unless the period of
revocation is either delayed or shortened by the Town Board due to
voluntary mitigation action by the owner/operator, and such mitigation
action is approved by the Town Board.
C. A license to operate that is nonrenewed shall not be reissued for a
period of one year from the date of such nonrenewal unless the period
of nonrenewal is either delayed or shortened by the Town Board due to
voluntary mitigation action by the owner/operator, and such mitigation
action is approved by the Town Board.
D. If there is a transfer or sale of the hotel/motel or the real estate on
which the hotel/motel is operated, at the time the license is either under
suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal, the license may not be reissued
if the following apply:
(1) The new owner/operator or manager/agent is related to the former
owner/operator by blood, adoption, or marriage, or common
ownership or control.
(2) The new owner/operator or manager/agent held a business or
financial interest in the previous licensed hotel/motel business, real
estate at which the hotel/motel business is operated, or equipment
utilized by the hotel/motel business.
§ 315-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-15
1:191
§ 315-16. Severability.
It is declared to be the intention of the Town Board that the sections,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this chapter are severable,
and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this chapter
shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court
of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of
the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this
chapter.
Chapter 317
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 220.
Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 291.
Nuisances — See Ch. 398.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 423.
Sewers — See Ch. 440.
Water — See Ch. 523.
§ 317-1. Title and scope.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the
"Minimum Standards Housing Code, Town of Grand Chute." This chapter
establishes minimum standards governing the condition and maintenance of
dwellings; establishes minimum standards governing utilities and facilities
and other conditions essential to make dwellings safe, sanitary and fit
for human habitation; fixes certain responsibilities and duties of owners,
operators and occupants of dwellings and dwelling units; authorizes the
inspection of dwellings and the condemnation of dwellings unfit for human
habitation; and provides penalties for violations.
§ 317-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to and through June 30, 1974,
to all buildings or portions thereof used, or designed or intended to be
used, for human habitation. Thereafter, Chapter 220, Article II, Building
(3) The former owner/operator retains a business or financial interest
in the hotel/motel business, or real estate at which the hotel/motel
business is operated or equipment used by the hotel/motel
business.
(4) The new owner/operator's acquisition of the hotel/motel business
did not involve an arm's-length transaction consisting of an openmarket
sale in which the former owner/operator is willing but not
obligated to sell and the new owner/operator is willing, not
obligated, to buy.
§ 315-15 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 317-2
1:192
Regulations, shall apply to all construction and maintenance requirements
of new dwellings within the Town of Grand Chute, except that this chapter
shall remain in full force and effect to maintain and enforce the standards
set forth herein, or in Chapter 220, Article II, as governed by the date of
construction of any dwelling or dwelling unit.
§ 317-3. Definitions and word usage.
Certain words or terms in this chapter are defined for the purpose hereof as
follows. Words used in the present tense include the future; words used in
the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number
includes the plural, and the plural number the singular; and the word
"dwelling," "dwelling unit" or "premises" includes the words "or any part
thereof."
APPROVED — Approved by the Building Inspector.
BASEMENT — A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground
and having 1/2 or more of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average
grade of the adjoining ground.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Inspector for the Town of Grand Chute.
DWELLING — Any building or structure, or part thereof, which is used or
intended to be used for living or sleeping.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and
forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to
be used for living, sleeping and cooking.
EXTERMINATION — The control or elimination of insects, rodents or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food, by poisoning, spraying,
fumigating or trapping, by blocking their access to a dwelling, or by any
other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by a health
officer of the Town of Grand Chute pursuant to the appropriate ordinances.
FIRST STORY — That story of a dwelling at or next above the average grade
of adjoining ground.
GARBAGE — The animal and/or vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be
used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms,
water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers or communicating
corridors, closets and storage spaces.
HALF BASEMENT or LOWER LEVEL — A portion of a building located
partly underground but having less than 1/2 of its clear floor-to-ceiling
height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
INFESTATION — The presence, within or around a dwelling, or in or near
waste disposal containers, of any insects, rodents or other pests.
§ 317-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-3
1:193
LIGHT HOUSEKEEPING — The use of a room or rooms for combined living,
sleeping and dining purposes by individuals or groups of persons having
part of a dwelling such as stairs or halls in common but living independently
of each other and doing their cooking upon the premises, whether in the
same or in other units, as distinguished from a dwelling unit or apartment
having normal kitchen and toilet facilities.
LIGHT HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — The room or rooms occupied for light
housekeeping purposes by one individual or group of persons living
independently of other such individuals or groups.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling
units.
OCCUPANT — Any person living, sleeping, cooking or eating in or having
possession or use of a dwelling unit.
OPERATOR — Any legally responsible person who has charge, care or
control of a building or part thereof in which dwelling units are leased or
let.
OWNER — Any legally responsible person who, alone or jointly or severally
with others:
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, corporation, association or
partnership.
PLUMBING — Water pipes, mechanical garbage disposal units, waste pipes,
water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers and clothes-washing machines,
lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, catch basins, drains, vents and other
similar supplied fixtures, including all connections to water or sewer lines.
ROOMING HOUSE — Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling, containing
one or more rooming units in which space is let by the owner or operator.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping but not for cooking
or eating purposes.
RUBBISH — Combustible or noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage, and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood,
coal, coke and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes,
wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, leaves, tin
cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery or dust.
SUPPLIED — Paid for, arranged, furnished, or provided by or under control
of the owner or operator.
Has legal title to any dwelling with or without actual possession
thereof; or
A.
Has charge, care or control of any dwelling as owner or agent of the
owner or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee
or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus
representing the owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of
this chapter to the same extent as if he were the owner.
B.
§ 317-3 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 317-4
1:194
§ 317-4. Compliance required.
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling for the
purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein which does not comply
with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 317-5. Sanitation.
A. Sink, flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower in
dwellings.
(1) Every dwelling unit shall contain:
(a) A kitchen sink in good working condition, properly connected
to an approved water and sewer system.
(b) A room or rooms affording privacy and equipped with a flush
water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower in good
working condition, properly connected to an approved water
and sewer system.
(2) No water closet shall be of the flush hopper, frostproof hopper,
privy or similar type where a sewer system is available to the
property; where no sewer is available, then such facilities shall be
used only when approved by the Building Inspector.
B. Access to bathrooms and water closets. Access to each bathroom or
water closet compartment shall be provided without requiring passage
through a sleeping room, bathroom or water closet compartment of
another dwelling unit.
C. Floors and ventilation of bathrooms and water closets.
(1) Every water closet compartment and bathroom shall be floored
with a surface which is reasonably impervious to water and which
can be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(2) Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall be provided
with windows meeting the requirements for light and ventilation of
habitable rooms prescribed in § 317-6 or with an approved
mechanical or gravity ventilation system affording adequate
ventilation and maintained in good working condition at all times.
D. Piped hot and cold running water.
(1) Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower required
under this chapter shall be connected and supplied with hot and
cold running water.
(2) Every dwelling shall have supplied water-heating facilities which
are properly installed and connected to waterlines maintained in
safe and good working condition and of sufficient capacity to supply
an adequate amount of water at every required kitchen sink,
§ 317-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-5
1:195
§ 317-6. Light, ventilation and heating.
lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than
120° F.
A. Window area and ventilation.
(1) Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight
facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area in
every sleeping room shall be 10% of the floor area of such room but
not less than 12 square feet. Whenever walls or other portions of
structures face a window of any such room and such light
obstruction structures are located less than three feet from the
window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room,
such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors
and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum
total window area. Whenever the only window in a room is a
skylight-type window in the top of such room, the total window area
of such skylight shall equal at least 15% of the total floor area.
(2) Every habitable room shall have at least one window which can
easily be opened or such other device as will adequately ventilate
the room. The total openable window area in every habitable room
shall equal at least 45% of the minimum window area required by
this section.
B. Screening.
(1) When flies or other pests are prevalent, all openable windows as
required by Subsection A(2) of this section shall be effectively
screened, and screen doors shall be self-closing. Screens and
screen doors shall be maintained in good condition.
(2) Every basement window used for ventilation, and every other
opening to a building which might provide an entry for rodents,
shall be supplied with a screen or such other device as will
effectively prevent their entrance.
C. Electrical outlets. Every habitable room shall contain at least one flooror
wall-type electric convenience outlet and one ceiling electric lighting
fixture or two electric convenience outlets, and every water closet
compartment, bathroom or hall, furnace room or laundry room shall
contain at least one wall- or ceiling-type electric light fixture. Every
electrical outlet and fixture shall be properly installed and maintained
in good and safe working condition and connected to an approved
source of electric power in a safe, approved manner.
D. Public hall lighting. Every public hall and stairway in every multiple
dwelling shall be lighted to at least five footcandles on the floor and
stairs at all times.
§ 317-5 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 317-6
1:196
§ 317-7. Floor space and general occupancy.
E. Heating facilities. Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are
properly installed and vented, are maintained in safe operating
condition, and are capable of heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms
and water compartments in each dwelling unit therein to a temperature
of at least 70° F. at a distance of three feet above floor level when the
outside temperature is minus 20° F.
A. Floor space.
(1) Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor
space for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional
square feet of floor space for every additional occupant, in addition
to the floor area included in water closet compartments,
bathrooms, halls or passageways.
(2) Every room occupied for sleeping purposes shall contain at least 70
square feet of floor space for one occupant or 50 square feet of
floor space for each occupant if more than one.
B. Access to sleeping rooms. No dwelling unit shall be so located or
arranged that access thereto requires passage through a habitable
room of another dwelling unit.
C. Ceiling height of habitable rooms. At least 1/2 of the floor area of every
habitable room shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet of
unfinished ceiling height. The floor area of any part of a room where the
ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered as part of the
required floor area.
D. Basement or half-basement occupancy.
(1) No basement space may be used as a habitable room or dwelling
unit, except as hereinafter provided.
(a) In one- and two-family dwellings, kitchens and dining rooms
may be located in a basement area having its floor level not
more than three feet six inches below the outside finish grade.
(b) A basement space may be used as a living or sleeping room or
dwelling unit provided that its floor level is not more than three
feet six inches below the outside finish grade at any point and
the ceiling of such space shall not be less than four feet above
the outside finish grade at any point.
(c) Family rooms may be located in basements or half-basements
provided that adequate ventilation is provided. In a one- or
two-family residence, any basement or half-basement space
may be used as a sleeping room by members of the immediate
family of a resident owner, but only on condition that the floors
and walls are made impervious to the leakage of underground
§ 317-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-7
1:197
§ 317-8. Safe and sanitary maintenance of dwellings and dwelling
units.
§ 317-9. Cleanliness and garbage and trash disposal.
and surface runoff water, the space is insulated against
dampness, the space to be so used complies with all the
requirements of this chapter for habitable rooms, and access
to the habitable room can be gained without passage through
a furnace room.
A. Structural soundness.
(1) Members. Every foundation, door, outer wall, ceiling and roof shall
be weathertight, watertight, and rodentproof, shall be capable of
affording privacy, and shall be kept in good repair.
(2) Openings. Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway or
stairway shall be weathertight, watertight and rodentproof and
shall be kept in good working condition and repair.
(3) Stairs and porches. Every inside and outside stair and handrail and
every porch and porch rail shall be so constructed as to safely
support the maximum load that normal use may require and shall
be kept in safe condition and good repair at all times. The Building
Inspector may require a handrail for each stair if deemed
necessary.
(4) Handrails. Every stairway of more than three risers must have a
handrail of height corresponding to state statute requirements and
be safely enclosed to handrail height.
B. Mechanical soundness of plumbing. All plumbing shall be properly
installed and maintained in sanitary condition, free from defects, leaks
and obstructions.
C. Exits. Every dwelling unit shall have a safe, unobstructed means of
egress leading to safe and open space at ground level, as required by
the Wisconsin Statutes and the ordinances of the Town of Grand Chute.
D. Effectiveness. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment, or utility
which is required under this chapter shall be so constructed or installed
that it will function safely and effectively and shall be maintained in
satisfactory working condition.
A. Owner or owner-occupant responsibility. Every owner or owneroccupant
shall be responsible for the cleanliness of all parts of a
dwelling and premises shared in common by more than one family and
for provision of the following utilities and services, except where such
responsibility is assumed by an operator or an occupant by agreement:
§ 317-7 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 317-9
1:198
§ 317-10. Emergency discontinuance of service or utilities.
No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment
or utility to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued in any
occupied dwelling unit let or occupied by him, except for such temporary
interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in
progress or during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of service
is approved by the Building Inspector. Upon the discontinuance of gas
or electric service for cause by a public utility company or upon
discontinuance of any municipal or other service for cause, the Building
Inspector shall be notified and shall thereupon take immediate steps to have
the responsible person correct conditions leading to such discontinuance
of service. This section shall not be construed to prevent the cessation or
discontinuance of any such service upon order of the Building Inspector or
any other authorized officials.
§ 317-11. Dangerous dwellings.
(1) Provision of garbage and rubbish disposal facilities or containers
where the dwelling exceeds two units.
(2) Extermination of insects, rodents or other pests, except that where
only one dwelling unit is infested, the occupant of such infested
unit shall be responsible for its extermination, unless the dwelling
is not maintained in a reasonably ratproof or insectproof condition.
(3) Provision of all facilities, utilities, services or conditions required
by this chapter.
B. Occupant responsibility. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall be
responsible for keeping the occupied area and premises and all
plumbing equipment and facilities in a clean, safe and sanitary
condition at all times. Garbage and rubbish shall be disposed of or
stored in proper containers in a neat and sanitary manner unless
disposed of or stored by the owner or owner-occupant as provided in
Subsection A above.73
A. All dwellings or parts thereof which have any of the following defects
shall be deemed dangerous dwellings and shall be condemned as unfit
for human habitation:
(1) Those whose interior or exterior bearing walls or other vertical
structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent as to
weaken the structural support they provide.
(2) Those which, excluding the foundation, show 33% or more of
damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members or
50% or more of damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting
enclosing or outside walls or covering.
73.Editor's Note: Original § 12.10, Rooming houses, which immediately followed this section,
was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 317-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-11
1:199
§ 317-12. Entry and inspection of dwellings.
(3) Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or
roofs or in which the same are overloaded or which have
insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
(4) Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as
no longer to provide shelter from the elements and which have
become dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general health and
welfare of the occupants or the people of the Town of Grand Chute.
(5) Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe,
unsanitary or vermin-infested or obsolete that they are likely to
cause sickness or disease or injury to the health, morals, safety or
general welfare of those living therein or of the people at large.
(6) Those which lack light, air and sanitation facilities as required by
this chapter to protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare
of persons living therein.
(7) Those which lack the facilities required by this chapter for egress
in case of fire or panic or those which have insufficient stairways,
elevators, fire escapes, or other means of ingress and egress
required herein.
(8) Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they
may fall and injure occupants or the public or other property.
B. Declaration of nuisance and orders.
(1) All dangerous dwellings or parts thereof within the terms of this
chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be
vacated and repaired or demolished in accordance with the
provisions of § 317-13 of this chapter.
(2) In any case where a dangerous dwelling is 50% or more damaged
or decayed or deteriorated from its original structure, or where it
cannot be repaired so as to comply with the terms of this chapter,
the provisions of § 317-13 of this chapter shall be followed.74
A. The Building Inspector is hereby authorized and directed to make
inspections to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units and
premises located within the Town of Grand Chute in order to safeguard
the health and safety of the occupants of such dwellings and of the
general public. For this purpose and upon showing proper
identification, the Building Inspector is authorized to enter, examine
and survey at any reasonable hour all dwellings, dwelling units and
premises, but the owner, occupant or the person in charge thereof may
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 317-11 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 317-12
1:200
§ 317-13. Enforcement; service of notices and orders; hearings.
give the Building Inspector free access thereto for the purpose of such
inspection or require a warrant to accomplish the same.
B. Every occupant of a dwelling shall give the owner thereof or his agent
or employee access to any part of such dwelling or its premises at any
reasonable hour for the purpose of making any repairs or alterations
which are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this
chapter or any lawful order issued pursuant thereto.
C. No officer, agent or employee of the Town of Grand Chute shall be
personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or
property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of
his duties under this chapter. Any suit brought against any officer, agent
or employee of the Town of Grand Chute as a result of the proper
discharge of his duties under this chapter shall be defended by the
Town of Grand Chute Town Attorney until final determination of the
proceedings therein.
A. Notices of violation.
(1) Contents of notice.
(a) Whenever the Building Inspector determines that there has
been a violation of any provision of this chapter he shall give
notice of such violation to the person or persons responsible
therefor and order compliance with this chapter as hereinafter
provided. Such notice and order shall be in writing on an
appropriate form and shall include:
[1] A list of the violations, with reference to the section of this
chapter violated, and an order as to the remedial action
required to effect compliance with this chapter.
[2] Specification of a reasonable time for compliance.
[3] Advice concerning the procedure for appeal.
(b) Such notice and order shall be served upon the owner,
occupant or agent in person; provided, however, that the notice
and order shall be deemed to be properly served if such owner,
occupant or agent is sent a copy thereof by registered mail to
his last known address and a copy is posted in a conspicuous
place in or on the dwelling affected.
(2) Whenever the Building Inspector determines that a dwelling is a
dangerous dwelling as defined in § 317-11, he shall:
(a) Affix upon the door or entrance to such dwelling a printed
placard declaring that such dwelling is unfit for human
habitation and is ordered vacated. No person shall deface or
remove such placard from any dwelling which has been
§ 317-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-13
1:201
condemned as unfit for human habitation and placarded as
such. The Building Inspector shall remove the placard
whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation
and placarding were based have been eliminated.
(b) Serve notice, as provided herein, to the owner and occupant or
lessee of any building found by him to be a dangerous dwelling
within the standards set forth in § 317-11 that the owner must
vacate and repair or demolish said building in accordance with
the terms of the notice and this chapter, and the occupant or
lessee must vacate said building or, with the consent of the
owner, may have it repaired in accordance with the notice and
order and remain in possession.
B. Hearings.75
(1) Any person affected by a notice and order issued in connection with
the enforcement of this chapter may request and shall be granted a
hearing on the matter before the Town Board, provided that such
person shall file in the office of the Building Inspector a written
petition requesting the hearing and setting forth his name, address,
telephone number and a brief statement of the grounds for the
hearing or for the mitigation of the order. Such petition shall be
filed 30 days after the date the notice and order are served. Upon
receipt of the petition, the Building Inspector shall set a time and
place for a hearing before the Town Board and shall give the
petitioner written notice thereof. Said hearing shall be held within
30 days after a petition has been filed, and the petitioner shall be
given an opportunity to be heard and to show cause why the notice
and order should be modified or withdrawn. The failure of the
petitioner or his representative to appear and to state his case at
such hearing shall have the same effect as if no petition were filed.
(2) After the hearing, the Town Board, by a majority vote, shall sustain,
modify or withdraw the notice, depending on its findings as to
whether the provisions of this chapter have been complied with,
and the petitioner and the Building Inspector shall be notified
within 10 days in writing of such findings.
(3) The proceedings of the hearing, including the findings and decision
of the Town Board and the reasons therefor, shall be summarized in
writing and entered as a matter of public record in the office of the
Building Inspector. Such record shall also include a copy of every
notice and order issued in connection with the case.
C. Orders to vacate.
(1) Where a notice of violation and order to comply have been served
pursuant to this chapter and, upon reinspection at the end of the
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 317-13 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 317-13
1:202
time specified for compliance, if no petition for a hearing has been
filed, it is found that the violation or violations have not been
remedied, the Building Inspector may order the dwelling, or parts
thereof affected by the continued violations, vacated in accordance
with the following procedure:
(a) Dwellings shall be vacated within a reasonable time, not to
exceed 60 days.
(b) Vacated dwellings shall have all outer doors firmly locked and
basement, cellar and first- and second-story windows barred or
boarded to prevent entry.
(c) Vacated dwellings shall not again be used for human habitation
until written approval is secured from the Building Inspector.
(2) If a dwelling or part thereof is not vacated within the time specified
in the order of vacation, the Building Inspector shall seek a court
order in a court of competent jurisdiction for the vacation of such
dwelling or part thereof.
D. Emergency order. Whenever the Building Inspector finds that an
emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the health
and safety of the residents or of the public, he may issue an order so
stating, and notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter such
order shall take effect and shall be complied with immediately. Upon
petition to the Town Board, the petitioner shall be afforded a hearing
pursuant to Subsection B of this section.76
E. Vacation and demolition.
(1) If the owner, occupant, or lessee fails to comply with the order of
the Building Inspector or the action of the Town Board after
hearing, the Building Inspector shall cause such dwelling or part
thereof to be vacated and repaired or demolished as the facts may
warrant and shall, with the assistance of the Town of Grand Chute
Town Attorney, cause the costs of such repair or demolition to be
charged against the land on which the building existed as a
municipal lien or to be recovered in a suit at law against the
owner.77
(2) In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate
danger to the life or safety of any person unless a dangerous
dwelling as defined herein is immediately vacated and repaired or
demolished, the Building Inspector shall cause its immediate
vacation and repair or demolition. The costs of such emergency
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 317-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-13
1:203
§ 317-14. Violations and penalties.
Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
its requirements shall constitute a forfeiture. Any person who violates any
provision of this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements
shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined as provided in the Uniform
Forfeiture and Bond Schedules and, upon failure to pay such forfeiture, be
imprisoned in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days, until the
forfeiture is paid, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
§ 317-15. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements
to protect the health, safety, morals and welfare of the people of the Town
of Grand Chute, and where this chapter imposes greater requirements than
imposed by other provisions of law or ordinance this chapter shall control.
Chapter 330
IMPACT FEES
§ 330-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Town of Grand Chute
Impact Fee Ordinance."
§ 330-2. Authority and purpose.
Pursuant to the authority of § 66.0617, Wis. Stats., the local impact fees
enabling legislation, the purpose of this chapter is to establish the
mechanism for the imposition of impact fees upon new development to
finance the capital costs of acquiring, establishing, upgrading, expanding,
and constructing public facilities which are necessary to accommodate land
development. This chapter is intended to assure that new development
bears an appropriate share of the cost of capital expenditures necessary
to provide public facilities within the Town of Grand Chute and its service
areas, as they are required to serve the needs arising out of the land
development.
§ 330-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
repair or demolition shall be collected in the same manner as
provided in Subsection E(1) above.78
78.Editor's Note: Original § 12.15, Housing Appeals Board, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 317-13 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 330-3
1:204
CAPITAL COSTS — The capital costs to construct, expand or improve
public facilities, including the cost of land, and including legal, engineering
and design costs to construct, expand or improve public facilities, except
that not more than 10% of capital costs may consist of legal, engineering
and design costs unless such costs which relate directly to the public
improvement for which the impact fees were imposed actually exceed 10%
of capital costs.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
property, the use of any principal structure or land or any other activity that
requires the issuance of a building permit.
IMPACT FEES — Cash contributions, contributions of land or interests in
land or any other items of value that are imposed on a developer by the
Town under this chapter.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — The construction or modification of
improvements to real property that creates additional residential dwelling
units within the Town or its service areas or that results in nonresidential
uses that create a need for new, expanded or improved public facilities
within the Town or its service areas.
PUBLIC FACILITIES — Highways, as defined in § 340.01(22), Wis. Stats.,
and other transportation facilities, traffic control devices, facilities for
collecting and treating sewage, facilities for collecting and treating
stormwater and surface water, facilities for pumping, storing and
distributing water, parks, playgrounds and other recreation facilities, solid
waste and recycling facilities, fire protection facilities, law enforcement
facilities, emergency medical facilities and libraries. "Public facilities" does
not include facilities owned by a school district.
SERVICE AREA — A geographic area delineated by the Town Board within
which the Town provides public facilities, and for the purpose of this
chapter includes the entire Town of Grand Chute.
SERVICE STANDARD — A certain quantity or quality of public facilities
relative to a certain number of persons, parcels of land or other appropriate
measure, as specified by the Town Board.
TOWN — Town of Grand Chute.
§ 330-4. Public facilities needs assessment.
New public facilities, or improvements or expansions of existing public
facilities, that are required because of land development for which impact
fees will be imposed are those which are identified in this chapter and
in facilities needs assessment reports prepared prior to the adoption of
this chapter and in conjunction with any amendments hereto. All facilities
needs reports that form the basis of any impact fee imposed by the Town
shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk at least 20 days prior
to any public hearing to be held on the creation of this chapter and any
amendments. A Class 1 notice is required prior to any required hearing. All
facilities needs assessment reports shall remain on file in the office of the
§ 330-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-4
1:205
Town Clerk for the entire period during which impact fees arising out of a
specific report and this chapter are collected prior to expenditure, and such
report shall, after expenditure of all impact fees, be maintained as a public
record for such time period as required by law.
§ 330-5. Impact fee revenue administration.79
§ 330-6. Use of impact fees.
Funds collected from impact fees shall be used solely for the purpose of
paying the proportionate costs of providing public facilities that become
necessary due to land development. These costs may include the costs of
debt service on bonds or similar debt instruments when the debt has been
incurred for the purpose of proceeding with designated public facilities
projects prior to the collection of all anticipated impact fees for that project.
§ 330-7. Payment of impact fees.
§ 330-8. Appeals.
A. Revenues from impact fees shall be placed in one or more segregated,
interest-bearing accounts and shall be accounted for separately from
other Town general and utility funds Impact fee revenues and interest
earned thereon may be expended only for capital costs for which the
impact fees were imposed.
B. Impact fees that are collected but not used shall be refunded in
accordance with § 66.0617(9), Wis. Stats.
A. Impact fees shall be payable by the developer or the property owner to
the Town Treasurer in full upon the issuance of a building permit. If any
development affected by an impact fee imposed under this chapter is
under construction or has received a building permit at the time this
chapter takes effect, all required impact fees shall be paid to the Town
Treasurer in full upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Impact
fees shall be presumed to be payable by the owner of record at the time
the building permit or certificate of occupancy is requested.80
B. Where there are multiple dwelling units on a lot or parcel of land, the
fees shall be imposed for each dwelling unit.
A. Any developer or property owner upon whom an impact fee is imposed
by this chapter shall have the right to contest the amount, collection or
use of the impact fee to the Town Board. Such appeals shall be filed in
writing with the Town Administrator within 30 days of receipt of
request from the Town for payment of the impact fee.
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 330-4 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 330-8
1:206
§ 330-9. Types of impact fees.
§ 330-10. Exemptions.
B. The Town Clerk shall schedule the appeal for consideration by the Town
Board at a regular meeting as soon as reasonably practicable under the
circumstances and shall notify the applicant of the time, date and place
of such meeting in writing by regular mail deposited in the mail no later
than at least three days before the date of such meeting. Upon review of
such appeal, the Town Board may adjust the amount, collection or use
of the impact fee upon just and reasonable cause shown. The Town
Board shall decide all appeals within 30 days after the hearing and shall
transmit a copy of its written decision to the appellant.
A. Fire impact fees. The basis for the imposition of the fire impact fees is
the facilities needs assessment titled "Report on Fire Impact Fees and
Public Facilities Needs Assessment" prepared by the Town on July 17,
2006, which is on file in the office of the Town Clerk of the Town of
Grand Chute. These impact fees shall be collected until the capital costs
associated with the projects specified in the Report on Fire Impact Fees
and Public Facilities Needs Assessment have been incurred and
satisfied ("satisfied" includes the full repayment of any debt of the Town
related to the projects).
B. Water system impact fees. The basis for the imposition of the water
system impact fees is the facilities needs assessment titled "Water
System Needs Assessment" prepared by the Town on November 7,
2008, which is on file in the office of the Town Clerk of the Town of
Grand Chute. These impact fees shall be collected until the capital costs
associated with the projects specified in the Water System Needs
Assessment have been incurred and satisfied ("satisfied" includes the
full repayment of any debt of the Town related to the projects). [Added
1-20-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-01]
(1) Amount of impact fees. Impact fees imposed under this Subsection
B shall be determined based on the size of each water meter to be
installed to serve the development. In the event that an existing
water meter is to be replaced with a higher capacity meter, the
impact fee shall be limited to the amount by which the fee that
would be imposed on a new connection with the higher capacity
meter exceeds the charge that would apply to the replaced meter.
(2) Single-family residential structures less than 1,500 square feet of
living space that request a water meter larger than 3/4 inch shall
be required to pay the difference between the three-fourths-inch
meter fee and the requested size meter fee.
(3) For purposes of clarification, the exemptions provided in § 330-10
are applicable to this Subsection B.
§ 330-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-10
1:207
§ 330-11. Dedication of land in lieu of impact fees.
The Town Board may, in its discretion, accept lands dedicated for public
purposes in lieu of the impact fees assessed pursuant to this chapter;
provided, however, that in no event shall the fair market value of the land
or lands accepted by the Town be less than the amount of the assessment
which would otherwise be levied in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 330-12. Impact Fees Schedule; annual adjustments.
The fees imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be listed on the Impact Fees
Schedule and approved by the Town Board on an annual basis as a part
of the fiscal year annual fee list. The amount of the impact fees imposed
shall be adjusted annually based upon the Construction Cost Index (CCI) as
reported by the Engineering News Record (ENR) effective January 1 of each
year by a percentage equal to the annual percent change as listed for the
end of October of the previous year.
Chapter 335
INTOXICATING LIQUOR AND FERMENTED MALT
BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dances and dance halls — See Ch. 252.
Nuisances — See Ch. 398.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 409.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 415.
A. The following situations shall be exempted from payment of the impact
fee(s) outlined in § 330-9:
(1) When a lot or parcel for which payment has been made is further
divided, payment shall be required only for the additional lot(s) or
parcel(s) created.
(2) No payment shall be required on any lot that supports a residential
structure existing prior to the approval of the final plat or certified
survey map.
(3) No payment shall be required for the construction of a single-family
residential structure of a size of less than 1,500 square feet of living
area.
B. Any claim of exemption must be made prior to the payment of any fees
under this chapter.
§ 330-10 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 330-12
1:208
ARTICLE I
Licensing
§ 335-1. State statutes adopted.
The provisions of Chs. 125 and 139, Wis. Stats., relating to the sale of
intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverages are hereby adopted and
made a part of this article by reference. To the extent of any inconsistency
between this article and the statutory provisions, this article shall control,
except to the extent preempted by statutory provisions, in which case the
provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes shall control.
§ 335-2. License required.
No person, except as provided by § 335-1 of this article, shall distribute,
vend, sell, offer or keep for sale at retail or wholesale, deal or traffic in, or,
for the purpose of evading any law or ordinance, give away any intoxicating
liquor or fermented malt beverage, or cause the same to be done, without
having procured a license or permit as provided in this article, nor without
complying with all the provisions of this article and all statutes, ordinances
and regulations of the state and Town applicable thereto.
§ 335-3. Classes of licenses.
There shall be the following classes and designations of licenses, which,
when issued by the Town Clerk under the authority of the Town Board after
payment of the fee as prescribed in the Town Fee Schedule, shall permit
the holder to sell, deal or traffic in intoxicating liquor or fermented malt
beverages as provided in §§ 125.25(1), 125.26(1), (5) and (6) and 125.51(1),
(3)(a) and (9)(a), Wis. Stats.
A. Class "A" fermented malt beverage retailer's license.
B. Class "B" fermented malt beverage retailer's license under § 125.26(1),
Wis. Stats.
C. Retail "Class A" liquor license under § 125.51(2), Wis. Stats.
D. Retail "Class B" liquor license under § 125.51(3), Wis. Stats.
E. Reserve "Class B" license pursuant to § 125.51(4)(a)4 and (br), Wis.
Stats.
F. "Class C" wine license under § 125.51 (3m)(b), Wis. Stats.
G. Part-time or semiannual liquor licenses shall be issued pursuant to
§§ 125.26(5) and 125.51(9)(b), Wis. Stats.
H. Provisional retail licenses may be issued by the Town Clerk only to a
person who has applied for a Class "A," Class "B," "Class A," "Class B"
or "Class C" license who meets the residency requirements of the State
of Wisconsin. A provisional retail license expires 60 days after issuance.
Provisional retail licenses may not be issued if the municipality quota
§ 335-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-3
1:209
§ 335-4. License restrictions.
In addition to the requirements imposed by provision of the Wisconsin
Statutes adopted by reference in § 335-1 of this article, the following
restrictions shall apply to the issuance of licenses or permits pursuant to
this article:
under § 125.51(4), Wis. Stats., prohibits the municipality from issuing a
"Class B" license. No person may hold more than one provisional retail
license for each type of license applied for by the holder per year.
A. Requirements for licenses. No license or permit shall be issued to any
person who is not 21 years of age or over, of good moral character, and
a citizen of the United States and the State of Wisconsin, except that an
operator's license may be issued to an applicant who has attained the
age of 18. No license shall be issued to any person who has multiple
criminal misdemeanor convictions that relate to the licensed activity or
has been convicted of a felony that relates to the licensed activity. This
subsection shall not apply to Wisconsin corporations but shall apply to
all officers and directors of any such corporations.
B. Effect of revocation of license. No license shall be issued for any
premises if a license covering such premises has been revoked within
six months prior to application. No license shall be issued to any person
who has had a license issued pursuant to this article revoked within 12
months prior to application.
C. Inspection of application and premises. The Town Clerk shall notify the
Licensing Committee of all license and permit applications. The
Licensing Committee will direct the Police Department, Fire
Department, and Building Inspector to review each application and
inspect the premises identified in the application to determine whether
the applicant and the premises sought to be licensed comply with the
regulations, ordinances and laws applicable thereto and the applicant's
fitness for the trust to be reposed. No license or permit provided for in
this article shall be issued without the approval of a majority of the
Town Board.
D. Health and sanitation. No license shall be issued for any premises
which does not conform to the sanitary, safety and health regulations of
the State Department of Safety and Professional Services and State
Department of Health Services and to all such ordinances and
regulations adopted by the Town.
E. Delinquent taxes, assessment and claims. No license or license renewal
shall be issued under this article for any premises or person for which
or for whom taxes, assessments or other claims of the Town or the State
of Wisconsin are delinquent and not paid. Included within the definition
of delinquent taxes, delinquent assessments or other delinquent
payments due to the Town shall be any delinquency (unpaid) for special
assessments, personal property taxes, real estate taxes, or motel or
§ 335-3 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 335-4
1:210
hotel taxes, failure to pay any adjudicated fines or penalties, failure to
pay current any fees or moneys due to the Town of any kind or nature,
etc.
F. The term "person" shall include an individual and any other form of
partnership, corporation, or other entity, if any, to which a license has
been issued. The revocation provisions of § 335-9 shall also apply to any
partnership, corporation or other entity with one or more common
owners of any license subject to revocation. The issuance of new
licenses shall also be withheld from entities with one or more common
owners with any other entity not qualified for issuance of a license
pursuant to this article.
G. The Licensing Committee shall be an administrative review committee
to carry out the duties as directed by the Town Board pursuant to this
article. The Committee shall consist of the Town Chairperson or his/her
designee, the Town Clerk or his/her designee, the Police Chief or his/
her designee, the Fire Chief or his/her designee, the Chief Building
Inspector or his/her designee, and other Town staff members as
determined by the Town Administrator. The Town Clerk or designee
shall serve as Committee Chair.
H. Outdoor service/beer gardens.
(1) No holder of a "Class B," Class "B" and/or "Class C" license may
operate under said license(s) in any outdoor area, whether or not
said outdoor area was included in a description of the premises,
without first having obtained the permission of the Town Board
subject to the conditions of this subsection. Approval under this
subsection by the Town Board shall result in the outdoor area
becoming a part of the description of the premises, with said
outdoor area also being subject to all State and Town laws, rules,
regulations, and lawful orders governing "Class B," Class "B" and/
or "Class C" premises.
(2) As used in this subsection, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
OUTDOOR AREA — An area, whether or not enclosed by a roof,
which is open to the elements and which is not constructed for
year-round use.
OUTDOOR PREMISES — A licensed premises located in an outside
area.
(3) Application. Application for an outdoor extension of a "Class B,"
Class "B" and/or "Class C" license shall be made to the Community
Development Department in the form of a request for a special
exception permit. The application shall include a map describing
the outdoor area sought to be included within the description of the
licensed premises. In the event that such map is omitted and the
"Class B," Class "B" and/or "Class C" license is granted and issued,
§ 335-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-4
1:211
said license shall not be deemed to include an outdoor area within
the description of the licensed premises.
(4) Requirements. Outdoor premises approved under this subsection
are subject to the following requirements:
(a) Outdoor premises may be permitted only on properties located
in the CL Local Commercial, CR Regional Commercial, CP
Planned Commercial, and IND Industrial Zoning Districts as
those terms are defined in Chapter 535. Zoning, subject to the
special exception permit requirements of Chapter 535.
(b) Outdoor premises shall be completely surrounded by an
attractive wall, fence, or barrier of at least four feet in height.
(c) Outdoor premises located in the front yard of the licensed
premises shall also be completely surrounded by an attractive
wall, fence, or barrier, and such installation shall be 42 inches
in height for public safety and property aesthetics purposes.
(d) Outdoor premises shall be attached to the main business
premises, and access to the outdoor premises shall only be
allowed through the main building.
(e) Service in the outdoor premises shall be limited to persons
seated at tables or at a bar.
(f) Food and beverage service in the outdoor premises shall stop
no later than 10:30 p.m., with no food or beverage
consumption allowed in the outdoor premises after 11:00 p.m.
(g) No music shall be broadcast directly into the outdoor area by
means of outdoor speakers or jukeboxes, nor shall live music
be permitted.
(h) Lighting of the outdoor premises must be shielded and not be
of intensity or brilliance to create glare which is distracting to
adjoining property owners or that can become a hazard or
danger to vehicular traffic.
(i) Noise from any source that is emitted from the outdoor area
and measured at any border of the real property on which the
licensed premises is located shall not exceed 85 db from 7:00
a.m. to 9:00 p.m. and 75 db from 9:00 p.m. until closing.
(j) Outdoor premises shall not be located in any actual or required
yard area that directly abuts an adjoining property used for
residential purposes, unless the following additional conditions
are met:
[1] Provide a twenty-foot buffer between outdoor premises
and the adjoining lot containing the residential use.
§ 335-4 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 335-4
1:212
§ 335-5. Inspection of licensed premises.
It shall be a condition of any license issued hereunder that the licensed
premises may be entered and inspected at any reasonable hour by any
police officer of the Town of Grand Chute without any warrant, and the
application for a license hereunder shall be deemed a consent to this
provision. Any refusal to permit such inspection shall constitute grounds for
either revocation or nonrenewal of any license issued hereunder and shall
be deemed a violation of this article.
§ 335-6. License to be posted.
Licenses or permits issued under this section shall be posted and displayed
as provided in § 125.04(10), Wis. Stats., and any licensee or permit holder
who shall fail to post his license or permit as therein required shall be
presumed to be operating without a license.
§ 335-7. Safety and sanitation requirements.
Each licensed premises shall be maintained and conducted in a sanitary
manner and shall be a safe and proper place for the purpose for which used.
§ 335-8. Requirement to purchase alcoholic beverages from
wholesaler.
No campus or retail licensee or permittee may purchase fermented malt
beverages or alcoholic beverages from, or possess fermented malt
beverages or alcoholic beverages purchased from, any person other than
a wholesaler holding a permit under Chapter 125, Wis Stats., for the sale
of fermented malt beverages or alcoholic beverages §§ 125.33(9) and
125.69(6)(a), Wis. Stats.
§ 335-9. Revocation and suspension of licenses. [Amended 8-9-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-17]
[2] Provide a privacy fence six feet in height at the property
line in the area abutting the outdoor premises.
[3] Notwithstanding Subsection H(4)(f) of this section, food
and beverage service in the outdoor premises shall stop no
later than 9:30 p.m., with no food or beverage
consumption allowed in the outdoor premises after 10:00
p.m.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish guidelines
governing the revocation and suspension of alcoholic beverage licenses
through a system of demerit points that accrue for violations of this
chapter or Chapter 125, Wis. Stats.
B. Procedure. Except as hereinafter provided, the provisions of § 125.12,
Wis. Stats., shall be applicable to proceedings for the revocation or
§ 335-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-9
1:213
suspension of all licenses or permits granted under this article.
Revocation or suspension proceedings may be instituted by the Town
Board upon its own motion, subject to any additional requirements
under § 125.12, Wis. Stats., for both suspension and revocation
proceedings.
C. Point schedule.
(1) The scheme of demerit points appearing below is listed according
to the type of drug or alcohol beverage violation. This demerit point
system is used to identify both extraordinarily serious violations
and/or habitually troublesome license holders who have repeatedly
violated state statutes and Grand Chute ordinances for the purpose
of recommending suspension or revocation of their alcohol
beverage license.
(2) If the demerit points accumulated from the date of a violation
which results in a conviction meet or exceed 50 points in a twelvemonth
period, the agent or officer will be required to meet with the
Licensing Committee. In the event the agent or officer fails to
appear before the Licensing Committee as required under this
section, a citation and mandatory forfeiture of $250 plus statutory
costs shall be issued and imposed by the Police Department.
(3) Demerit points may be reduced as shown on the schedule one time
in a three-year period if the license holder has met with the
Licensing Committee as indicated in Section C(2), above.
[Amended 7-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-07]
(4) A violation of § 125.07(1)(a), Wis. Stats., prohibiting selling of
alcoholic beverages to underage persons will be assigned 19
demerit points instead of 80 points one time in a three-year period
if the licensee has adopted, prior to the violation, and complied
with, a written policy for the licensed premises, containing the
following provisions: [Amended 7-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-07]
(a) Each person authorized to sell alcoholic beverages at the
licensed premises has completed the operator's training
course sponsored by the State of Wisconsin and required for
operators of licensed premises pursuant to Chapter 125, Wis.
Stats.; and
(b) Signage is posted on the licensed premises visible to
customers at an area where alcoholic beverages are sold
stating the date of birth subsequent to which no such customer
is allowed to purchase alcoholic beverages; and
(c) Clear written expectations are given to employees permitted to
serve alcohol, which establish that all reasonable measures
will be taken to avoid serving any minors under any
§ 335-9 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 335-9
1:214
circumstances, and which include reasonable discipline or
incentives related to serving alcohol to patrons; and
(d) Internal controls to test procedural compliance by staff for
serving alcohol, such as utilizing "secret shoppers" to test
policy compliance; and
(e) Specific criteria for determining when identification must be
presented by customers prior to the purchase of alcoholic
beverages are established/followed; and
(f) Quarterly refresher training for all employees permitted to
serve alcohol on the policy and laws governing the sale of
alcoholic beverages. [Amended 3-24-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-06]
Type of Violation State Statute
Town
Ordinance
Demerit
Points
Qualified
Reductions
Selling to underage person (See
Subsection C(4), above)
§ 125.07(1)(a) § 335-18 80
19
60
Selling to intoxicated person § 125.07(2) § 335-18 50 0
Underage person on premises
licensee/permittee
§ 125.07(3)(a) § 335-18 50 35
Failure to be licensed § 125.04(1) § 335-2 100 0
False statement on application § 125.04(3)(j) § 335-2 100 0
Transfer of license without
permission
§ 125.04(12) § 335-10 75 0
Operate on another's license § 125.68(2m)
§ 125.32(2m)
§ 335-2 200 0
Sale without a license § 125.04(1) § 335-2 100 0
Unlicensed bartender § 125.32(2)
§ 125.68(2)
§ 335-12 50 35
Open after hours § 125.32(3)
§ 125.68(3)
§ 335-1 50 0
No carry-out after hours § 125.32(3)
§ 125.68(3)
§ 335-14 50 0
Failure to purchase from licensed
wholesaler
§ 125.33(9)
§ 125.69(6)(a)
§ 335-8 75 0
Failure to maintain qualifications
for license or permit
§ 125.04(5) § 335-2 200 0
§ 335-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-9
1:215
Type of Violation State Statute
Town
Ordinance
Demerit
Points
Qualified
Reductions
Keep a disorderly, riotous,
indecent, or improper house
§ 823.09 § 398-2(c) 50 0
Gambling § 945.04 § 415-8 50 0
Violation of law relating to public
health
§ 252.25 § 415-2 149 0
Adult entertainment/entertainer
without permit
§ 335-23 75 0
Obscene material or
performances/operation of a
sexually oriented business
§ 944.21 § 335-21
§ 335-22
200 0
Solicitation of drinks by employee § 944.36 § 415-2 50 0
Failure to display permit § 125.04(10) § 335-6 25 0
Owner/agent selling controlled
substance
§ 961.41(1) § 415-2 200 0
Employee selling controlled
substance
§ 961.41(1) § 415-2 75 0
Possession of controlled
substance by owner/agent
§ 961.41(3g) 100 (misd.)
200 (felony)
0
Possession of controlled
substance by employee
§ 961.41(3g) 50 0
Possession of drug paraphernalia
by owner/agent
§ 961.573 75 0
Possession of drug paraphernalia
by employee
§ 961.573 50 0
D. Calculation of violations. In determining the accumulative demerit
points against a licensee within 12 months or 18 months, the Town shall
use the date each violation was committed as the basis for a
determination if there has been a conviction. If the violations are
committed concurrently, the highest point violation shall be assessed.
E. Suspension and revocation of license.
(1) If the demerit points accumulated from the date of a violation
which results in a conviction meet or exceed 50 points in a twelvemonth
period, the agent or officer will be required to meet with the
Licensing Committee. The accumulation of points shall result in
suspension or revocation of the license in accordance with the
following schedule, subject to the exception that for violations
under §§ 125.07(1)(a) and 125.04(5)(a)1, Wis. Stats.; such
violations may be counted only if the licensee has committed
another violation under § 125.07(1)(a), Wis. Stats., within 12
§ 335-9 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 335-9
1:216
months of the present violation, in which case all violations
committed within one year of a prior violation may also be
considered:
100 to 149 points within 12 months: ten-day minimum suspension
150 to 199 points within 12 months: twenty-day minimum
suspension
200 points within 18 months: revocation
(2) When a license is revoked pursuant to this article, the revocation
shall be recorded by the Clerk and no other license issued under
Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., may be granted within 12 months of the date
of revocation to the person whose license was revoked. No part of
the fee for any license so revoked may be refunded.
F. Upon determination by the Town Board, after hearing, that the license
is subject to suspension or revocation, the Clerk shall give notice of
such suspension or revocation to the person whose license is suspended
or revoked. Such suspension or revocation shall take effect 30 days
from the date said notice is given to the licensee. Such notice may be
given in person or mailed by certified mail to the address of the
addressee shown on the licensee's application. Notice by mail shall be
deemed effective five days from the date of mailing. If the suspension or
revocation is appealed to the Circuit Court by service of notice of
appeal on the Town in accordance with § 125.12(2)(d), Wis. Stats., on or
before 30 days from the effective date of notice of suspension or
revocation, the revocation or suspension shall be stayed pending a
decision by the Circuit Court on the appeal unless the Board finds that
public health, safety, or welfare imperatively require emergency action
and incorporates a finding to that effect in its order. If the Circuit Court
affirms the suspension or revocation, the period of suspension or
revocation shall then take effect beginning on the fifth day following the
date the decision is signed by the Circuit Court Judge unless a different
date is ordered by the Court.
G. Repossession of license or permit. Whenever any license or permit
under this article shall be revoked or suspended by the Town Board or
action of any court or Subsection C, it shall be the duty of the Clerk to
notify the licensee or permit holder of such suspension or revocation
and to take physical possession of the license or permit wherever it may
be found and file it in the Clerk's office.
H. Transfer/sale of licensed business.
(1) Upon the transfer or sale of the licensed business, all accumulated
demerit points shall be canceled unless any of the following apply:
(a) The new licensee is related to the former licensee by blood,
adoption, or marriage.
§ 335-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-9
1:217
§ 335-10. Transfer of license.
§ 335-11. Operator's license.
(b) The new licensee held a business interest in the previous
licensed business, real estate, or equipment.
(c) The former licensee retains an interest in the business or
equipment used by the business.
(d) The new licensee's acquisition of the business did not involve
an arm's length transaction consisting of an open market sale
in which the owner is willing but not obligated to sell and the
buyer is willing, but not obligated, to buy.
(2) If any of the above apply, the new licensee shall inherit the demerit
points previously assessed and be subject to all penalties set forth
by this article.
A. Any licensee desiring to transfer a license from its current Town
location to another Town location shall complete and file with the Town
Clerk Wisconsin Department of Revenue form AT-112, Retail License
Transfer — Premises to Premises.
B. Reserve "Class B" liquor licenses, unlike other retail licenses, cannot be
transferred to another place or premises within the Town, per
§ 125.04(12)(a).
C. Such applications shall be filed for at least 15 days with the Town Clerk
before being acted upon by the Board. The Town Clerk shall promptly
notify the Licensing Committee of such application, and committee
members representing the Police Department, Fire Department, and
Community Development Department shall inspect or cause to be
inspected the premises sought to be licensed. They shall make such
other investigation as the Town Board or its Licensing Committee as
authorized by the Town Board shall order to determine whether the
application complies with the regulations, orders and laws applicable
thereto and the premises are in a proper physical condition and a
suitable location. The aforesaid officers shall furnish to the Town Clerk
in writing the information derived from such investigation.
D. As far as applicable, the provisions of § 335-3 of this article shall apply
to further proceedings in regard to the granting or refusal by the Board
of the applicant's request to transfer the license.
A. Persons wishing to be employed as an operator under § 125.17, Wis.
Stats., may make written application for an operator's license to the
Town Clerk upon the form provided by the Town.
B. Licenses are valid from July 1 to June 30, and renewed every two years:
Fees are as prescribed in the Town Fee Schedule. All applicants shall
comply with § 125.17(6), Wis. Stats.
§ 335-9 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 335-11
1:218
§ 335-12. Required onsite supervision of licensed premises.
C. No operator's license shall be granted to a person under 18 years of
age.
D. Provisional license.
(1) Provisional licenses shall only be issued to person(s) who have
applied for an operator's license under this section. A provisional
license may not be issued to any person(s) who has been denied a
license under this section. Provisional licenses shall expire 60 days
after issued or when a license under this section is issued to the
holder, whichever is sooner. Provisional licenses may be revoked if
the holder of the license made false statements on the application
or as determined by the Licensing Committee.
(2) Provisional licenses shall be issued by the Town Clerk at a fee as
prescribed in the Town Fee Schedule.
E. Temporary license.
(1) Temporary licenses may be issued only to operators employed by,
or donating their services to, nonprofit corporations. No person
may hold more than two licenses of this kind per year. This license
is valid for any period from one day to 14 days, which shall be
stated on the license.
(2) License fee is as prescribed in the Town Fee Schedule.
A. Except in Class "A" beer premises between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., one
of the following must be present on all licensed premises during all
business hours:
(1) The licensee; or
(2) An adult member of the licensee's immediate family (actually living
in the licensee's household); or
(3) The corporation or limited liability company's agent (the agent's
immediate family members must have an operator's license if they
supervisor the premises in the agent's absence); or
(4) The holder of a provisional operator's license (issued to persons
enrolled in the responsible beverage server training course
pending approval of an operator's license by the Town); or
(5) The holder of an operator's license.
B. An adult working under the immediate supervision of any of the above
does not need an operator's license. To satisfy the "immediate
supervision" criteria, the licensed person must be able to watch and
supervise each unlicensed person's actions.
§ 335-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-12
1:219
§ 335-13. Replacement of license.
Whenever a license or permit is lost or destroyed, a duplicate shall be issued
by the Town Clerk upon the payment of a fee as prescribed in the Town Fee
Schedule.
§ 335-14. Hours of operation.
§ 335-15. Licenses not used for extended periods.
C. The holder of the liquor license may be prosecuted for not having the
required supervision of their premises.
A. The holders of Class "A," Class "B," "Class A," "Class B" and "Class C"
licenses, meaning all licenses as issued by the Town of Grand Chute as
to the sale of fermented malt beverages and intoxicating liquor
[§ 125.02(1), Wis. Stats.], shall not permit the selling, dispensing, giving
away or furnishing, directly or indirectly, of said fermented malt
beverages or intoxicating liquor for consumption off premises between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., Central Standard Time. During
that portion of the year when standard time is advanced under
§ 175.095, Wis. Stats., then also said licensees shall not be permitted to
sell, dispense, give away or furnish, directly or indirectly, fermented
malt beverages or intoxicating liquor between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
B. It is the intention of this article to prevent the sale, dispensing, giving
away or furnishing of fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquor,
for consumption off premises, during the above prohibited times. Any
violation of this article shall be subject to the penalties as contained
within § 335-16 of this article.
A. Any person who has been granted a "Class B" liquor and beer license
for the operation of a liquor license premises who does not make use of
such liquor license by operation of said premises for a period of four
months shall be deemed to have forfeited such license, with the
exception of premises that, by virtue of their operation, are only open
for a portion of each year. Upon knowledge of such failure to use, the
Town Clerk shall notify the license holder by certified or registered mail
that the license is deemed to have been forfeited and direct by said
certified or registered mail that the license holder deliver the license
and surrender the license to the Town Clerk.
B. In the event the holder of said license encounters undue hardship or
unusual circumstances beyond the license holder's control, the license
holder can request an extension of up to four months from the Town
Board. The license holder must first address his or her request to the
Licensing Committee, who will consider the request and provide a
recommendation to the Town Board. Within the extension period of four
months, the license holder may ask, and the Town Board may grant, an
extension up to a further period of four months. The Town Board shall
§ 335-12 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 335-15
1:220
§ 335-16. Violations and penalties.
not authorize extensions in excess of four months. The decision of the
Town Board in any extension request shall be final and binding.
A. The holder of any license under this article who shall violate this article
or any of the provisions thereof or whose agents or employees shall do
so or who, having had his or its license revoked, shall continue to
operate such place of business, shall, upon the due proof and conviction
thereof, be punished as follows:
(1) A violation of any provision of this article where a like violation is
covered, provided for and penalized by Ch. 66 or 125, Wis. Stats.,
shall be punished by a fine of not less than the minimum fine and
not more than the maximum fine provided for by said chapters for
said violation or offense, besides the costs of prosecution, and in
default of the payment of any such fine and/or costs of prosecution
such guilty and convicted person shall be committed to and
confined within the county jail of Outagamie County, Wisconsin,
until such fine and/or costs of prosecution are paid, but not to
exceed 60 days.
B. Each day of violation under this article shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
C. A first violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a
fine as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules,
together with the costs of prosecution, and on default of the payment of
any such fine and/or costs of prosecution such person shall be
committed to the county jail of Outagamie County until such fine and
costs are paid, but not to exceed 60 days.
D. Any person violating this article who shall previously have been
convicted of a violation of this article shall, upon proof and conviction
thereof, forfeit an amount as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and
Bond Schedules, together with the costs of prosecution, and on default
of the payment of any such fine and costs of prosecution, or either of
them, such convicted person shall be committed to and confined within
the county jail of Outagamie County, Wisconsin, until such fine and
costs of prosecution are paid, but not to exceed six months.
E. Penalties set forth in this section shall be in addition to penalty
provisions in other sections of this article, if any.
§ 335-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-16
1:221

ARTICLE II
Offenses Involving Alcoholic Beverages
§ 335-17. Possession and consumption of intoxicants.
§ 335-18. Underage and intoxicated persons; general restrictions.
§ 335-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as follows:
A. No person shall consume any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt
beverage while in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, thoroughfare,
parking lot, or other public way. No person shall consume any
intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage while in or upon any
private property without the property owner's consent.
B. All purchases of intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages by
glass or in open containers shall be consumed upon the licensed
premises where purchased and where served and shall not be removed
to the public areas or private areas set forth in Subsection A above.
C. No person shall possess any glass or open container containing
intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages in or upon any public
areas set forth in Subsection A above or in or upon any private property
without the owner's consent as set forth in Subsection A above.
D. The Town Board of Supervisors may, in special circumstances, where it
is satisfied that adequate supervision and police protection exist and
upon application therefor by any person, permit the consumption or
possession of intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage contrary
to this section, provided that said permission is limited to a specific
date, a specific time, and a specific location. Request for such
permission shall be in the form of an application for a special event
permit, as outlined in Chapter 456, Town of Grand Chute Municipal
Code.
E. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section, or any part
thereof, shall be punished by a forfeiture as prescribed in the Uniform
Forfeiture and Bond Schedules for each offense, together with the costs
thereof, and in default of payment thereof shall be imprisoned in the
county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
A. Pursuant to § 125.10, Wis. Stats., the Town does hereby adopt by
reference §§ 125.07 and 125.09, Wis. Stats. A violation thereof may be
prosecuted as a Town ordinance violation pursuant to this section and
the adoption of the above-referenced state statutes.
B. The penalty for violation of this section shall be as prescribed in the
Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules.
§ 335-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-19
1:223
A. For a violation of any provision of this article, any person shall, upon
proof and conviction thereof, forfeit an amount as prescribed in the
Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules, together with the costs of
prosecution, and in default of payment of the forfeiture and costs of
prosecution, or either of them, such convicted person shall be
committed to and confined within the county jail of Outagamie County,
Wisconsin, until such fine and costs of prosecution are paid, but not to
exceed 60 days.
§ 335-19 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 335-19
1:224
ARTICLE III
Attire, Conduct, and Entertainment on Licensed Premises
§ 335-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT TAVERN — Any establishment, including a
sexually oriented business, whether or not licensed to sell alcoholic
beverages pursuant to Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., which is used for, among other
things, services, performances or entertainment by nude/semi-nude
entertainers as defined in this section.
ANAL CLEFT AND CLEAVAGE — The definition of anal cleft and cleavage
can generally be described as including only that 1/3 of the complete
buttocks centered over the cleavage for the length of the cleavage, more
particularly described as follows:
The area at the rear of the human body (sometimes referred to as
the gluteus maximus) which lies between two imaginary straight lines
running parallel to the ground when a person is standing, the first or
top such line being 1/2 inch below the top of the vertical cleavage of
the nates (i.e., the prominence formed by the muscles running from the
back of the hip to the back of the leg) and the second or bottom such
line being 1/2 inch above the lowest point of the curvature of the fleshy
protuberance (sometimes referred to as the gluteal fold), and between
two imaginary straight lines, one on each side of the body (the "outside
line"), which outside lines are perpendicular to the ground and to the
horizontal lines described above and which perpendicular outside lines
pass through the outermost point(s) at which each nate meets the outer
side of each leg. Notwithstanding the above, buttocks shall not include
the leg, the hamstring muscle below the gluteal fold, the tensor faciae
latae muscle or any of the above-described portion of the human body
that is between either:
The left inside perpendicular line and the left outside perpendicular
line; or
(1)
The right inside perpendicular line and the right outside
perpendicular line.
(2)
A.
For the purpose of Subsection (1)(a) and (b):
The left inside perpendicular line shall be an imaginary straight
line on the left side of the anus:
That is perpendicular to the ground and to the horizontal lines
described above; and
(a)
That is 1/3 of the distance from the anus to the left outside line;
and
(b)
(1)
B.
§ 335-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-20
1:225
BREASTS — A portion of the human female mammary gland (commonly
referred to as the female breast) including the nipple and the areola (the
darker colored area of the breast surrounding the nipple) and an outside
area of such gland wherein such outside area is:
ENTERTAINER or PERFORMER — Includes entertainers, performers and
wait staff and means any person who provides services, performances or
entertainment for customers or patrons at a sexually oriented business,
whether or not for consideration, such as fees, wages, or tips, charged or
accepted for the service, performance or entertainment, and whether or not
the service, performance or entertainment is provided as an employee or
independent contractor, meaning any person who serves, performs for or
entertains, customers or patrons in the form of either live nudity, live seminudity,
or live specified sexual activities.
LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT — Any premises licensed by the Town of
Grand Chute pursuant to Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., for serving alcoholic
beverages for on-premises consumption.
NUDE or NUDITY — The showing of the human male or female genitals,
pubic area, vulva, anus, or anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully
opaque covering or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully
opaque covering of any part of the nipple and areola, or the showing of
covered male genitals in a discernible turgid state. This definition shall not
include any portion of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse,
skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel commonly worn by
persons in public.
NUDE/SEMI-NUDE ENTERTAINER — "Entertainer" includes both
performers and wait staff. Any person who provides services to customers,
performances, dancing or entertainment at a licensed establishment, adult
entertainment tavern or sexually oriented business, as defined in this
section, whether or not for consideration, such as fees, wages, or tips,
charged or accepted for the services, performance or entertainment, and
whether or not the services, performance or entertainment is provided in
the capacity of an employee, independent contract or under some other
arrangement, including any person who provides services, performances
or entertainment in the form of either live nudity, live semi-nudity, or live
The right inside perpendicular line shall be an imaginary straight
line on the right side of the anus:
That is perpendicular to the ground and to the horizontal lines
described above; and
(a)
That is 1/3 of the distance from the anus to the right outside
line.
(b)
(2)
A. Reasonably compact and contiguous to the areola; and
Contains at least the nipple and the areola and 1/2 of the outside
surface area of such gland located below the top of the areola, which
area shall be reasonably compact and contiguous to the areola.
B.
§ 335-20 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 335-20
1:226
specified sexual activities, or which is characterized by an emphasis on
exposure to view of human genitals, pubic area or anus or a female's
vulva or breasts below the top of the areola, or an emphasis on acts of or
acts which simulate sexual intercourse, masturbation, flagellation, erotic
touching or any sexual acts or specified sexual activities prohibited by
Wisconsin Statutes.
OPERATOR — Any person operating, conducting, maintaining or owning
any licensed establishment.
PREMISES — The real property upon which a licensed establishment,
adult entertainment tavern or sexually oriented business is located, or
is proposed to be located, and all appurtenances thereto and buildings
thereupon, including, but not limited to, the licensed establishment, the
grounds, the private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages
adjacent thereto, under the ownership, control, or supervision of the
operator of the licensed establishment.
PROHIBITED SEXUAL CONTACT — Touching the breasts, buttocks, anus,
vulva, labia, penis or testicles of another person in public view of customers
or patrons done for the purpose of gratifying the sexual desires of either
party.
SEMI-NUDE OR SEMI-NUDITY — All definitions of nude or nudity above,
and also the exposure of a bare female breast including the nipple and
areola, at any point below a horizontal line intersecting the top of the
areola. This definition shall not include any portion of the human female
breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other
wearing apparel commonly worn by persons in public. The terms "seminude"
and "semi-nudity" includes females adorned by clothing consisting of
pasties covering only the nipple and areola and G-strings.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — A business that regularly features
either live nudity or live semi-nudity as a permanent focus of its business,
giving special prominence to such content on a permanent basis, as cited in
Kraimer v. City of Schofield, 342 F. Supp. 2d 807 at page 822, citing Schultz
v. City of Cumberland, 228 F.3d 831, or otherwise permits live display of
specified sexual activities to members of the public.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Live simulated or live actual:
§ 335-21. Entertainment in licensed establishments operating
sexually oriented businesses.
Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality,
necrophilia, sadomasochistic abuse, fellatio, cunnilingus;
A.
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in Subsection A above.
B.
A. Application. This section shall only apply to licensed establishments
that operate sexually oriented businesses as defined in § 335-19,
subject to the excluded categories of businesses described as follows.
§ 335-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-21
1:227
(1) Excluded from application of the provisions of this section are the
following licensed establishments: wherever performances of
serious artistic merit, theaters, performing arts center, civic
centers, and dinner theaters, where live dance, ballet, or music, of
serious artistic merit, are offered, or legitimate educational,
medical or health-related programs are offered, and in which the
predominant business or attraction is not the offering to customers
of entertainment which is intended for the sexual interests or
titillation of customers, and where the licensed establishment is not
distinguished by an emphasis on, or the advertising or promotion
of, live nude or live semi-nude performances, or live specified
sexual activities take place. Also excluded from application of this
section are such establishments as hotels, motels, and restaurants
which are licensed establishments but which do not operate
sexually oriented businesses.
(2) Also excluded from application of this section are sexually oriented
businesses, which are not licensed establishments.
B. Intent. It is the intent of this section to promote the health, safety,
welfare, and morals of the citizens of the Town of Grand Chute by
establishing reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the
deleterious secondary effects associated with licensed establishments
that operate sexually oriented businesses. The provisions of this section
have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation or
restriction on the content of any communicative or expressive materials
or acts, including sexually oriented materials or acts. Similarly, it is not
the intent nor effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults
to sexually oriented materials or acts protected by the First Amendment
or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented
entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor
effect of this section to condone or legitimize the distribution of
obscene materials as regulated by state law.
C. Authority.
(1) The Town Board of the Town of Grand Chute has explicit authority
under § 125.10, Wis. Stats., to adopt regulations governing the sale
of alcoholic beverages.
(2) Under Wisconsin Statutes §§ 60.10(2)(c), 60.22(3), and 61.34, and
its police powers, respectively, the Town Board has authority to act
for the good order of the Town of Grand Chute and for the health,
safety and welfare of the public and may carry out its powers by
ordinances and enforcement.
(3) The Town Board recognizes it lacks authority to regulate obscenity,
to the extent preempted by State of Wisconsin Statutes, and does
not intend by adopting this section to regulate or to condone
obscenity.
§ 335-21 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 335-21
1:228
(4) The Town Board recognizes that the authority to adopt zoning
ordinances applicable to the Town falls under the jurisdiction of
Outagamie County, and the Town Board does not by adoption of this
section create a zoning regulation.
(5) The Town Board recognizes that the U.S. Supreme Court has held
that nude or semi-nude dancing is expressive conduct within the
outer parameters of the First Amendment to the United States
Constitution and therefore is entitled to protection under the First
Amendment, and the Town Board further recognizes that freedom
of speech and expression are among our most precious and highly
protected rights and wishes to act consistently with the full
protection of these rights.
D. Findings.
(1) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Town Board has become aware,
based upon its own observations and experiences, as well as
testimony before the Board by legal counsel for the Town, and also
the experiences of other communities, that sexually oriented
businesses may and do generate secondary effects which the
governing body believes are detrimental to the public health,
safety, welfare, and morals of the citizens of the Town of Grand
Chute.
(2) Specifically, the Town Board has reviewed evidence concerning
adverse secondary effects on other communities found in, but not
limited to, the cases of Ben's Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset, 316
F3d 702 (2003); City of Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S.
41 (1986); Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); Arcara
v. Cloud Books, Inc., 478 U.S. 697 (1986); California v. LaRue, 409
U.S. 109 (1972); City of Newport, KY v. lacobucci, 479 U.S. 92
(1986); United States v. O'Brien, 391 U.S. 367 (1968); DLS, Inc. v.
City of Chattanooga, 107 F3d 403 (6th Cir. 1997); Kev, Inc. v. Kitsap
County, 793 F2d 1053 (9th Cir. 1986); Hang On, Inc. v. City of
Arlington, 65 F3d 1248 (5th Cir. 1995); South Florida Free
Beaches, Inc. v. City of Miami, 734 F2d 608 (11th Cir. 1984); New
York State Liquor Auth. v. Bellanca, 452 US 714 (1981); Blue
Canary Corp. v. City of Milwaukee, 251 F3d 1121; MDK, Inc. v.
Village of Grafton, 345 F. Supp 2d 952 at page 957; Daytona Grand,
Inc. v. City of Daytona Beach, Florida, 490 F3d 860 (11th Cir. 2007);
and a compilation of studies on various municipalities regarding
the impact of adult-oriented business, and reports of harmful
secondary effects occurring in and around sexually oriented
businesses, including a publication of the American Planning
Association compiled by Eric Damian Kelly and Connie Cooper
entitled "everything you always wanted to know about regulating
sex businesses xxx," Report of the Attorney General's Working
Group on the Regulation of sexually oriented businesses, June 6,
1989, reports from studies in Phoenix, Arizona-1984 and
1995-1998; Minneapolis, Minnesota-1980; Houston, Texas-1997;
§ 335-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-21
1:229
Indianapolis, Indiana-1984; Amarillo, Texas-1977; Garden Grove,
California-1991; Los Angeles, California-1977; Whittier,
California-1978; Austin, Texas-1986; Seattle, Washington-1989;
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma-1986; Cleveland, Ohio-1977; Dallas,
Texas-1997; St. Croix County, Wisconsin-1993; Bellevue,
Washington-1998; Newport News, Virginia-1996; and New York
Times Square study-1994.
(3) Based upon the foregoing evidence as well as Town Board
members' own individual experiences, observations and reasoning,
the Town Board finds that:
(a) Crime statistics show that many types of crimes, especially sexrelated
crimes, such as prostitution, occur with more
frequency in neighborhoods where sexually oriented
businesses are located.
(b) Studies of the relationship between sexually oriented
businesses and neighborhood property values have found a
negative impact on both residential and commercial property
values.
(c) Sexually oriented businesses will probably contribute to an
increased public health risk through the spread of sexually
transmitted diseases.
(d) Areas with sexually oriented businesses exhibit an increased
potential for infiltration by organized crime for the purpose of
unlawful conduct.
(e) The consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of a
sexually oriented business exacerbates the deleterious
secondary effects of such businesses on the community.
(f) That restricting performers and entertainers only to a
requirement of wearing minimal coverings such as pasties or
G-strings alone will not avoid undesirable secondary effects in
licensed establishments.
(g) Some persons frequent sexually oriented businesses for the
purpose of engaging in illicit sexual behavior on the premises.
(4) The Town Board desires to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
the citizens of the Town by preventing and controlling the
secondary adverse effects associated with licensed establishments
that operate sexually oriented businesses.
(5) The Town Board has determined that the enactment of an
ordinance prohibiting licensed establishments from operating
sexually oriented businesses promotes the goal of minimizing,
preventing, and controlling the above-referenced adverse
§ 335-21 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 335-21
1:230
secondary effects and thereby protects the health, safety, and
welfare of the citizens of the Town of Grand Chute.
E. Grounds for nonissuance, suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of
alcohol beverage license issued under Chapter 125, Wisconsin Statutes.
The following shall constitute grounds for nonissuance, suspension,
revocation or nonrenewal, in accordance with notice and hearing
procedures under Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., of a license applied for, or
issued, by the Town of Grand Chute pursuant to Ch. 125, Wis. Stats.,
which license permits on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages.
(1) Conviction of an offense, contrary to § 944.21, Wis. Stats., or any
successor statute or later amended version.
(2) A finding by the Town Board that the operation of the licensed
facility or activity is in conflict with § 944.21, Wis. Stats.
(3) A finding by the Town Board that any of the following have
occurred on the proposed or existing licensed establishment's
premises:
(a) Live nude, live semi-nude services or performances by
entertainers or performers, provided or performed, and
directed at a proposed or existing licensed establishment's
patrons or customers, or the general public.
(b) An instance of live public display of specified sexual activities
involving any entertainer or performer.
(c) An instance of live display of prohibited sexual contact
involving an entertainer or performer.
(d) Operation of a sexually oriented business.
F. Penalties. In alternative to, or in conjunction with, action the Town may
take, described in Subsection E above, with respect to licenses, the
Town may impose a forfeiture for each violation as determined by the
Town Board or Municipal Court Judge taking into account the number
of past and present violations proven, and the severity of the current
offense, pursuant to issuance of a summons and complaint to the
operator of the licensed establishment followed by a hearing with
respect to the charges in accordance with Municipal Court procedures
of the Town of Grand Chute.
(1) Any person, partnership, or corporation who is found to have
violated this section shall be punished by a forfeiture of not less
than $500 nor more than $5,000 for each offense, together with the
cost thereof, as determined by the Municipal Court Judge, in
accordance with the following schedule:
(a) First offense: not more than $1,000.
(b) Second offense: not more than $3,000.
§ 335-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-21
1:231
§ 335-22. Visual displays.
The following acts or conduct on licensed premises is deemed contrary to
public welfare and morals, and therefore no on-sale license shall be held
at any premises where such conduct or acts are permitted. The showing
of film, still pictures, electronic reproduction, or other visual reproductions
depicting:
§ 335-23. Registration of entertainers.
(c) Third offense: not more than $5,000.
(2) Each violation of this section shall be considered a separate
offense, and any violation continuing more than one day shall be
considered a separate offense.
(3) Nothing herein precludes the Town Board from taking action on
any alcohol beverage license pursuant to, or consistent with, the
requirements and procedures applicable under Ch. 125, Wis.
Stats., or other applicable Town ordinances, on other legal grounds
than those specified in this section.
G. Standards for enforcement action. All notice and hearing requirements
required for action on licenses under Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., shall be
followed for purposes of taking license action pursuant to this section.
All actions of the Town Board regarding licenses under Ch. 125, Wis.
Stats., pursuant hereto shall be subject to the rights of appeal
applicable to action taken under this section in accordance with Ch.
125, Wis. Stats. For purposes of enforcement of this section pursuant to
Subsections E and F above, regardless of the basis for the hearing
involving any violation of this section, in those cases where hearings are
conducted pursuant to Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., regarding a licensed
establishment's violation of this section, the standard for enforcement
action shall be whether the Town Board finds, by sufficient evidence, in
the discretion of the Board, that the violation has occurred.
A. Acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy,
bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are
prohibited by law.
B. Any person being touched, caressed or fondled on the breast, buttocks,
anus or genitals.
C. Scenes wherein a person displays the vulva or the anus or the genitals.
D. Scenes wherein artificial devices or inanimate objects are employed to
depict, or drawings are employed to portray, any of the prohibited
activities described above.
A. Registration requirement.
§ 335-21 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 335-23
1:232
(1) Any person intending to be employed or work in any capacity as a
nude/semi-nude entertainer, as defined in § 335-20, in any licensed
establishment, adult entertainment tavern or sexually oriented
business, as defined § 335-20, within the Town of Grand Chute
shall, before engaging in such employment or work, register with,
and obtain a license from, the Grand Chute Police Department by
completing and filing a registration statement on the form provided
by the Department and paying the required fee as established in
the fee schedule maintained by the Grand Chute Town Clerk.
(2) No licensed establishment, adult entertainment tavern or sexually
oriented business shall allow services or performances by any
nude/semi-nude entertainer who is not registered with and has not
obtained a license from the Grand Chute Police Department as
required above.
B. Application.
(1) This section shall only apply to nude/semi-nude entertainers
employed or desiring to work, entertain or perform in a licensed
establishment, adult entertainment tavern or sexually oriented
business and to the licensed establishments, adult entertainment
taverns or sexually oriented businesses which allow services or
performances by such entertainers, as defined in § 335-20, subject
to the excluded categories of businesses described as follows.
(2) Excluded from application of the provisions of this section are the
following establishments: wherever performances of serious
artistic merit, theaters, performing arts centers, civic centers, and
dinner theaters, where live dance, ballet, or music, of serious
artistic merit, are offered, or legitimate educational, medical or
health-related programs are offered, and in which the predominant
business or attraction is not the offering to customers of
entertainment which is intended for the sexual interests or
titillation of customers, and where the establishment is not
distinguished by an emphasis on, or the advertising or promotion
of, live nude or live semi-nude performances, or live specified
sexual activities take place. Also excluded from application of this
section are such establishments as hotels, motels and restaurants
which are licensed establishments but which do not operate adult
entertainment taverns or sexually oriented businesses.
C. Intent. It is the intent of this section to promote the health, safety,
welfare, and morals of the citizens of the Town of Grand Chute by
establishing reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the
deleterious secondary effects associated with the operation of licensed
establishments, adult entertainment taverns and sexually oriented
businesses. The provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor
the effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative or expressive materials or acts, including sexually
oriented materials or acts. Similarly, it is not the intent or effect of this
§ 335-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-23
1:233
section to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented
materials or acts protected by the First Amendment or to deny access
by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment
to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this
section to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials
as regulated by state law.
D. Authority.
(1) The Town Board of the Town of Grand Chute has explicit authority
under § 125.10, Wis. Stats., to adopt regulations governing the sale
of alcoholic beverages.
(2) Under §§ 60.10(2)(c), 60.22(3), and 61.34, Wis. Stats., and its police
powers, respectively, the Town Board has authority to act for the
good order of the Town of Grand Chute and for the health, safety
and welfare of the public and may carry out its powers by
ordinances and enforcement.
(3) The Town Board recognizes it lacks authority to regulate obscenity,
to the extent preempted by State of Wisconsin Statutes, and does
not intend by adopting this section to regulate or to condone
obscenity.
(4) The Town Board recognizes that the United States Supreme Court
has held that nude or semi-nude dancing is expressive conduct
within the outer parameters of the First Amendment to the United
States Constitution and therefore is entitled to certain protections
under the First Amendment, and the Town Board further
recognizes that freedom of speech and expression are among our
most precious and highly protected rights and wishes to act
consistently with the full protection of these rights.
E. Findings.
(1) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Town Board has become aware,
based upon its own observations and experiences, as well as
testimony before the Board by legal counsel for the Town, and also
the experiences of other communities, that licensed
establishments, adult entertainment taverns and sexually oriented
businesses may and do generate secondary effects which the
governing body believes are detrimental to the public health,
safety, welfare, and morals of the citizens of the Town of Grand
Chute.
(2) Specifically, the Town Board has reviewed evidence concerning
adverse secondary effects on other communities found in, but not
limited to, the cases of Ben's Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset, 316
F3d 702 (2003); City of Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S.
41 (1986); Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); Arcara
v. Cloud Books, Inc., 478 U.S. 697 (1986); California v. LaRue, 409
U.S. 109 (1972); City of Newport, KY v. lacobucci, 479 U.S. 92
§ 335-23 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 335-23
1:234
(1986); United States v. O'Brien, 391 U.S. 367 (1968); DLS, Inc.
v. City of Chattanooga, 107 F3d 403 (6th Cir. 1997); Kev, Inc.
v. Kitsap County, 793 F2d 1053 (9th Cir. 1986); Hang On, Inc.
v. City of Arlington, 65 F3d 1248 (5th Cir. 1995); South Florida
Free Beaches, Inc. v. City of Miami, 734 F2d 608 (11th Cir. 1984);
New York State Liquor Auth. v. Bellanca, 452 US 714 (1981); Blue
Canary Corp. v. City of Milwaukee, 251 F3d 1121; MDK, Inc. v.
Village of Grafton, 345 F. Supp 2d 952 at page 957; Daytona Grand,
Inc. v. City of Daytona Beach, Florida, 490 F3d 860 (11th Cir. 2007);
and a compilation of studies on various municipalities regarding
the impact of adult and sexually oriented businesses, and reports
of harmful secondary effects occurring in and around sexually
oriented businesses, including a publication of the American
Planning Association compiled by Eric Damian Kelly and Connie
Cooper entitled "everything you always wanted to know about
regulating sex businesses xxx," Report of the Attorney General's
Working Group on the Regulation of sexually oriented businesses,
June 6, 1989, reports from studies in Phoenix, Arizona-1984 and
1995-1998; Minneapolis, Minnesota-1980; Houston, Texas-1997;
Indianapolis, Indiana-1984; Amarillo, Texas-1977; Garden Grove,
California-1991; Los Angeles, California-1977; Whittier,
California-1978; Austin, Texas-1986; Seattle, Washington-1989;
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma-1986; Cleveland, Ohio-1977; Dallas,
Texas-1997; St. Croix County, Wisconsin-1993; Bellevue,
Washington-1998; Newport News, Virginia-1996; and New York
Times Square study-1994.
(3) Based upon the foregoing evidence as well as Town Board
members' own individual experiences, observations and reasoning,
the Town Board finds that:
(a) Crime statistics show that many types of crimes, especially sexrelated
crimes, such as prostitution, occur with more
frequency in neighborhoods where sexually oriented
businesses are located.
(b) Studies of the relationship between sexually oriented
businesses and neighborhood property values have found a
negative impact on both residential and commercial property
values.
(c) Sexually oriented businesses will probably contribute to an
increased public health risk through the spread of sexually
transmitted diseases.
(d) Areas with sexually oriented businesses exhibit an increased
potential for infiltration by organized crime for the purpose of
unlawful conduct.
§ 335-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-23
1:235
(e) The consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of a
sexually oriented business exacerbates the deleterious
secondary effects of such businesses on the community.
(f) That restricting performers and entertainers only to a
requirement of wearing minimal coverings such as pasties or
G-strings alone will not avoid undesirable secondary effects in
licensed establishments.
(g) Some persons frequent sexually oriented businesses for the
purpose of engaging in illicit sexual behavior on the premises.
(4) The Town Board desires to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
the citizens of the Town by preventing and controlling the
secondary adverse effects associated with licensed establishments
or other businesses operating as adult entertainment taverns or
sexually oriented businesses.
(5) The Town Board has determined that the enactment of an
ordinance prohibiting licensed establishments from operating
sexually oriented businesses and mandating that nude/semi-nude
entertainers register through the Town promotes the goal of
minimizing, preventing, and controlling the above-referenced
adverse secondary effects and thereby protects the health, safety,
and welfare of the citizens of the Town of Grand Chute.
F. Annual licensing of nude/semi-nude entertainers. Licensing shall be
required on an annual basis from July 1 to June 30. The registration
period shall terminate on June 30 and require renewal for each
separate year thereafter, beginning July 1 of each year.
G. Grounds for nonissuance, suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of
license issued to nude/semi-nude entertainers. The following, among
others as determined appropriate by the Town, shall constitute grounds
for nonissuance, suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of a license
issued to a nude/semi-nude entertainer.
(1) Conviction of a sexually related offense, offenses of moral
turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or an offense contrary to
§§ 944.01 through 944.36, Wis. Stats., or any successor statutes or
later amended versions.
H. Procedure for nonissuance, suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal of
license. The Town Clerk shall give written notice of any decision by the
Town Police Department or Town Board to nonissue, suspend, revoke,
or nonrenew a license for any nude/semi-nude entertainer by regular
mail to the last known address shown on the application or license
previously issued. The decision of the Police Department or Town Board
shall become final unless the nude/semi-nude entertainer requests a
hearing before the Town Board, in writing, submitted to the Town Clerk,
which request shall be received by the Town Clerk within 15 days of the
postmark mailing of the notice of the Town Board decision. The Town
§ 335-23 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 335-23
1:236
hearing shall be conducted on the next regularly scheduled Town Board
meeting, providing at least 72 hours' advance notice of the request for
hearing is received prior to the Town Board meeting; otherwise, the
hearing shall be at the next regularly scheduled Town Board meeting.
The Town Board at such hearing may affirm, reverse, or modify its
decision following the hearing, and written notice thereof shall be
mailed by the Town Clerk to the nude/semi-nude entertainer.
I. Penalties.
(1) In alternative to, or in conjunction with, any action the Town may
take in order to enforce this section, any nude/semi-nude
entertainer failing to comply with the provision of this section shall
be punished upon conviction thereof by a fine as prescribed in the
Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules for each separate offense.
Each day an unregistered adult nude/semi-nude entertainer is
performing, dancing or otherwise entertaining shall be considered
and charged as a separate offense punishable by a separate fine.
(2) Any licensed establishment, sexually oriented business or adult
entertainment tavern employing an unregistered nude/semi-nude
entertainer or otherwise permitting an unregistered nude/seminude
entertainer to perform, dance or otherwise entertain shall be
punished, upon conviction, by fine as prescribed in the Uniform
Forfeiture and Bond Schedule. Each day an unregistered adult
nude/semi-nude entertainer is employed, or permitted to perform,
dance or otherwise entertain by any licensee or any licensed
establishments, adult entertainment taverns or sexually oriented
businesses shall constitute a separate offense punishable by a
separate fine.
§ 335-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-23
1:237
Chapter 349
JUNK DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Direct sellers, auctions and closeout
sales — See Ch. 259.
Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers — See
Ch. 412.
Waste management — See Ch. 520.
§ 349-1. License required.
No person shall keep or maintain in the Town any building or yard for the
keeping or storing in commercial quantities or for dealing in any old, used
or secondhand materials of any kind, including rags, paper, rubbish, bottles,
rubber, iron or other metals, or junked motor vehicles or the parts thereof
without first having obtained a license as hereinafter provided.
§ 349-2. Application for license.
Every application for a junk dealer's license shall be in writing and shall
contain the name and address of the person applying for such license and
the proposed location of the business and a detailed account of the type of
materials to be dealt in or stored.
§ 349-3. Issuance of license; fee.81
Whenever it shall appear that the proposed location of such yard or
business and the types of materials to be collected and stored are suitable
and proper with regard to the public health, safety and welfare, and
whenever it shall further appear that such business shall not be or become
a fire hazard and shall not be or become a public nuisance by reason of foul
odors, noise or unsightliness, the Town Board shall authorize and the Town
Clerk shall issue a junk dealer's license. The fee for such license shall be
as prescribed in the Town Fee Schedule, and the license shall terminate on
June 30 in each year. The Town Board may, in its discretion, require as a
condition of such license that such licensee shall erect a board fence around
the premises.
§ 349-4. Revocation of license.
Any junk dealer's license may be revoked by the Town Board whenever it
shall appear that such business is conducted in such a manner as to create
a public nuisance or upon conviction of such licensee for violation of any
state law or Town ordinance pertaining to junk dealers.
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 335-23 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 349-5
1:238
§ 349-5. Term of license.
All licenses shall be issued as of July 1 and shall continue in force until June
30 next succeeding the date of issuance thereof unless sooner revoked as
provided by law.
§ 349-6. Violations and penalties.82
Chapter 382
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 535.
§ 382-1. Purpose.83
It is the purpose of this chapter to enforce minimum standards for mobile
homes and mobile home parks to promote the public health, safety and
welfare; to establish requirements for the design, construction, alteration,
extension, operation, and maintenance of mobile homes and mobile home
parks and related utilities and facilities; to require the issuance of permits
for construction, alteration and extension of mobile homes and mobile home
parks; to authorize the inspection of mobile homes and mobile home parks;
to regulate the location of mobile homes; and to fix penalties for violations.
A. A first violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules,
together with the costs of prosecution, and on default of the payment of
any such fine and/or costs of prosecution such person shall be
committed to the county jail of Outagamie County until such fine and
costs are paid, but not to exceed 90 days.
B. Any person violating this chapter who shall previously have been
convicted of a violation of this chapter shall, upon proof and conviction
thereof, forfeit an amount as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and
Bond Schedules, together with the costs of prosecution, and on default
of the payment of any such fine and costs of prosecution, or either of
them, such convicted person shall be committed to and confined within
the county jail of Outagamie County, Wisconsin, until such fine and
costs of prosecution are paid, but not to exceed six months.
C. Each day of violation under this chapter shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 349-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-2
1:239
§ 382-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — All structures constructed on a mobile home
lot apart from the basic mobile home unit and shall include awnings,
cabanas, storage cabinets (or sheds), carports, windbreaks, attached
porches and garages.
COMMON AREA — Any area of space designed for joint use of tenants
occupying the mobile home park.
DEPENDENT MOBILE HOME — A mobile home which does not have
complete bathroom facilities.
DRIVEWAY — A minor private way used by vehicles and pedestrians on a
mobile home lot or used for common access to a small group of lots or
facilities.
LICENSE — A written license issued by the Town of Grand Chute allowing
a person to operate and maintain a mobile home park under the provisions
of this chapter and regulations issued hereunder.
LOT AREA — The total area reserved for exclusive use of the occupants of a
mobile home.
MOBILE HOME — A manufactured, transportable, single-family dwelling
unit, suitable for year-round occupancy, containing water supply, waste
disposal and electrical conveniences and which is ready for occupancy
except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations at the
site and as defined in § 66.0435(1)(d), Wis. Stats.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land for the placement of a single mobile
home and the exclusive use of its occupants.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land which has been developed for
the placement of mobile homes and is owned by an individual, a firm, trust,
partnership, public or private association or corporation.
MOBILE HOME STAND — That part of an individual lot which has been
reserved for the placement of one mobile home unit.
PARK MANAGEMENT — The person who owns or has charge, care or
control of the mobile home park.
PARK STREET — A private way which affords principal means of access to
individual mobile home lots or auxiliary buildings.
PERMIT — A written permit or certification issued by the Town Board
permitting the construction, alteration and extension of a mobile home park
under the provisions of this chapter and regulations issued hereunder.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, public or private
association or corporation.
TENANT STORAGE AREA — An enclosed space designed to provide
auxiliary general storage space for an individual mobile home.
§ 382-2 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 382-2
1:240
TOWN BOARD — The Town Board of the Town of Grand Chute, Outagamie
County, Wisconsin.
§ 382-3. Permits for new construction, alteration or extension of
mobile home parks.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend any
mobile home park within the limits of the Town of Grand Chute unless
he holds a valid permit issued by the Town Board in the name of such
person for the specific construction, alteration or extension proposed.
B. All applications to the Town Board for permits shall be filed with the
Clerk and reviewed by the Plan Commission and shall contain the
following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Location and legal description of the mobile home park.
(3) Complete engineering plans and specifications of the proposed
park showing but not limited to the following:
(a) The area and dimensions of the tract of land.
(b) The number, location and size of all mobile home lots and the
location of common areas.
(c) The location and width of roadways and walkways.84
(d) The location of each permanent foundation for a mobile home,
as each mobile home shall be placed on a permanent
foundation, with all such permanent foundations to be subject
to the same setback requirements established for subdivisions
in the Town of Grand Chute.
(e) Plans and specifications of all utilities, including sewage
collection and disposal, stormwater drainage, water
distribution and supply, refuse storage and collection, lighting,
electrical, telephone and television antenna systems.
(f) Landscaping plans for the entire park, including a planting
plan for the buffer strip.
(g) Plans and specifications of all buildings to be located within the
park.
(h) Such other plans and specifications and information as may
reasonably be required by the Town Board.
C. No permit shall be issued for the construction of a mobile home park
unless that development shall contain a minimum number of two and a
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 382-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-3
1:241
§ 382-4. Licenses for operation of mobile home parks.
maximum number of 10 mobile home lots, and no permit shall be issued
for the construction of the mobile home park unless that development is
greater than two miles from any other mobile home park then existing
in the Town of Grand Chute.
D. All applications for a permit shall be accompanied by the deposit of a
fee as prescribed in the Town Fee Schedule for each mobile home lot
proposed, plus any other permit fees required by any provision of this
Code.
E. When, upon review of the application, the Town Board is satisfied that
the proposed plan meets the requirements of this chapter, a permit
shall be issued.
F. Any person whose application for a permit under this chapter has been
denied may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before
the Town Board under the procedure provided by § 382-6 of this
chapter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any mobile home park
within the limits of the Town of Grand Chute unless he holds a valid
license issued annually by the Town of Grand Chute in the name of such
person for the specific mobile home park. All applications for licenses
shall be made to the Town Board, which shall issue a license upon
compliance by the applicant with the provisions of this chapter.85
B. Every person holding a license shall give notice in writing to the Town
Board within three days after having sold, transferred, given away, or
otherwise disposed of interest in or control of any mobile home park.
Such notice shall include the name and address of the person
succeeding to the ownership or control of such mobile home park. Upon
application in writing for transfer of the license and deposit of a fee as
prescribed in the Town Fee Schedule, the license shall be transferred if
the mobile home park is in compliance with all applicable provisions of
this chapter.
(1) Application for original licenses shall be in writing, signed by the
applicant, accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant as to the
truth of the application and by the deposit of a fee as prescribed in
the Town Fee Schedule for each 50 lots or fraction thereof, plus an
inspection fee as prescribed in the Town Fee Schedule per mobile
home located within the mobile home park, and shall contain the
name and address of the applicant, the location and legal
description of the mobile home park, and a site plan of the mobile
home park showing all mobile home lots, structures, roads,
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 382-3 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 382-4
1:242
walkways, and other service facilities as required by § 382-3B of
this chapter.
(2) Applications for renewals of licenses shall be made in writing by
the holders of the licenses, shall be accompanied by the deposit of a
fee as prescribed in the Town Fee Schedule for each 50 lots, or
fraction thereof, plus an inspection fee as prescribed in the Town
Fee Schedule per mobile home, and shall contain any change in the
information submitted since the original license was issued or the
latest renewal granted.
C. In addition to the above license fee, the licensee or the owner or the
occupant of every mobile home shall pay and be jointly and severally
liable for the payment of a monthly parking permit fee to the Town of
Grand Chute. Such monthly parking permit fees shall be collected by
the licensee, who is primarily liable for the payment thereof. The
determination of the amount of such fee, the review thereof, and the
enforcement of the payment and the disposition of such fee shall be in
accordance with § 66.0435, Wis. Stats.
D. After approval of such application in accordance with this chapter and
before issuance of such license, the applicant shall cause to be filed a
surety bond in the amount of $2,000 if the park contains 100 units or
fewer or $4,000 if the park contains more than 100 units. The bond
shall guarantee the collection from the licensee of the monthly parking
fee provided for in Subsection C and the payment of such fees to the
Town Treasurer.
E. All minimum standards under the Town of Grand Chute's Housing Code
(Chapter 317) are expressly incorporated into this chapter and shall
apply to each and every mobile home located within the Town of Grand
Chute. Additionally, all provisions of the Town of Grand Chute's
ordinances concerning compliance, enforcement, penalties, appeals
and interpretation are expressly incorporated into this chapter. Also
incorporated by reference are the Town Fire Code (Chapter 291), the
Building Code as applicable (Chapter 220, Article I), Town Building
Regulations (Chapter 220, Article II), §§ 66.0435 and 101.94, Wis.
Stats., and any other applicable statutory or Administrative Code
provisions.
F. No license may be granted for the operation of a mobile home park
within the Town of Grand Chute unless each and every mobile home
contained therein is in compliance with all minimum standards for
housing contained in Chapter 317 of this Code.
G. Additionally, no license may be granted unless a mobile home park and
all homes contained therein are in compliance with the Town Fire Code
(Chapter 291), the Building Code as applicable (Chapter 220, Article I),
Town Building Regulations (Chapter 220, Article II), §§ 66.0435 and
101.94, Wis. Stats., and any other applicable statutory or
Administrative Code provisions.
§ 382-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-4
1:243
§ 382-5. Inspection of mobile home parks.
§ 382-6. Notices, hearings and orders.
H. Any person whose application for a license under this chapter has been
denied may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before
the Town Board under the procedure provided by § 382-6 of this
chapter.
I. Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home park, the Town Board or
its authorized agents find that conditions or practices exist which are in
violation of any provision of this chapter, the Town Board shall give
notice in writing in accordance with § 382-6A to the person to whom the
license was issued that unless such conditions or practices are
corrected within a reasonable period of time specified in the notice by
the Town Board, the license shall be suspended. At the end of such
period, the Town Board shall reinspect such mobile home park and, if
such conditions or practices have not been corrected, shall suspend the
license and give notice in writing of such suspension to the person to
whom the license is issued. Upon receipt of notice of such suspension,
such person shall cease operation of such mobile home park, except as
provided in § 382-6B.
A. The Town Board is hereby authorized and directed to make such
inspections as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with
this chapter.
B. The Town Board and its authorized agents shall have the power to enter
at reasonable times upon any private or public property for the purpose
of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement
of this chapter.
C. The Town Board and its authorized agents shall have the power to
inspect the register containing a record of all residents of the mobile
home park.
D. It shall be the duty of the park management to give the Town Board and
its authorized agents free access to all lots at reasonable times for the
purpose of inspection.
E. It shall be the duty of every occupant of a mobile home park to give the
owner thereof or his agent or employee access to any part of such
mobile home park at reasonable times for the purpose of making such
repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with this
chapter.
A. Whenever the Town Board determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of
this chapter, the Town Board may order the discontinuance of such
violation and shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person to
whom the permit or license was issued. Such notice shall be in writing,
§ 382-4 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 382-6
1:244
include a statement of the reasons for its issuance, allow a reasonable
time for the performance of the act it requires, and contain an outline
of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. Such notice and order shall have been
properly served when a copy thereof has been sent by registered United
States Mail to the last registered post office address of the permittee
or licensee as registered with the Town Clerk or when the same has
been personally served upon the attorney-in-fact of such permittee or
licensee or when the same shall have been served in any other manner
as provided by the Wisconsin Statutes for the service of process.
B. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provisions of this chapter may request and
shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Town Board,
provided that such person shall file in the office of the Town Board a
written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief
statement of the grounds therefor within 10 days after the day such
notice or order was served.
C. The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the
notice and of the order, except in the case of an order issued under
Subsection E. Upon receipt of such petition, the Town Board shall set a
time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written
notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an
opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice and order should
be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later
than 10 days after the day on which the petition was filed, provided
that, upon application of the petitioner, the Town Board may postpone
the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten-day
period when in its judgment the petitioner has submitted good and
sufficient reasons for such postponement.
D. Upon the expiration of the time required in such notice or order or after
such hearing, as the case may be, the Town Board shall make findings
as to the compliance with the provisions of this chapter and shall issue
an order in writing sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the notice and
order which shall be served as provided in Subsection A. Upon failure to
comply with such order, either as sustained or modified, the license of
the mobile home park affected by the order may be suspended or
revoked.
E. Whenever the Town Board finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health, the Town Board
shall issue an order declaring the existence of such an emergency and
requiring that such action be taken as it may deem necessary to meet
the emergency, including the suspension of the permit or license.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, such order shall
be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed
shall comply therewith immediately but upon petition to the Town
Board shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible.86
§ 382-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-7
1:245
§ 382-7. Exemptions.
§ 382-8. General requirements for new mobile home parks.
Any person making application for a permit to construct or expand a mobile
home park shall meet the following design and system requirements:
A. Where the Town Board finds that compliance with provisions of this
chapter would result in undue hardship, an exemption may be granted
by the Town Board without impairing the intent and purpose of this
chapter. Deviations from design, construction and installation
provisions shall be brought into compliance with this chapter within a
reasonable period of time based on economic feasibility of
improvement, nature, significance, and extent of deviation,
depreciation of material, improvement, layout in use and other similar
factors.
B. Such period shall begin after the Town Board has given notice of a
certain and specific deviation from this chapter to the person to whom
the permit or certification was issued.
C. Gradual improvements to a higher degree of conformity shall be
permissive, provided that there shall be complete conformity at the end
of a period prescribed by the Town Board.
A. All design and system requirements contained in any applicable
provisions of any other chapters of the Town of Grand Chute Code,
§§ 66.0435, 101.94 and 101.96, Wis. Stats., and any other applicable
statutory or Administrative Code sections must be satisfied; to the
extent that any provision conflicts with this chapter, the more
restrictive provision shall apply.
B. Environmental requirements.
(1) Density. The maximum allowable density in a mobile home park
development shall be six units, or lots, per gross acre.
(2) Minimum lot size. Individual lots within the mobile park must
contain an area of not less than 3,600 square feet.87
(3) Maximum lot coverage. The basic mobile home unit shall not
occupy in excess of 1/3 of the mobile home lot, and the complete
unit, including all accessory structures, shall not occupy more than
1/2 of the mobile home lot.
(4) Required separation between mobile homes. Mobile homes shall be
separated from each other and from other buildings and structures
by at least 15 feet. An accessory structure, such as an awning,
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 382-7 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 382-8
1:246
cabana, storage cabinet, carport, windbreak, or porch attached to
the mobile home, shall, for purposes of separation requirements,
be considered a part of the mobile home. Detached accessory
structures shall be allowed only if included and approved as part of
the original or revised mobile home park plan.
(5) Setback and buffer strips. Each mobile home shall be located at
least five feet from any mobile home lot line.
(a) There shall be a minimum distance of 10 feet between the
mobile home stand and abutting park street right-of-way.
(b) The mobile homes shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from
public streets.
(c) All mobile homes shall be located at least 40 feet from any park
property boundary line, except where the adjoining property is
also a mobile home park.
(6) Screening.
(a) All mobile home parks shall be provided with screening of
natural growth along the property boundary line separating
the park and such adjacent properties, except where the
adjoining property is also a mobile home park. The planting
area shall have a minimum width of 15 feet.
(b) Within such a planting area there shall be established, within
six months after issue of the license for the occupation of such
mobile home park, the following plantings:
[1] A temporary planting of fast-growing material capable or
reaching a height of 15 feet or more, such as Lombardy
poplar.
[2] A permanent planting such as white or Norway pine, the
individual trees to be of such a number and so arranged
that within 10 years they will have formed a screen
equivalent in opacity to a solid fence or wall. Such
permanent planting shall be grown or maintained at a
height of not less than 15 feet.
(7) Recreation areas.
(a) In all mobile home parks there shall be one or more recreation
areas which shall be easily accessible to all park residents.
(b) The size of such recreation areas shall be based upon a
minimum of 200 square feet for each lot. No outdoor
recreation area shall contain less than 2,500 square feet.
§ 382-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-8
1:247
(c) Recreation areas shall be located so as to be free of traffic
hazards and should, where the topography permits, be
centrally located.
(8) Allowable uses.
(a) Single-family mobile homes as defined by this chapter shall be
allowed and any approved accessory structures included in the
original plans and specifications, or revision thereof.
Dependent mobile homes shall specifically be prohibited from
placement within mobile home parks.
(b) Parks, playgrounds and open space shall be allowed, as well as
the following commercial uses when they are for the exclusive
use of park residents:
[1] Mobile home park office.
[2] Laundromat.
[3] Clubhouse and facilities for private, social or recreation
clubs.
(c) Signs pertaining to the lease, hire or sale of individual mobile
homes, not more than two square feet in area, shall be allowed,
as well as one mobile home park identification sign not more
than 50 square feet in area, to be located in proximity to the
park entrance.
C. Access requirements.
(1) General requirements. All mobile home parks shall be provided
with safe and convenient vehicular access from abutting public
street or roads to each mobile home lot. Such access shall be
provided by streets, driveways, or other means.
(2) Road systems. All road systems shall comply with current local
adopted code.88
(3) Park entrance. Entrances to mobile home parks shall be designed
to minimize congestion and hazards and allow free movement of
traffic on adjacent streets.89
(4) Street construction and design standards.
(a) Pavements. All streets shall be provided with a smooth, hard
and dense surface which shall be durable and well drained
under normal use and weather conditions. Pavement edges
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
89.Editor's Note: Original § 11.08, Subsection 3d, Internal streets, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
§ 382-8 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 382-8
1:248
shall be protected to prevent raveling of the wearing surface
and shifting of the pavement base.
(b) Grades. Grades of all streets shall be sufficient to ensure
adequate surface drainage but shall not be more than 8%.
(c) Intersections. Within 100 feet of an intersection, streets shall
be at approximately right angles. A distance of at least 150 feet
shall be maintained between center lines of offset intersecting
streets. Intersections of more than two streets at one point
shall be avoided.
(5) Parking requirements. On-street parking, or parking in the street
right-of-way, shall be prohibited, except as provided in Subsection
C(5)(d) below.
(a) Occupant parking. A minimum of two parking spaces shall be
provided for occupant parking purposes. Such spaces shall be
located within 150 feet of the mobile home lot to be served.
(b) Visitor parking. A minimum of one space for every four mobile
home lots shall be provided for visitor parking purposes.
(c) Parking space. Each parking space shall contain a minimum of
200 square feet. The space shall be paved with a smooth, hard
and dense surface which shall be durable and well drained
under normal use and weather conditions.
(d) Use of right-of-way for parking. In no instance shall the
required street pavement width be used for parking purposes.
The remaining right-of-way width, 10 feet on either side of the
street pavement, may be used for parking purposes only if the
spaces are perpendicular to the street.
(e) Parking restrictions. Parking of boats, trailers, campers,
snowmobiles, or other similar vehicles shall be restricted to an
area provided by the park management specifically for said
purpose.
(6) Walkways. All parks shall be provided with safe, convenient, allseason
pedestrian access of adequate width for intended use,
durable and convenient to maintain, between individual mobile
homes, the park streets and all community facilities provided for
park residents. Sudden changes in alignment and gradient should
be avoided.
(a) Common walk system. A common walk system shall be
provided and maintained between locations where pedestrian
traffic is concentrated. Such common walks shall have a
minimum width of 3 1/2 feet.
(b) Individual walks. All mobile home stands shall be connected to
common walks, to paved streets, or to paved driveways or
§ 382-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-8
1:249
parking spaces connected to a paved street or roadway. Such
individual walks shall have a minimum width of two feet.
D. Mobile home stand. To the extent that this subsection is ever held by a
court of competent jurisdiction to be impermissibly in conflict with
§ 101.96, Wis. Stats., this provision is severable and the balance of the
chapter shall remain intact. For the purpose of this chapter, a mobile
home stand shall be defined as an area 15 feet by 70 feet. The area of
the mobile home stand shall be improved to provide adequate support
for the placement and tie-down of the mobile home, thereby securing
the superstructure against uplift, sliding, rotation and overturning.
(1) The mobile home stand shall not heave, shift or settle unevenly
under the weight of the mobile home due to frost action,
inadequate drainage, vibration or other forces acting on the
structure.
(2) The mobile home stand shall be provided with anchors and tiedowns
such as cast-in-place concrete "dead men" eyelets
embedded in concrete foundations or runways, screw augers,
arrowhead anchors, or other devices securing the stability of the
mobile home.
(3) Anchors and tie-downs shall be placed at least at each corner of the
mobile home stand, and each shall be able to sustain a minimum
tensile strength of 2,800 pounds.
E. Site suitability and stormwater drainage. Condition of soil,
groundwater level, drainage and topography shall not create hazards to
the property or the health or safety of the occupants. The site shall not
be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors or other adverse
influences, and no portion subject to unpredictable and/or sudden
flooding, subsidence or erosion shall be used for any purpose which
would expose persons or property to hazards.
(1) Soil and ground cover requirements. Exposed ground surfaces in
all parts of the mobile home park that are not paved or covered
with stone screenings or other solid material shall be protected
with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion
and of eliminating objectionable dust.
(2) Site drainage requirements. The ground surface in all parts of
every mobile home park shall be graded and equipped to drain all
surface water in a safe, efficient manner.
F. Water supply and distribution system. An adequate, safe and potable
supply of water shall be provided in each mobile home park. Where a
public supply of water of satisfactory quantity, quality and pressure is
available at the site or at the boundary of the site, connection shall be
made thereto and its supply used exclusively. When a satisfactory public
water supply is not available, a private water supply system may be
developed and used as approved by Wisconsin Statutes, the
§ 382-8 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 382-8
1:250
Department of Safety and Professional Services, and/or any other
agency as reflected in the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
G. Sewage disposal system. An adequate and safe sewer system shall be
provided within all mobile home parks for conveying all sewage. The
mobile home park sewer system shall make connection to the public
sewerage system at the boundary of the site and shall use its disposal
and treatment services exclusively. The mobile home park sewer system
shall be constructed and maintained according to standards set by
Wisconsin Statutes, the Department of Safety and Professional
Services, and/or any other agency as reflected in the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
H. Refuse storage and collection system.
(1) The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the mobile home
park shall be so conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent
harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards, or air
pollution.
(2) All refuse shall be stored in flytight, watertight, rodentproof
containers which shall be located not more than 150 feet from any
mobile home lot. Containers shall be provided in sufficient number
and capacity to properly store all refuse.
(3) Refuse collection stands shall be provided for all refuse containers.
Such container stands shall be so designed as to prevent containers
from being tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration
and to facilitate cleansing around them.
(4) All refuse containing garbage shall be collected at least once per
week. Where suitable collection service is not available from public
or private agencies, the mobile home park operator shall provide
this service. All refuse shall be collected and transported in covered
vehicles or covered containers.
(5) In no instance may disposal of the waste be carried out through
incineration on the mobile home park site.
I. Public utility systems. All utility service systems shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations
governing such systems.
(1) Public utility service outlets shall be provided at each mobile home
stand for electric, telephone, gas (if provided) and television
antenna service systems.
(2) All utility service lines shall be located underground within the
mobile home park.
(3) Each mobile home park shall have only one television antenna that
shall serve for all park residents.
§ 382-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-8
1:251
J. Street and public walkway illumination requirements.
(1) All parks shall be furnished with lighting units so spaced and
equipped with luminaires placed at such mounting heights as will
provide the following average maintained levels of illumination for
the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles at night:
(a) All parts of park street systems shall be illuminated at an
average level of 0.6 footcandle, with a minimum of 0.2
footcandle.
(b) All parts of the public walkway system shall be illuminated at a
minimum of 0.3 average maintained footcandle.
(c) Potentially hazardous locations, such as major park street
intersections and steps or stepped ramps, shall be directly
illuminated with a minimum of 0.3 footcandle.
(2) All street or walkway light poles shall be decorative in nature
("decorative" is defined here as a pole made of concrete, aluminum,
steel or laminated wood rather than the traditional wood utility
pole).
K. Fire protection.
(1) Mobile home parks shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other
flammable materials.
(2) Portable fire extinguishers rated for Class B and C fires shall be
kept in service buildings and shall be maintained in good operating
condition. Their capacity shall not be less than 2 1/2 pounds.
(3) Fire extinguisher quantity, size, and storage shall meet the
requirements as set forth in NFPA 10.
(4) Fires shall be made only in barbecue pits, fireplaces, stoves or
other equipment intended for such purposes. Incinerators for the
specific purpose of burning refuse shall be prohibited. Outdoor
fires and incinerators shall comply with Chapter 291 of the Town of
Grand Chute Code.
(5) Cooking shelters, barbecue pits, fireplaces, and wood-burning
stoves shall be so located, constructed, maintained and used as to
minimize fire hazards and smoke nuisances, both on the property
on which used and on neighboring property. No open fire shall be
permitted except in facilities provided. No open fire shall be left
unattended. No fuel shall be used which emits dense smoke or
objectionable odors.
(6) Fire hydrants shall be required in accordance with the following
requirements:
§ 382-8 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 382-8
1:252
§ 382-9. Responsibilities of park management, unit owners and
occupants.
(a) The water supply system shall permit the operation of a
minimum of two one-and-one-half-inch hose streams.
(b) Each of two nozzles, held four feet above the ground, shall
deliver at least 75 gallons of water per minute at a flowing
pressure of at least 30 pounds per square inch at the highest
elevation point of the park.
(7) Fire hydrants, if provided, shall be located within 500 feet of any
mobile home, service building or other structure in the park.
A. Responsibility of the park management.
(1) The person to whom a license for a mobile home park is issued shall
operate the park in compliance with this chapter and shall provide
adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and
equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
(2) The park management shall notify park occupants of all applicable
provisions of this chapter and inform them of their duties and
responsibilities under this chapter.
(3) The park management shall supervise the placement of each
mobile home on its mobile home stand, which includes securing its
stability and installing all utility connections. Additionally, the park
management is responsible to ensure that all provisions of
§ 101.96, Wis. Stats., regarding manufactured home installation,
are fully complied with.
(4) The park management shall maintain a register containing the
names of all park occupants identified by lot number or street
address, the motor vehicle license numbers, the places of
employment, and copies of the titles to all individual mobile home
units. A copy of such register, listing all of such information, and all
monthly changes as of the first day of each month, shall be mailed
to the Town Clerk on a monthly basis and at any time upon demand.
(5) The park management shall notify the governing body immediately
of any suspected communicable or contagious disease within the
park.
(6) In every mobile home park, the park management shall locate an
office for the attendant or person in charge of said park. A copy of
the park license and this chapter shall be posted therein, and the
park register shall at all times be kept in said office.
(7) The park management shall collect the monthly parking permit fee
provided for in § 382-4C of this chapter. An account shall be kept
§ 382-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-9
1:253
showing the names of persons paying said service charges and the
amount paid.
(8) The park management shall bear the ultimate responsibility to
ensure that all park occupants and/or mobile home owners are in
absolute compliance with all provisions of this chapter and all
provisions of the Town of Grand Chute's minimum standards for
housing contained in Chapter 317 of this Code. In the event that a
park occupant and/or mobile home owner is not in compliance with
any provision of this chapter and/or the Town of Grand Chute's
minimum standards for housing contained in Chapter 317 of this
Code, the park management shall take any steps necessary to bring
said park occupants and/or mobile home owners into compliance,
including but not limited to monitoring the condition of all mobile
homes located within the park, ordering necessary improvements
to individual mobile home units, and eviction of individual mobile
home owners, or similar remedies as allowed by Wisconsin law.
(9) The park management shall also bear the ultimate responsibility to
ensure that the mobile home park and all buildings, homes, and
structures contained therein are in compliance with Chapters 291
and 220 of this Code and §§ 66.0435, 101.94, 101.96, and 710.15,
Wis. Stats., and any applicable requirements of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.90
(10) A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for
each mobile home and shall be clearly assigned and marked
corresponding to each individual mobile home.
(11) All concrete and/or asphalt pavement must be maintained in a safe
and attractive manner. In the event that any pavement becomes
broken or is unreasonably worn, such pavement must be replaced
at the expense of the park operator.
(12) The park operator must report any notices received from the State
of Wisconsin, any state agency, any county agency, or any other
authority for violations of any applicable provisions.
(13) Building permits must be applied for and received in accordance
with this chapter and Chapter 220, Building Construction, of this
Code prior to making any improvements to any aspect of the mobile
home park.
(14) Upon demand, the park operator must produce to the Town of
Grand Chute's Building Inspector a list of all tenants residing
within the mobile home park.
B. Responsibilities of park occupants and unit owners.
90.Editor's Note: Original § 11.09, Subsection 1j, which immediately followed this section and
contained lighting standards, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II). For lighting standards see § 382-8J.
§ 382-9 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 382-9
1:254
(1) The park occupant and unit owners shall comply with all applicable
requirements of this chapter and shall maintain each mobile home
lot, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and
sanitary condition.
(2) Owners of mobile homes must receive a permit to install or place a
mobile home within a mobile home park in accordance with
Chapter 220 of this Code. This permitting requirement is in
addition to any requirements of § 101.96, Wis. Stats., or any other
applicable federal, state statutory, or state administrative
regulation.
(3) The park occupant shall be responsible for proper placement of his
mobile home stand and proper installation of all utility connections
in accordance with the instructions of the park management.
(4) Pets, if permitted in the park, shall be prohibited to run at large or
to commit any nuisance within the limits of any mobile home lot.
(5) The undercarriage, supports and stabilizing devices of the mobile
home shall be skirted to maintain an attractive community
appearance.
(6) Porches, awnings, and other additions shall be installed only if
permitted and approved by the park management. When installed,
they shall be maintained in good repair. Permits must be issued by
the Town prior to installing porches, awnings, or any other
additions in accordance with this chapter and Chapter 220,
Building Construction, of this Code. The space immediately
underneath a mobile home shall be used for storage only if
permitted by the park management. If permitted, the following
conditions shall be satisfied:
(a) The storage area shall be provided with a base of impervious
material.
(b) Stored items shall be located so as not to interfere with the
underneath inspection of the mobile home.
(c) The storage area shall be enclosed by skirting.
(7) The park occupant shall store and dispose of all his rubbish and
garbage in a clean, sanitary and safe manner. The garbage
container shall be rodentproof, insectproof and watertight.
(8) Fire extinguishers shall be kept at each mobile home unit and shall
meet the requirements as set forth in NFPA 10.
(9) Individual mobile home units and areas adjacent to individual
mobile home units shall be in compliance with all provisions of the
Town of Grand Chute's minimum housing standards as identified in
Chapter 317 of this Code. Any violations of the minimum housing
standards contained in Chapter 317 of this Code may result in the
§ 382-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-9
1:255
§ 382-10. Location of mobile homes.
enforcement provisions and penalties contained therein, as well as
the enforcement provisions and penalties contained in this chapter.
(10) Building permits must be applied for and received in accordance
with Chapter 220 of this Code prior to making any improvements to
any mobile home within the mobile home park.
(11) All structures appurtenant to any individual mobile home must be
safe, in good working order, and in compliance with the minimum
standards for housing found in Chapter 317 of this Code.
(12) Any new structures built or constructed appurtenant to any mobile
home unit or existing structure moved or otherwise made
appurtenant to any mobile home must be built or installed in
accordance with Chapter 220 of this Code in addition to any other
applicable Code provision(s).
(13) In addition, park occupants and unit owners are responsible to
ensure that their homes, all appurtenances thereto, and the space
immediately surrounding each unit are in compliance with all
applicable provisions of Chapters 291 and 220 of this Code and
§§ 66.0435, 101.94, 101.96, and 710.15, Wis. Stats., and any other
applicable statutory provisions and provisions of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any mobile home on any
public roadway or other public place or on any tract of land owned by
any person except as licensed for mobile home park use in compliance
with this chapter or except as provided in Subsections B and C.
B. Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is permitted on any public
roadway for not longer than one hour subject to any other and further
prohibitions imposed by the traffic and parking regulations or
ordinances for that public roadway.
C. The Town Board may issue a special written permit allowing the
location and occupancy of a mobile home outside of a mobile home park
upon a showing of hardship and/or immediate necessity by the
applicant. The permit shall not be issued for a period to exceed 90 days
for one premises in any twelve-month period nor for more than one
mobile home on any one premises. In a district zoned for agricultural
use, a special permit may be issued for year-round occupancy of one
mobile home on condition that the parcel of land is greater than 10
acres. The special permit shall only be granted upon the written
consent of the owner, legal agent of the owner, or the lessee of the
location for which the special permit is issued.
D. Application for the permit shall be made to the Town Clerk and shall be
accompanied by an inspection fee as prescribed in the Town Fee
Schedule. The application shall contain the following information:
§ 382-9 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 382-10
1:256
§ 382-11. Violations and penalties.91
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, forfeit an amount as prescribed in the Uniform
Forfeiture and Bond Schedules, together with the costs of prosecution.
Each day's failure of compliance with any such provision shall constitute a
separate violation.
§ 382-12. Conflicting provisions.
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict
with a provision of any other ordinance or code of the Town of Grand
Chute existing on the effective date of this chapter, the provision which,
in the judgment of the Town Board, establishes the higher standard for
the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall
prevail. In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in
conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or code of the Town of
Grand Chute existing on the effective date of this chapter which establishes
a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety
of the people, the provision of this chapter shall be deemed to prevail, and
(1) Name and permanent address of the occupants;
(2) License number of the mobile home and towing vehicle;
(3) Intended purpose of stay at requested location;
(4) Exact location of the premises;
(5) Documentation of the owner's and/or occupant's permission to
locate on the premises;
(6) Statement of the nature and location of sanitary facilities;
(7) Written permission from the occupant of the dwelling house for use
of sanitary facilities;
(8) A statement that all wastes from mobile home occupancy will be
disposed of in a sanitary manner; and
(9) If the location is a vacant lot or parcel of land, a statement
indicating the nature and location of sanitary facilities and source
of water supply, that these facilities are within 200 feet of the
mobile home, and that the owner has given permission for their
use.
E. All occupied mobile homes not located in a mobile home park shall be
subject to the monthly parking fee established in § 382-4C of this
chapter.
91.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 382-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-12
1:257
such other ordinances or codes are hereby declared to be repealed to the
extent that they may be found in conflict with this chapter.
Chapter 398
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 197.
Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 291.
Fireworks — See Ch. 295.
Hazardous substances — See Ch. 310.
Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages — See Ch. 335.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 349.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 415.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 423.
Sewers — See Ch. 440.
Trees and shrubs — See Ch. 497.
Waste management — See Ch. 520.
§ 398-1. Public nuisances prohibited.
No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist
any public nuisance within the Town of Grand Chute.
§ 398-2. Public nuisances defined.
A. A public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation, condition or use of
property which shall continue for such length of time as to:
(1) Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose
or safety of the public.
(2) In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of
property.
(3) Greatly offend the public morals or decency.
(4) Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to
obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley,
highway, navigable body of water or other public way or the use of
public property.
B. Public nuisances affecting heath. The following acts, omissions, places,
conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public
health nuisances, but such enumeration shall not be construed to
exclude other health nuisances coming within the definition of "public
nuisance" of this section:
(1) All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink
sold or offered for sale to the public.
§ 382-12 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 398-2
1:258
(2) Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not intended for human
consumption or food which are not buried or otherwise disposed of
in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death.
(3) Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash,
rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, scrap metal or
any material whatsoever in which flies, mosquitoes, diseasecarrying
insects, rats or other vermin may breed.
(4) All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can
multiply.
(5) Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not flytight.
(6) Noxious weeds, as defined in § 66.0407(1)(b) and § 23.235(1)(a),
Wis. Stats., invasive species as defined in Ch. NR 40, Wis. Adm.
Code, and rank growth of other vegetation, as defined in § 423-4 of
the Town of Grand Chute Municipal Code that exceed eight inches
in height. Rank growth of vegetation and noxious weeds adversely
impact public health and safety, and can decrease adjacent
property values. This subsection applies to properties zoned or
used for residential, commercial and industrial purposes, including
vacant lots in platted subdivisions. Exceptions include gardens,
cultivated flower beds, environmentally sensitive areas, and
natural landscaping, as defined in § 423-4 of the Town of Grand
Chute Municipal Code. [Amended 4-23-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-06; 11-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-08]
(7) All animals running at large.
(8) The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly
ash, industrial dust or other atmospheric pollutants within the
Town or within one mile therefrom in such quantities as to
endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or to
threaten or cause substantial injury to property in the Town.
(9) The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or
other body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or
other substances.
(10) Any use of property, substances or things within the Town of Grand
Chute emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous,
noxious or disagreeable odors, gases, effluvia or stenches
extremely repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary persons
which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of any
appreciable number of persons within the Town.
(11) All abandoned wells not securely covered or secured from public
use.
§ 398-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-2
1:259
(12) Any use of property which shall cause any nauseous or
unwholesome liquid or substance to flow into or upon any street,
gutter, alley, sidewalk or public place within the Town.
C. Public nuisances offending morals and decency. The following acts,
omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically
declared to be public nuisances offending public morals and decency,
but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances
offending public morals and decency coming within the definition of
"public nuisance" of this section:
(1) All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill fame, gambling
houses and buildings or structures kept or resorted to for the
purpose of prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse or
gambling.
(2) All gambling devices and slot machines.
(3) All places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages
are sold, possessed, stored, brewed, bottled, manufactured or
rectified without a permit or license as provided for by the
ordinances of the Town of Grand Chute.92
(4) Any place or premises within the Town of Grand Chute where Town
ordinances or state laws relating to public health, safety, peace,
morals or welfare are openly, continuously, repeatedly and
intentionally violated.
(5) Any place or premises resorted to for the purpose of drinking
intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages in violation of the
laws of the State of Wisconsin or ordinances of the Town.
D. Public nuisances affecting peace and safety. The following acts,
omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby declared to be
public nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such enumeration shall
not be construed to exclude other nuisances affecting public peace or
safety coming within the definition of "public nuisance" of this section:
(1) All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices placed or
maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway
crossing which purport to be or may be mistaken as an official
traffic control device, railroad sign or signal or which because of
their color, location, brilliance or manner of operation interfere
with the effectiveness of any such device, sign or signal.
(2) All trees, hedges, or other obstructions which prevent persons
driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from
obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection
or pedestrian crosswalk. All limbs of trees which project above the
surface of a public sidewalk or street or above any other public
92.Editor's Note: See Ch. 335, Intoxicating Liquor and Fermented Malt Beverages.
§ 398-2 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 398-2
1:260
place shall be kept trimmed to a reasonable height to allow for safe
use and passage.
(3) All use or display of fireworks except as provided by the laws of the
State of Wisconsin and ordinances of the Town.93
(4) All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of repair as to
be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human use.
(5) All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are strung
less than 15 feet above the surface thereof.
(6) All loud, discordant and unnecessary noises or vibrations of any
kind.
(7) The keeping or harboring of any animal or fowl which by frequent
or habitual howling, yelping, barking, crowing or making of other
noises shall greatly annoy or disturb a neighborhood or any
considerable number of persons within the Town.
(8) All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and all
excavations in or under the same except as permitted by the
ordinances of the Town or which, although made in accordance
with such ordinances, are kept or maintained for an unreasonable
or illegal length of time after the purpose thereof has been
accomplished.
(9) All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or unused
basements freely accessible from any public street, alley or
sidewalk.
(10) All abandoned refrigerators or iceboxes from which the doors and
other covers have not been removed or which are not equipped
with a device for opening from the inside.
(11) Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on a public
street, alley or sidewalk or of a public street, alley or sidewalk
which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic
and free use of the streets or sidewalks.
(12) Repeated or continuous violations of the ordinances of the Town or
laws of the State of Wisconsin relating to the storage of flammable
liquids.
(13) Any violation of the ordinances of the Town of Grand Chute and the
laws of the State of Wisconsin and the Administrative Code of the
State of Wisconsin adopted by reference under Chapter 291, Fires
and Fire Prevention, of this Code, particularly but without
limitation Ch. Comm 10, Wis. Adm. Code, as relates to the storage
of flammable liquids, etc.
93.Editor's Note: See Ch. 295, Fireworks.
§ 398-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-2
1:261
§ 398-3. Chronic nuisances. [Added 2-19-2009 by Ord. No. 6-2009]
(14) All junked, disassembled, inoperable or wrecked motor vehicles, or
parts thereof, which have been allowed to remain outside of any
building upon public or private property for a period in excess of
three days, unless in connection with an automotive sales or repair
business located in a properly zoned area. [Added 3-20-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-06]
(15) Any construction debris or materials, unsightly debris, trash, wood,
brick, washing machines, refrigerators or junk such as may tend to
depreciate property values or be detrimental to the appearance,
neatness and cleanliness of the neighborhood, provided that
nothing in this subsection shall prohibit reasonable storage of
construction materials during the construction of any building or
structure. [Added 3-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-06]
A. Definitions. The following terms shall be defined as follows in this
section:
CHIEF — The Chief of Police or his/her designee and the Fire Chief or
his/her designee.
DEPARTMENT HEAD — Includes the Director of Community
Development and/or Public Works Director.
EFFECT OF PROPERTY CONVEYANCE —
ENFORCEMENT ACTION — Arrest, the issuance of a citation, or the
issuance of a written or verbal warning.
NUISANCE ACTIVITY — Any of the following activities, behaviors, or
conduct whenever engaged in by property owners, operators, tenants,
occupants, or persons associated with premises:
When title to property is conveyed, any nuisance activity that
occurred before the conveyance may not be used to establish the
property as a chronic nuisance property unless the reason for the
conveyance was to avoid a determination that the property was a
chronic nuisance property.
(1)
There is a rebuttable presumption that a reason for the conveyance
of property was to avoid a determination that the property was a
chronic nuisance property if:
(a) The property was conveyed for less than fair market value.
The property was conveyed to an entity controlled by a person
conveying the property.
(b)
The property was conveyed to a relative of a person conveying
the property.
(c)
(2)
(1) An act of harassment, as defined in § 947.013, Wis. Stats.
§ 398-2 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 398-3
1:262
(2) Disorderly conduct, as defined in § 947.01, Wis. Stats.
(3) Crimes of violence, as defined in Ch. 940, Wis. Stats.
Obstructing or resisting an officer, as defined in § 946.41, Wis.
Stats.
(4)
(5) Crimes against sexual morality, as defined in Ch. 944, Wis. Stats.
(6) Any gambling crimes, as defined in Ch. 945, Wis. Stats.
(7) Animal violations, as defined in Chapter 197 of this Code.
(8) Theft, as defined in § 943.20, Wis. Stats.
(9) Receiving stolen property, as defined in § 943.34, Wis. Stats.
(10)Damage to property, as defined in § 943.01, Wis. Stats.
(11)Arson, as defined in § 943.02, Wis. Stats.
Possession, manufacture, or delivery of a controlled substance or
related offenses, as defined in Ch. 961, Wis. Stats.
(12)
(13)Trespassing, as defined in §§ 943.13 and 943.14, Wis. Stats.
(14)Weapons violations, as defined in Chapter 415 of this Code.
(15)Noise violations, as defined in Chapter 415 of this Code.
Alcohol violations, as defined in Chapter 335 of this Code and
§ 125.07, Wis. Stats.
(16)
Loitering and curfew violations, as defined in Chapter 415 of this
Code.
(17)
(18)Reckless driving, as defined in § 346.62, Wis. Stats.
Any conspiracy to commit, as defined in § 939.31, Wis. Stats., or
attempt to commit, as defined in § 939.32, Wis. Stats., any of the
activities, behaviors, or conduct enumerated in Subsections (1)
through (18) above.
(19)
(20)The execution of arrest or search warrants at a particular location.
Town of Grand Chute inspection-related calls where the Police
Department responds.
(21)
Drug or criminal gang house as defined by § 823.113, Wis. Stats.
Section 823.113, Wis. Stats., is hereby adopted by reference as a
Town ordinance. At the discretion of the Chief of Police, the action
provided therein may be in the name of the Town, county or state.
(22)
Nuisances as defined by Ch. 823, Wis. Stats., which include but are
not limited to:
(23)
§ 398-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-3
1:263
OWNER — The owner of the premises and his/her agents.
823.065 Flammable liquids
823.07 Noxious business
823.09 Bawdy houses
823.10 Disorderly house
823.21 Dilapidated buildings
Violations of the Code of the Town of Grand Chute, which include
any and all sections of the following chapters or articles:
[Amended 3-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-06]
Chapter 190 Amusements
Chapter 197 Animals
Chapter 220 Building Construction
Chapter 230 Cable Television
Chapter 241 Cigarettes
Chapter 252 Dances and Dance Halls
Chapter 259 Direct Sellers, Auctions and Closeout Sales
Chapter 275 Erosion and Sediment Control
Chapter 291 Fires and Fire Prevention
Chapter 295 Fireworks
Chapter 317 Housing Standards
Chapter 335 Intoxicating Liquor and Fermented Malt
Beverages
Chapter 349 Junk Dealers
Chapter 382 Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks
Chapter 398 Nuisances
Chapter 412 Pawnbrokers and Secondhand Dealers
Chapter 415 Peace and Good Order
Chapter 423 Property Maintenance
Chapter 440, Article
III
Sewers: Illicit Discharges and Connections
Chapter 456 Special Events
Chapter 463 Stormwater Management
Chapter 468 Streets and Sidewalks
Chapter 480 Taxicabs
Chapter 492 Tracks
Chapter 497 Trees and Shrubs
Chapter 535 Zoning
(24)
§ 398-3 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 398-3
1:264
PERSONS ASSOCIATED WITH — Any person who, whenever engaged
in a nuisance activity, enters, occupies, patronizes, visits or attempts
to enter, occupy, patronize or visit a property. Includes any officer,
director, customer, agent, employee or independent contractor of a
property owner, tenant, or occupant.
PREMISES — An individual dwelling unit, an apartment building (all
units included as one premises), or an individual business premises and
associated common areas located in the Town.
B. Notice. Whenever a Chief or department head determines that three or
more nuisance activities resulting in enforcement action have occurred
at the premises during a twelve-month period, the Chief or department
head may notify the premises owner in writing. In calculating the
requisite nuisance activities, the Chief or department head may count
separate qualifying nuisance activities resulting in enforcement action
occurring on the same day (as long as they are distinct in time) or
different days but shall never count nuisance activities that were
reported by the owner of the premises. The notice shall contain the
street address and, where the enforcement action involves the owner of
the premises, the legal description sufficient to identify the premises, a
description of the nuisance activities that have occurred at the
premises, a statement indicating that the cost of future enforcement
may be assessed as a special charge against the premises, and a notice
as to the appeals rights of the owner.
C. Delivery of notice. The notice shall be deemed to be properly delivered
if either sent by certified mail to the property owner's last known
address or delivered in person to the property owner. If the property
owner cannot be located, the notice shall be deemed properly delivered
if left at the property owner's usual place of residence in the presence
of a competent family member at least 14 years of age or a competent
adult currently residing there and who shall be informed of the contents
of the notice. If a current address cannot be located, it shall be deemed
sufficient if a copy of the notice is sent by certified mail to the last
known address of the owner as identified by the records of the tax roll.
D. Abatement plan. Any owner receiving notice pursuant to Subsections B
and C shall meet with the Chief, or his/her designee, within five
business days of receipt of such notice. The parties shall review the
problems occurring at the property and agree upon an abatement plan
to end the nuisance activity on the property. The plan shall also specify
a name, address, and telephone number of a person living within 60
miles of the property who can be contacted in the event of further
police, fire, or inspection contact.
E. Additional nuisance activity. Whenever the Chief determines that
additional nuisance activity has occurred at a premises not less than 15
business days after notice has been issued and that reasonable efforts
have not been made to abate the nuisance activity, the Chief may
calculate the cost of police response and enforcement for this and any
§ 398-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-3
1:265
§ 398-4. Tree trimming and sanitation. [Amended 2-17-200494]
See Chapter 497, Trees and Shrubs.
§ 398-5. Depositing of snow on public rights-of-way.
subsequent nuisance activities. The Chief shall also cause such charges
and administrative costs to be assessed against the premises as a fee
for current service authorized by §§ 61.34, 66.0628 and 74.01, Wis.
Stats., and collected as a special charge which the Town may impose as
a lien against the real estate upon which the premises is located.
F. Appeal. Appeal of the determination of the Chief of Police pursuant to
either the notice, abatement plan, or the levying of special charges may
be made solely to the Town Board requesting a hearing. Notice of
appeal must be in writing and submitted to the Town Board in care of
the Town Clerk with a copy submitted to the Chief of Police. Chapter 68,
Wis. Stats., does not apply to this section.
G. Additional enforcement authority. The Town hereby adopts and
incorporates the authority granted the Town pursuant to § 823.01, Wis.
Stats., and adopts and authorizes enforcement procedures as set forth
in §§ 823.015, 823.02, 823.03, 823.04, 823.05 and 823.06, Wis. Stats.
H. Penalty.
(1) Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall,
upon due conviction thereof, forfeit not less than an amount set
forth in § 398-16 for each such offense, together with the costs of
prosecution, and in default of the payment of such forfeiture and
costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail until said forfeiture and
costs of prosecution are paid, but not to exceed 30 days.
(2) In addition to imposition of a fee for services constituting a special
charge against the real estate imposed under this section, the Town
may pursue injunctive relief against the owner in the Circuit Court
for Outagamie County. All legal costs and attorney fees incurred by
the Town for enforcement of this section, pursuant to any remedy
available, shall be payable to the Town by the owner of the
premises. Judgment for such obligations may be obtained by the
Town in either the Small Claims Court or Circuit Court for
Outagamie County.
A. No person shall remove or cause to be removed any snow or ice from a
premises owned or occupied by that person or from any residence,
parking lot, parking area, filling station, business property or other
property owned or occupied by said person by placing said snow onto
any public right-of-way or property. Snow removed from public walks
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-3 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 398-5
1:266
§ 398-6. Abandoned or unattended refrigerators or other
containers.
No person shall leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building
or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned building,
dwelling or other structure under his control in a place accessible to
children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or
other container which has an airtight door or cover which has not been
removed or which is not equipped with a device for opening from the inside.
§ 398-7. Storage of junked vehicles.
shall not be stored in any manner which will obstruct or limit vehicular
or pedestrian vision, movement or access.
B. The deposit of any snow or ice upon any sidewalk, alley or road or street
of the Town of Grand Chute contrary to the provisions of this section is
hereby made to be a nuisance, and, in addition to the penalty provided
for the violation of this section, the Town of Grand Chute may
summarily remove any snow or ice so deposited and cause the cost of
said removal to be charged to the owner of the property from which
said snow or ice has been removed, and upon failure to pay the same
may be charged as a special assessment upon the tax bill to the owner
of property from which the snow or ice removal was necessitated.
C. The penalty for violation of this section shall be as provided in § 398-16
of this chapter.
A. Definitions. Terms used in this section shall have the following
meanings:
JUNKED VEHICLE — All junked, disassembled, inoperable or wrecked
motor vehicles, or parts thereof, which have been allowed to remain
outside of any building upon public or private property for a period in
excess of three days, unless in connection with an automotive sales or
repair business located in a properly zoned area. The definition shall
also include any vehicles stored in the open without being licensed in
excess of 30 days.[Amended 3-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-07]
OWNER — Includes owner, owners, tenants, lessees and/or occupants.
B. Nuisance. No vehicle as hereinabove defined shall be stored or allowed
to remain in the open upon public or private property within the Town,
unless it is in connection with a duly authorized sales or repair business
enterprise located in a properly zoned area. Any violation of this section
is a nuisance. [Amended 3-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-07]
C. Abatement by owner. The owner of any property within this Town upon
which a vehicle as hereinabove defined is stored or permitted to remain
and also the owner of any such vehicle shall, jointly and severally, abate
said nuisance by the prompt removal of such vehicle into a completely
enclosed building authorized to be used for such storage purposes, if
§ 398-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-7
1:267
§ 398-8. Abandoned vehicles. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-30; 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-37; 6-5-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-10]
within the limits of the Town, or otherwise remove the same to a
location outside the Town.
D. Vehicle upon public property. Whenever the Building Inspector or Town
police officers shall find any such vehicle placed or stored in the open
upon public property within the limits of the Town, such vehicle shall be
removed to a junk or salvage yard and stored therein for a period of 30
days. At the end of said time, such junk or salvage yard shall dispose of
such vehicle unless it has previously been claimed by the owner.
E. Vehicles upon private property. Whenever the Building Inspector or
Town police officers shall find any such vehicle placed or stored in the
open upon private property within the limits of the Town, the owner of
such property and the owner of the vehicle, if he can be located, shall
be given a three-day written notice by certified mail to remove the
same. If such vehicle is not removed within the time specified, the Town
police shall have it removed by a junk or auto salvage dealer. The owner
of the property upon which the vehicle had been placed or stored and
the owner of the vehicle, if he can be located, shall be jointly and
severally liable for the cost of removal by such dealer. [Amended
12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
F. Storage costs. If such vehicles are claimed by the owner, the junk or
salvage yard shall charge a reasonable fee for handling and storing.
G. Salvage yard excepted. The provisions of Subsection B shall not apply
to auto salvage yards and/or junkyards that are duly authorized under
the ordinances of the Town and have been issued a permit to operate as
such salvage yard and/or junkyard under this Code.
H. Disposal of unclaimed vehicles. When any such vehicle has been
removed and placed in storage by the Town as herein provided and such
vehicle is not claimed within 30 days after such storage, it shall be sold
by the Town. If the proceeds of such sale are insufficient to pay the
costs for the removal and storage, said owners jointly and severally
shall be liable to the Town for the balance of the costs. If the proceeds
are in excess of costs, the balance shall be paid to said owners.
I. Violation of this section shall be subject to a penalty as prescribed in
§ 175.25(5), Wis. Stats. [Added 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
A. Section 342.40, Wis. Stats., Vehicle abandonment prohibited; removal;
disposal, as amended from time to time, is incorporated herein by
reference.
B. Pursuant to § 342.40, Wis. Stats., no person shall leave unattended any
motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or mobile home on any public street
or highway or public or private property for such time and under such
§ 398-7 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 398-8
1:268
§ 398-9. Open cisterns, wells, basements or other dangerous
excavations.
No person shall have or permit on any premises owned or occupied by
him any open cisterns, cesspools, wells, unused basements, excavations or
other dangerous openings. All such places shall be filled, securely covered
or fenced in such manner as to prevent injury to any person, and any cover
shall be of a design, size and weight that the same cannot be removed by
small children.
§ 398-10. Covered hauling to dump site.
No person shall transport or haul to any dumping site in the Town any
materials without covering the same as provided under Chapter 520, Waste
Management, of this Code.
§ 398-11. Vacant lots.
circumstances as to cause the vehicle to reasonably appear to have
been abandoned. When any such vehicle has been left unattended on
any Town street or highway or on any public or private property within
the Town without permission of the owner for more than 48 hours, the
vehicle is deemed abandoned and constitutes a public nuisance.
C. Any vehicle deemed in violation of this section shall be towed by a
licensed towing company approved by the Chief of Police and
contracted with the Town of Grand Chute for such purpose, or towed by
such other means deemed reasonable or necessary under the
circumstances by the Chief of Police. Such vehicle will be held at the
contractor's facility until lawfully claimed or disposed of in any lawful
manner.
D. The owner of any abandoned vehicle, except a stolen vehicle, is
responsible for the abandonment and all costs of impounding and
disposing of the vehicle. Prior to reclamation of the vehicle, the owner
or lien holder shall pay to the contracted towing company the towing
and storage fees incurred by the towing company.
E. Penalty. Any person who shall cause a vehicle to become abandoned
within the Town of Grand Chute under the terms and conditions of this
section and § 342.40, Wis. Stats., shall, upon due conviction thereof,
forfeit an amount as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond
Schedule, together with costs of prosecution.
A. Vacant lots become a public nuisance when said lots are not
maintained. Such is especially true when vacant lots are not smoothly
graded as to provide for regular routine maintenance.
B. Within 90 days of purchase of vacant property within the Town of Grand
Chute, the new owner shall cause the vacant lot to be appropriately
filled and graded so as to provide for routine maintenance. All debris is
§ 398-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-11
1:269
§ 398-12. Compression brakes. [Added 9-21-1999]
§ 398-13. Abatement of public nuisances.
to be removed by the owner within said time period. Presently existing
owners of vacant lots shall be granted 21 days to come into compliance
with this section upon issuance of an appropriate citation by the Town
Building Inspector.
C. Should any new or existing owner fail to come into compliance with this
section, the Town Board of Supervisors shall authorize Town employees
to cause the appropriate filling and grading of the vacant lot in question
to occur. Any and all costs associated with the same shall be assessed
against the property in question and shall be placed upon the tax rolls
maintained by the Town of Grand Chute.
A. Compression brakes prohibited. No person shall use motor vehicle
brakes which are in any way activated or operated by the compression
of the engine of the motor vehicle.
B. Defense. It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this
section that compression brakes were applied in an emergency and
were necessary for the protection of persons or property.
C. Emergency vehicles. Emergency vehicles shall be exempt from this
section.
A. Rank growth of vegetation and noxious weeds. Upon receipt of a rank
growth of vegetation or noxious weed complaint referenced in
§ 398-2B(6), the Weed Commissioner or his designee will issue written
notice to the property owner via first-class United States Mail. The
property owner shall have three days to comply with this chapter.
Failure to comply will result in the Town performing the necessary
services to bring the property within compliance. The cost of property
maintenance services and equipment shall be in accordance with the
Town's current fee schedule and equipment charge out rates. All costs
of such service and equipment used will be borne by the property owner
and may be placed as a lien on the property for a lack of payment.
[Amended 4-23-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-06]
B. Inspection of premises. [Amended 4-23-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-06]
(1) Whenever a complaint is made, except for rank growth of
vegetation and noxious weeds, to the Town Board that a public
nuisance exists within the Town of Grand Chute, the Town Board
shall promptly notify the Town Police Department, Health Officer or
Building Inspector, who or which shall forthwith inspect or cause to
be inspected the premises complained of and shall make a written
report of his or her findings to the Town Board. Whenever
practicable, the inspecting officer shall cause photographs to be
§ 398-11 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 398-13
1:270
made of the premises and shall file the same in the office of the
Town Clerk.
(2) Whenever a complaint is made to the Town Board with regard to
the existence of rank growth of vegetation or noxious weeds within
the Town of Grand Chute, the Town Board shall promptly notify the
Town Weed Commissioner or his designee, who shall forthwith
inspect or cause to be inspected the premises complained of and
shall make a written report of his or her findings to be filed in the
Department of Public Works. Whenever practicable, the inspecting
officer shall cause photographs to be made of the premises and
shall be filed with the written inspection report.
C. Summary abatement. [Amended 4-23-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-06]
(1) Notice to owner. If the inspecting officer shall determine that a
public nuisance exists within the Town and that there is great and
immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or
decency, the Town Board may direct the Town Police Department,
or the Weed Commissioner or his designee in the case of rank
growth of vegetation and noxious weeds, to serve notice on the
person causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance or upon
the owner or occupant of the premises where such nuisance is
caused, permitted or maintained and to post a copy of said notice
on the premises. Posting a notice on the premises is not required
for rank growth of vegetation and noxious weeds.
(2) Such notice shall direct the person causing, permitting or
maintaining such nuisance or the owner or occupant of the
premises to abate or remove such nuisance within 24 hours or as
provided in the notice and shall state that, unless such nuisance is
so abated, the Town will cause the same to be abated and will
charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or person causing,
permitting or maintaining the nuisance, as the case may be.
(3) Abatement by Town. If the nuisance is not abated within the time
provided or if the owner, occupant or person causing the nuisance
cannot be found, the Health Officer, in case of health nuisances, the
Weed Commissioner or his designee in the case of rank growth of
vegetation and noxious weeds, and the Police Department, in other
cases, shall cause the abatement or removal of such public
nuisances.
D. Abatement by court action. If the inspecting officer shall determine that
a public nuisance exists on private premises but that the nature of such
nuisance is not such as to threaten great and immediate danger to the
public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, he/she shall file a
written report of his/her findings with the Town Board, which shall
cause an action to abate such nuisance to be commenced in the name of
the Town in the Circuit Court of Outagamie County in accordance with
the provisions of Ch. 823, Wis. Stats.
§ 398-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-13
1:271
§ 398-14. Recovery of abatement costs.
In addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter for the erection,
contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the
cost of abating a public nuisance by the Town shall be collected as a debt
from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the
nuisance, and if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner,
such cost shall be assessed against the real estate as a special charge.95
§ 398-15. Suspension and revocation of permits and licenses.
[Added 4-5-2001]
E. Other methods not excluded. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed
as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the Town of Grand
Chute or its officials in accordance with the laws of the State of
Wisconsin.
A. In the event that any owner of property or operator of a business in the
Town of Grand Chute creates or maintains a public nuisance, for which
property or business a license or permit has been granted by the Town
of Grand Chute, upon a majority vote of the Town Board such license or
permit may be suspended, revoked, or denied renewal. Any such
suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal may be invoked by the Town
Board at such time and subject to such conditions as the Town Board
deems appropriate and, alternatively, in the discretion of the Town
Board, may be enforced by bringing action regarding said public
nuisance in the Circuit Court of Outagamie County. Licenses and
permits which are subject to this section involve all licenses and
permits issued by the Town of Grand Chute, including but not limited to
licenses for hotels/motels issued pursuant to Chapter 57 of this Code
and alcoholic beverage licenses issued in accordance with and subject
to the provisions of Ch. 125, Wis. Stats. Any suspension, termination or
nonrenewal of licenses issued pursuant to Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., shall be
undertaken in accordance with the procedures set forth in Ch. 125, Wis.
Stats.
B. Upon suspension, termination or nonrenewal, the business and
property owner shall immediately cease all operations for which such
license or permit is required.
C. As a prior condition for the Town Board to take action for suspension,
revocation or nonrenewal, the Town Clerk shall issue a written notice
generally describing the alleged nuisance and advising said owner or
operator of the next regularly scheduled Town Board meeting for which
an agenda item shall be established to give said owner or operator an
opportunity to show cause to the Town Board why suspension,
revocation or termination should not take place. This notice shall be in
95.Editor's Note: Original § 8.115, Interfering with or failing to assist in firefighting, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30. See now
§ 291-11.
§ 398-13 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 398-15
1:272
§ 398-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
due conviction thereof, forfeit an amount as prescribed in the Uniform
Forfeiture and Bond Schedules for each such offense, together with the
costs of prosecution, and in default of the payment of such forfeiture and
costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail until said forfeiture and costs of
prosecution are paid, but not to exceed 30 days.
§ 398-17. Smoking ban. [Added 6-15-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-07;
amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-33; 3-19-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-04]
writing and may be served by regular mail to either the address of
the property or business or to the last known address of the owner
or operator, based upon tax billing records in the Town offices or the
address shown on the permit or license application.
A. Purpose. The Town Board recognizes that smoking of cigarettes and
other tobacco products and inhaling vapors from an electronic delivery
device are hazardous to an individual's health and may affect the health
of nonsmokers/smokers when they are involuntarily in the presence of
smoking. Reliable scientific studies assessed by credible health officials
have found that secondhand tobacco smoke and the vapors exhaled by
users of an electronic delivery device are significant health hazards for
children, elderly people, and individuals with cardiovascular disease or
impaired respiratory function. Air pollution caused by smoking is an
offensive annoyance and irritant. Smoking results in serious and
significant physical discomfort to nonsmokers. This article is adopted
for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety, comfort and
general welfare of the people of the Town of Grand Chute, especially
recognizing the health interests of nonsmokers, who constitute a
majority of the population.
B. Smoking ban adopted. The Town hereby adopts, by reference, the
provisions of § 101.123, Smoking prohibited, Wis. Stats., pertaining to
the statewide smoking ban as of July 5, 2010.
C. Use of electronic delivery devices.
(1) Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in
this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except
where the context indicates a different meaning:
ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE — Any product containing or
delivering nicotine, lobelia, or any other substance intended for
human consumption that can be used by a person to simulate
smoking in the delivery of nicotine or any other substance through
inhalation of aerosol, mist, or vapor from the product. The term
includes, but is not limited to, devices manufactured, distributed,
marketed, or sold as electronic cigarettes or cigars, electronic
§ 398-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-17
1:273
§ 398-18. Practice of massage or bodywork therapy requiring state
licensing. [Added 1-21-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-04]
pipes, personal vaporizers, electronic nicotine delivery systems,
vape pens, or electronic hookahs.
An electronic cigarette (e-cig or e-cigarette), personal vaporizer
(PV), or electronic nicotine delivery system (ENDS) is a batterypowered
vaporizer which has the feel of tobacco smoking. They
produce a mist rather than cigarette smoke. In general, a heating
element vaporizes a liquid solution known as "e-liquid." E-liquids
usually contain a mixture of propylene glycol, glycerin, nicotine,
and flavorings.
SMOKING — Burning or holding or inhaling or exhaling smoke,
mist, or vapor from any of the following items containing tobacco
or nicotine products:
(a) A lighted cigar.
(b) A lighted cigarette.
(c) A lighted pipe.
(d) An electronic delivery device.
(e) Any other lighted smoking equipment.
(2) Prohibition. The prohibition against smoking established in
§ 101.123, Wis. Stats., and adopted in Subsection B, above, shall be
expanded to include the use of an electronic delivery device.
D. Inspection and enforcement. The Town of Grand Chute Police
Department shall have the power to enter any premises subject to the
smoking ban established by this section to ascertain whether the
premises is in compliance with, and to take appropriate enforcement
action pursuant to, this section.
E. Violations and penalties. Any person found to have violated any
provision of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture as prescribed in
the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedule.
A. No person who is required to hold a license, certificate of registration
or other credential pursuant to Chapter 460, Wis. Stats., Massage
Therapy and Bodywork Therapy, shall practice that profession within
the Town of Grand Chute unless that person holds a valid, unexpired
license, certificate of registration or credential issued under Chapter
460, Wis. Stats.
B. No person who is required to hold a license, certificate of registration
or other credential pursuant to Chapter 460, Wis. Stats., Massage
Therapy and Bodywork Therapy, shall advertise the availability of
services to be performed within the Town of Grand Chute unless that
§ 398-17 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 398-18
1:274
Chapter 409
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 197.
Fireworks — See Ch. 295.
Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages — See Ch. 335.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 415.
§ 409-1. Regulation of parks. [Amended 7-17-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-15]
The public parks owned and managed by the Town of Grand Chute shall
be governed by the following rules and regulations and by additional rules
and regulations made and published upon the park premises by the Grand
Chute Park Commission. The power to regulate said parks in addition to
the restrictions contained in this chapter shall be delegated to the Park
Commission subject to approval of the Grand Chute Town Board.
person holds a valid, unexpired license, certificate of registration or
credential issued under Chapter 460, Wis. Stats.
C. No business whose employees are required to hold a license, certificate
of registration or other credential pursuant to Chapter 460, Wis. Stats.,
Massage Therapy and Bodywork Therapy, shall allow employees to
practice that profession within the Town of Grand Chute unless the
employees hold a valid, unexpired license, certificate of registration or
credential issued under Chapter 460, Wis. Stats.
D. No business whose employees are required to hold a license, certificate
of registration or other credential pursuant to Chapter 460, Wis. Stats.,
Massage Therapy and Bodywork Therapy, shall advertise the
availability of services to be performed within the Town of Grand Chute
unless the employees hold a valid, unexpired license, certificate of
registration or credential issued under Chapter 460, Wis. Stats.
E. Each person who is licensed under Chapter 460, Wis. Stats., Massage
Therapy and Bodywork Therapy, shall conspicuously display the license
in the place of business where he or she practices massage therapy or
bodywork therapy so that the license can easily be seen and read.
F. Each place of business providing massage therapy and/or bodywork
therapy shall permit inspections of the premises at any time during
business hours by Town building inspectors, fire inspectors, health
inspectors or personnel of any law enforcement agency.
§ 398-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 409-2
1:275
§ 409-2. Offenses within parks. [Amended 12-6-2006; 12-10-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-30; 8-16-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-10; 7-18-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-06; 7-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-15]
No person shall:
A. Alter or change anything within any park of the Town unless permitted
to do so by the Management of Public Works.
B. Willfully injure, cut down, destroy, remove, or deface any tree or shrub
existing on any Grand Chute public park neighboring any park of the
Town including attaching any rope, wire, chain, sign or any other device
whatsoever to any tree or shrub in any park in the Town.
C. Interfere with, break down, deface or remove, or cause to be interfered
with, broken down, defaced or removed, any sign, guard, protection,
barrier or barricade placed in any park of the Town.
D. Disobey or disregard the orders of any police officer when commanding
any person to desist in a violation of any provisions of this section.
E. Discharge any missile from any firearm, slingshot, bow and arrow or
other weapon within any public park. (Cross reference § 415-3.)
F. Operate a snowmobile within any park of the Town except where the
Park Commission shall, by the posting of official signs, designate trails
for allowed use within a park.
G. Place or leave rubbish or refuse of any kind within any parks except for
that which is generated during normal permitted uses within the parks.
Such refuse and recyclables shall be properly placed in containers or
disposed of per § 409-3 of this chapter. (No person shall bring garbage
or refuse into any park for the purpose of disposing the same in a refuse
container or receptacle.)
H. Operate any vehicle faster than 10 miles per hour, except in designated
areas.
I. Operate any vehicle (motorized or nonmotorized, and specifically
including cycle-type vehicles commonly known as "trail bikes" or
"minibikes") except on designated roads and trails within any park in
the Town.
J. Allow any animals, leashed or unleashed, in any park with the following
exceptions:
(1) Dogs that assist the physically handicapped.
(2) Properly licensed dogs on a leash of less than six feet in length that
are within six feet of any bike or walking trail within a park. In
allowing such animals on trails, the pet owner must remain in
control of the animal at all times. The owner is responsible for
proper disposal of pet waste. For trails that terminate in a Town
§ 409-2 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 409-2
1:276
§ 409-3. Use regulations. [Amended 8-16-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-10;
7-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-15]
park that does not contain a designated trail within said park, the
owner must remain on the paved park road with the animal as the
owner actively walks through the park with the animal.
K. Hunt or trap within any park in the Town except as approved by the
Town.
L. Park any vehicle except in the designated areas in any park in the Town.
M. Leave unattended any fire legally maintained in any park in the Town.
N. Be allowed in any park in the Town while under the influence of
intoxicants in the form of alcoholic beverages or drugs.
O. Distribute any circulars, pamphlets, handbills or notices of any kind
within any park in the Town.
P. Injure, destroy or deface any property within any park in the Town, nor
shall any person climb on any buildings, fences, statues or other
structures in any park in the Town except properly designated
recreational facilities.
Q. Park overnight in accordance with the provisions of § 515-4C.
A. The Town of Grand Chute and the Grand Chute Park Commission shall
have the authority to regulate the use of certain portions of the park
during certain hours in order to facilitate persons, groups, or others in
such a manner as to beneficially make the most efficient use of said
park on behalf of said residents.
B. Refuse and empty containers (cans, bottles, plastic and paper cups,
plates, etc.) will be placed in barrels marked "trash" or "recyclables."
Hot coals from fires will be left in the grill. Vehicles will not be allowed
on the park turf for any reason, and damage to the park turf will be
cause for damage assessment against the permit holder. There shall be
no stakes driven in for the purpose of horseshoe playing. The turf
cannot be dug up for any reason, and campfires of any type or other
fires of any type shall not be burned directly upon turf which will cause
damage to the turf. Loudspeakers and amplified music must be on low.
Mechanical rides, amusement devices and dunk tanks are prohibited
except by special permit authorized by the Town Board.
C. If cleanup and damage are of an excessive extent, the Park Commission
may deny future permits to the responsible group from a permit
holder's use. It is understood that Town personnel shall have the right
to terminate the use of a permit and shall further have the jurisdiction
to close the use of said park of the Town of Grand Chute at any time it is
necessary for the protection of park property.
§ 409-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 409-4
1:277
§ 409-4. Hours. [Amended 8-16-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-10;
7-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-15]
The parks of the Town of Grand Chute shall be open from sunrise each
morning until 11:00 p.m. All parks in the Town of Grand Chute shall be
regulated in such manner. Any person found on a park premises after 11:00
p.m. shall be deemed guilty of violating the regulation with regard to hours
herein.
§ 409-5. Possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages on
park property. [Amended 12-19-2006; 8-16-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-10; 7-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-15]
§ 409-6. Fees. [Amended 8-16-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-10; 7-17-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-15]
Fees for park pavilion rentals or other permits where specific sites or
facilities are reserved for exclusive use shall be established and adjusted
from time to time by the Park Commission, subject to approval of the Town
Board. The fee for fermented malt beverage and/or wine permits required
A. No person shall possess or consume alcoholic beverages or use or take
any other form of alcohol which may cause intoxication without first
obtaining a permit from the Town Clerk of Grand Chute or through its
designated agent or officer.
B. A person obtaining a permit for the possession or consumption of
alcoholic beverages on park property shall be required to designate the
number of persons it is anticipated will participate in the event or
gathering and shall further become responsible for and shall execute a
statement of responsibility as set forth in Subsection C. Permits shall
only be issued to an adult who shall agree to be present at the park on
the day of the permit.
C. A responsibility agreement shall be executed by any person given
permission to consume or possess fermented malt beverages and/or
wine on park property.
D. The fermented malt liquor and/or wine permit holder shall agree to
accept and pay for the loss or damage caused by persons within the
group authorized under any permit. Permits shall only be issued for one
day. The fee for the park permit shall be adopted by resolution of the
Grand Chute Town Board and may be updated by resolution as needed.
Possession or consumption of fermented malt and/or wine shall be
allowed only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
E. Renters of the Town Center Park pavilion are not required to obtain a
permit providing the attendees are invited guests and the function is
not open to the public. Intoxicating liquor, fermented malt beverages,
and wine are allowed at the Town Center Park pavilion and patio for
private events only.
§ 409-4 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 409-6
1:278
in § 409-5 shall be established and adjusted by the Clerk subject to approval
of the Town Board.
§ 409-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
due conviction thereof, forfeit an amount as prescribed in the Uniform
Forfeiture and Bond Schedules for each such offense, together with the
costs of prosecution, and in default of the payment of such forfeiture and
costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail until said forfeiture and costs of
prosecution are paid, but not to exceed 30 days.
Chapter 412
PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Direct sellers, auctions and closeout
sales — See Ch. 259.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 349.
§ 412-1. Statute adopted.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, the statutory
provisions of § 134.71, Wis. Stats., describing and defining regulations with
respect to pawnbrokers and secondhand article dealers, exclusive of any
regulations for which the statutory penalty is a fine or term of imprisonment
or exclusively state changes, are hereby adopted and by reference made
part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be
performed or prohibited by any regulation incorporated herein by reference
is required or prohibited by this chapter. Any future amendments, revisions
or modifications of the statutory regulations in § 134.71, Wis. Stats., as
incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this chapter in order to
secure to the extent legally practicable uniform regulation of pawnbrokers
and secondhand dealers. Any person who shall, within the Town of Grand
Chute, Wisconsin, violate any provision of said statute shall be deemed
guilty of an offense under this chapter.96
§ 412-2. Exceptions.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, § 134.71(12), Wis.
Stats., is not adopted by this chapter.
96.Editor's Note: Original § 9.20(2), Statutes specifically incorporated by reference, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II). See Chapter 1, § 1-1A.
§ 409-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 412-3
1:279
§ 412-3. Applications and forms.
The Town of Grand Chute shall develop application and other forms
required under this chapter.
§ 412-4. Violations and penalties.97
Chapter 415
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 190.
Animals — See Ch. 197.
Cigarettes and tobacco products — See Ch.
241.
Dances and dance halls — See Ch. 252.
Fireworks — See Ch. 295.
Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages — See Ch. 335.
Nuisances — See Ch. 398.
Special events — See Ch. 456.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 515.
§ 415-1. Title, authority and purpose.
A. A first violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules,
together with the costs of prosecution, and on default of the payment of
any such fine and/or costs of prosecution such person shall be
committed to the county jail of Outagamie County until such fine and
costs are paid, but not to exceed 90 days.
B. Any person violating this chapter who shall previously have been
convicted of a violation of this chapter shall, upon proof and conviction
thereof, forfeit an amount as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and
Bond Schedules, together with the costs of prosecution, and on default
of the payment of any such fine and costs of prosecution, or either of
them, such convicted person shall be committed to and confined within
the county jail of Outagamie County, Wisconsin, until such fine and
costs of prosecution are paid, but not to exceed six months.
C. Each day of violation under this chapter shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
A. This chapter is titled the "Town of Grand Chute Public Safety/Public
Order Ordinance." The Town Board has the specific statutory authority,
pursuant to § 60.23(23), Wis. Stats., to regulate, control, prevent and
enforce against in the Town of Grand Chute certain uses, activities,
97.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 412-3 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 415-1
1:280
§ 415-2. Offenses against state laws subject to forfeiture. [Amended
11-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-19; 11-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-20;
12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30; 12-3-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-12]
businesses and operations by persons that may affect public safety and
public order in the Town of Grand Chute.
B. The Town Board has, by adoption of this chapter, confirmed the specific
statutory authority, powers and duties noted in the specific sections of
this chapter and has established by these sections and this chapter the
regulations, controls and enforcement against certain uses, activities,
businesses and operations by persons that may affect the public safety
and public order in the Town of Grand Chute.
A. No person shall commit the following offenses in the Town of Grand
Chute (herein noted as Town of Grand Chute ordinance violations) that
are hereby adopted by reference in this chapter. These statutes defining
offenses against the peace and good order of the state are adopted by
reference to define offenses against the peace and good order of the
Town. Prosecutions of such offenses under this chapter shall be as
provided in §§ 60.23 and 66.0107, Wis. Stats., and the below-noted
sections, but the penalties for violations of these sections shall be
limited as noted in Subsection B of this section. [Amended 12-4-2012
by Ord. No. 2012-18; 12-3-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-12; 3-24-2020
by Ord. No. 2020-05]
252.25 Violation of law relating to public health
940.19(1) Battery; substantial battery; aggravated battery
941.10 Negligent handling of burning material
941.20 Endangering safety by use of dangerous weapons
941.23 Carrying concealed weapon
941.235 Carrying firearm in public building
941.24 Possession of switchblade knife
941.35 Emergency telephone calls
941.36 Fraudulent tapping of electrical wires or gas or water
meters or pipes
941.37 Obstructing emergency or rescue personnel
943.01 Damage to property
943.11 Entry into locked vehicle
943.125 Entry into locked coin box
943.13 Criminal trespass to land
943.14 Criminal trespass to dwellings
943.15 Entry onto a construction site or into a locked building,
dwelling or room
943.20 Theft
§ 415-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-2
1:281
943.21 Fraud on hotel or restaurant keeper
943.22 Use of cheating tokens
943.23 Operating vehicle without owner's consent
943.34 Receiving stolen property
943.37 Alteration of property identification marks
943.46 Theft of video service
943.50 Retail theft
944.20 Lewd and lascivious behavior
944.23 Making lewd, obscene or indecent drawings
944.30 Prostitution
944.31 Patronizing prostitutes
944.32 Soliciting prostitutes
944.33 Pandering
944.34 Keeping place of prostitution
944.36 Solicitation of drinks
946.40 Refusing to aid officer
946.41 Resisting or obstructing officer
946.42 Escape
946.65 Obstructing justice
946.66 Filing false complaints of police misconduct
946.69 Falsely assuming to act as public officer or employee or
utility employee
946.70 Impersonating peace officers
946.72 Tampering with public records and notices
947.01 Disorderly conduct
947.012 Unlawful use of telephone
947.0125 Unlawful use of computerized communication systems
947.013 Harassment
947.015 Bomb scares
947.02 Vagrancy
947.06 Unlawful assemblies and their suppression
948.10 Exposing genitals or pubic area
948.11 Exposing a child to harmful materials
948.40 Contributing to the delinquency of a child
948.51 Hazing
961.573 Possession of drug paraphernalia
961.574 Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia
§ 415-2 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 415-2
1:282
§ 415-3. Discharge of firearms and other weapons; hunting.
[Amended 12-20-2005; 2-19-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-08; 9-1-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-14; 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30; 12-20-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-38; 2-20-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-06]
961.575 Delivery of drug paraphernalia to a minor
B. Consistent with the provisions of the above-referenced statutes and
§ 939.52, Wis. Stats., forfeitures are classified into the following
categories: Class A forfeiture, Class B forfeiture, Class C forfeiture,
Class D forfeiture, and Class E forfeiture. Penalties for these forfeitures
are as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules.
A. Purpose. This section is adopted to protect the health, safety and
welfare of persons within the municipal boundaries of the Town of
Grand Chute and to protect the safety of residential, commercial and
industrial buildings located within the municipal boundaries of the
Town of Grand Chute.
B. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise expressly
stated, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this section:
BUILDING — A permanent structure used for human occupancy and
including a manufactured home, as defined in § 101.91(2), Wis. Stats.
PARTIALLY RESTRICTED AREA — All areas of the Town of Grand
Chute lying outside the boundaries of U.S. Highway 41 except the area
described as West Capitol Drive extended westerly to Mayflower Drive,
then southerly along Mayflower Drive extending beyond its terminus
to the southern boundary of the Town of Grand Chute and all Town
publicly owned land.
PROHIBITED AREA — All areas of the Town of Grand Chute lying
within the boundaries of U.S. Highway 41, the area lying outside the
boundaries of U.S. Highway 41 described as West Capitol Drive
extended westerly to Mayflower Drive, then southerly along Mayflower
Drive extending beyond its terminus to the southern boundary of the
Town of Grand Chute, and all Town publicly owned land.
C. Total prohibition. No person except a peace officer, as defined in
§ 939.22, Wis. Stats., shall fire or discharge any firearm (defined
without limitation as a rifle, muzzle loader, pistol and/or shotgun),
slingshot, or pellet or BB gun, nor utilize such weapons for the practice
of hunting, as defined in § 29.001, Wis. Stats., within the area of the
Town of Grand Chute defined and described as prohibited in Subsection
B, above. No person except a peace officer, as defined in § 939.22, Wis.
Stats., shall fire or discharge any bow and arrow or crossbow within the
area of the Town of Grand Chute defined and described as prohibited in
Subsection B, above, except in the practice of hunting, as defined in
§ 29.001, Wis. Stats. The firing or discharge of any bow and arrow or
crossbow in the practice of hunting in the area of the Town of Grand
§ 415-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-3
1:283
Chute defined and described as prohibited in Subsection B, above, shall
be restricted as follows:
(1) No person shall hunt with a bow and arrow or crossbow within a
distance of 100 yards from a building located on another person's
land. This restriction shall not apply if the person who owns the
land on which the building is located allows the hunter to hunt with
a bow and arrow or crossbow within the specified distance of the
building.
(2) A person who hunts with a bow and arrow or crossbow shall
discharge the arrow or bolt from the respective weapon toward the
ground.
(3) No person shall discharge any arrow or bolt from any bow or
crossbow where the arrow or bolt may endanger the life, limb or
property of another or will traverse any part of a street, alley,
public grounds or parks.
(4) No person shall fire, discharge, or utilize for hunting any bow and
arrow or crossbow within 50 feet of the center of any Town street,
county road or state highway.
D. Partial restriction. No person except a peace officer, as defined in
§ 939.22, Wis. Stats., shall fire or discharge any rifle or pistol
(regardless of caliber), nor utilize such weapons for the practice of
hunting, as defined in § 29.001, Wis. Stats., within the area of the Town
of Grand Chute defined and described as partially restricted in
Subsection B, above. The firing or discharge of shotguns, muzzle
loaders, bow and arrow, crossbow, slingshot, or pellet or BB gun, or
utilization of such weapons for the practice of hunting, as defined in
§ 29.001, Wis. Stats., within the area of the Town of Grand Chute
defined and described as partially restricted in Subsection B, above, by
persons other than peace officers, shall be restricted as follows:
(1) No person shall fire, discharge, or utilize for hunting any shotgun,
muzzle loaders, bow and arrow, crossbow, slingshot, or pellet or BB
gun within a distance of 100 yards from a building located on
another person's land. This restriction shall not apply if the person
who owns the land on which the building is located allows the
person to fire, discharge, or utilize for hunting any shotgun, muzzle
loaders, slingshot, or pellet or BB gun within the specified distance
of the building.
(2) A person who hunts with a bow and arrow or crossbow shall
discharge the arrow or bolt from the respective weapon toward the
ground.
(3) No person shall discharge any shotgun, muzzle loaders, slingshot,
pellet or BB gun or arrow or bolt from any bow or crossbow where
the discharged projectile may endanger the life, limb or property of
§ 415-3 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 415-3
1:284
§ 415-4. Throwing or shooting of arrows, stones and other missiles.
[Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
No person shall throw or shoot any object, arrow, stone, snowball or other
missile or projectile, by hand or by any other means, at any other person or
at, in or into any building, street, sidewalk, alley, highway, park, playground
or other public places within the Town unless authorized by the Chief
of Police or unless conducted entirely upon private property with the
permission of the owner thereof. The discharge of bows and arrows upon
private property shall be done only when properly and securely guarded
and properly supervised against injury or damage to other persons or their
property. This section shall not apply to police officers in the discharge of
their duties.
§ 415-5. Obstructing streets and sidewalks.
another or will traverse any part of a street, alley, public grounds
or parks.
(4) No person shall fire, discharge, or utilize for hunting any shotgun,
muzzle loaders, bow and arrow, crossbow, slingshot, or pellet or BB
gun within 50 feet of the center of any Town street, county road or
state highway.
E. Any landowner within the area of the Town of Grand Chute defined and
described as prohibited or partially restricted in Subsection B, above,
may prohibit trespassing or hunting upon his or her private property,
pursuant to the provisions of Wisconsin state law.
F. Nothing in this section shall prevent the maintenance and operation of
duly supervised rifle, pistol, and archery ranges as authorized by the
Town Board by written permit. Any such duly authorized rifle, pistol,
and archery range shall encompass only the area of the range proper
and shall not include adjacent, vacant and/or open lands that may be
owned by the rifle, pistol or archery range. The discharge of firearms at
any range authorized for such use shall be limited to the hours of 7:00
a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
G. Penalties. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section
shall, upon due conviction thereof, forfeit an amount as prescribed in
the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedule, together with the costs of
prosecution.
A. Obstructing streets. No person shall obstruct, loiter, cause a nuisance,
or engage in any sport or exercise on any public street, sidewalk,
bridge, or public ground within the Town in such a manner as to:
(1) Prevent or obstruct the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic thereon;
(2) Prevent or hinder free ingress and egress to or from any place of
business or amusement, church, public hall or meeting place; or
§ 415-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-5
1:285
§ 415-6. Interference with police officer.
No person shall cause, allow or permit any person to resist or interfere with
any Town of Grand Chute police officer in the execution of his or her official
duties.
§ 415-7. Loud and unnecessary noise.
§ 415-8. Gambling, lotteries and fraudulent devices and practices.
(3) Cause a nuisance by congregating and hindering the free passage
of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
B. Obstructing sidewalk prohibited. No person shall block any sidewalk or
bridge by obstructing the same so that it is impossible for a pedestrian
to travel along the sidewalk without leaving the sidewalk and walking
on adjacent property or on the street.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different
meaning is intended:
LOITER — To sit, stand, loaf, lounge, wander or stroll in an aimless
manner or to stop, pause or remain in an area for no obvious reason.
NUISANCE — Conduct which prevents or obstructs the exercise of
rights of passage or travel by another in or about any public street,
sidewalk, bridge, or public ground located in the Town of Grand Chute.
OBSTRUCT — To interfere with unobstructed travel by any means,
including but not limited to standing on the part of the street, sidewalk,
bridge or public ground that is fit and intended for travel or passage or
placing any vehicle or any other object whatsoever on such area so as
to prevent travel or passage.
SIDEWALK — Any sidewalk owned or maintained by the Town. The
term shall not include sidewalks or walkways on private property in
shopping centers, apartment complexes, office building sites or any
other private property.
STREET — Any public street, road, highway, alley, or easement located
in the Town on which public vehicular traffic is permitted.
A. No person shall make or cause to be made any loud, disturbing or
unnecessary sounds or noises such as may tend to annoy or disturb
another in or about any public street, alley or park or any private
residence.
B. It shall be a violation of this section for a person to operate a motor
vehicle so as to cause the tires thereof to squeal, the horn to blow
excessively or the motor to race excessively.
A. All forms of gambling, lotteries and fraudulent devices and practices
are prohibited within the limits of the Town. Any peace officer or police
§ 415-5 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 415-8
1:286
§ 415-9. Urinating or defecating in public. [Amended 11-16-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-21]
No person shall urinate or defecate outside of designed sanitary facilities,
upon any sidewalk, street, alley, public parking lot, park, playground,
cemetery, or other public area within the Town, or upon any private
property in open view of the public, in the halls, rooms without rest room
facilities, stairways or elevators of public or commercial buildings.
§ 415-10. Littering.
No person shall throw any glass, rubbish, waste or filth upon the streets,
alleys, highways, public parks or other property of the Town or upon any
private property not owned by him or upon the surface of any body of water
within the Town.
§ 415-11. Climbing on motor vehicles. [Amended 12-20-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-30]
No person shall climb, lay or sit upon a motor vehicle while such vehicle
is parked or standing upon the public streets, public parking lots or other
public area of the Town.
§ 415-12. Disorderly conduct with motor vehicle. [Amended
7-16-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-13]
officer of the Town is hereby authorized to seize anything devised solely
for gambling or found in actual use for gambling within the Town and
to dispose thereof after a judicial determination is made that the device
was used solely for gambling or found in actual use for gambling.
B. Section 945.04, Permitting premises to be used for commercial
gambling, Wis. Stats., is hereby adopted. Violations of this section
constitute civil violations subject to forfeitures rather than Class A
misdemeanors. [Added 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
A. No person shall cause, by excessive and unnecessary acceleration, the
tires of any vehicle to spin and emit loud noises or to unnecessarily
throw stones, gravel, or other debris or cause to be made by excessive
and unnecessary acceleration any loud noise as would disturb the
public peace.
B. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in such a manner as to cause to
be made any smoke, gases, or odors which are disagreeable, foul, or
otherwise offensive which may tend to annoy or disturb the public.
C. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in a manner so as to cause the
vehicle to spin rapidly in a tight radius or in a manner which causes the
rear of the vehicle to unnecessarily sway from side to side.
§ 415-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-13
1:287
§ 415-13. Possession of marijuana. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-30]
No person shall possess 25 grams or less of marijuana,
tetrahydrocannabinols or any derivative thereof, unless the substance was
obtained directly from, or pursuant to, a valid prescription or order of a
licensed physician or pharmacist for a valid medical purpose. The marijuana
in the person's possession should be consistent with the amount needed for
personal use only and not in an amount that is intended for distribution.
§ 415-14. Synthetic cannabinoid prohibited. [Added 1-8-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-05 (§ 7.235 of the 1997 Code)]
§ 415-15. Loitering by minors.
A. The possession of a controlled substance specified in § 961.14(4)(tb) to
(ty), Wis. Stats., is prohibited. Violation of this section shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in § 415-19 of this chapter, except that any
person who is charged with possession of a controlled substance
specified in § 961.14(4)(tb) to (ty), Wis. Stats., following a conviction for
possession of a controlled substance in this state shall not be
prosecuted under this section.98
B. Acts otherwise prohibited under Subsection A shall not be unlawful if
done by or under the direction or prescription of a licensed physician,
dentist, or other medical health professional authorized under
Wisconsin law to direct or prescribe such acts, provided that such use is
permitted under Wisconsin and federal laws.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
LOITERING — Remaining idle in essentially one location and includes
the concept of spending time idly, to be dilatory, to linger aimlessly,
to stay, to delay, to stand around, and shall also include the colloquial
expression "hanging around."
MINOR — Any person less than 18 years of age.
B. Loitering of minors prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any minor to
loiter in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks,
public buildings, premises licensed for the sale of alcohol beverages,
vacant lots, vacant buildings, playgrounds or school grounds in the
Town of Grand Chute, either on foot or in or upon any conveyance being
driven or parked thereon, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00
a.m. of the following day, Sunday through Thursday, and between 11:00
p.m. and 5:00 a.m. Friday and Saturday, unless said minor is
accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or adult person having
legal custody or control.
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 415-13 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 415-15
1:288
§ 415-16. Truancy and habitual truancy. [Added 3-15-2005]
C. Responsibility of parents. It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian,
or other adult person having legal custody or control of any minor to
suffer to permit or by inefficient control allow such minor to violate this
section unless said minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian
or other adult person having legal custody or control.
A. Prohibited acts. A child is prohibited from being a truant or a habitual
truant. Any child violating this section shall be subject to one or more of
the penalties provided in Subsection D(1) and (2) below respectively.
B. Definitions. In this section, all terms not specifically defined shall have
the same meaning as those terms used in the context of the Wisconsin
Statutes referred to in this section. Further, the following terms shall
have the following meanings:
ACCEPTABLE EXCUSE — Permission of the parent/guardian/legal
custodian of a pupil within limits of policies on truancy established
by the school in which that pupil is enrolled. Except in emergencies
or unforeseeable circumstances, such permission is expected to be
communicated in writing from the parent/guardian/legal custodian to
the school prior to the absence. In emergencies or unforeseeable
circumstances, such communication is expected to be as soon as
practicable following the absence.
HABITUAL TRUANT — A pupil who is absent from school without an
acceptable excuse under §§ 118.15 and 118.16(4), Wis. Stats., for part
or all of five or more days on which school is held during the school
semester.
TRUANT — A pupil who is absent from school without an acceptable
excuse under §§ 118.15 and 118.16(4), Wis. Stats., for part or all of any
day on which school is held during a school semester.
C. Contributing to truancy.
(1) Contributing to truancy is prohibited. Except as provided in
Subsection C(2), no person 17 years of age or older may, by any act
or omission, knowingly encourage or contribute to truancy. An act
or omission contributes to the truancy of a child, whether or not the
child is adjudged to be in need of protection or services, if the
natural and probable consequences of that act or omission would
be to cause the child to be truant, as defined in this section.
(2) Subsection C(1) shall not apply to a person who has under his/her
control a child who has been sanctioned under § 49.26(1)(h), Wis.
Stats.
(3) Any person who violates Subsection C(1) shall be subject to a
forfeiture as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond
Schedules for each offense, plus costs, and in default of payment
§ 415-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-16
1:289
§ 415-17. Misuse of 911. [Added 11-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-22
(§ 7.28 of the 1997 Code)]
thereof shall be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
D. Truancy penalties.99
(1) A child under the age of 18 who is found to be truant shall be
subject to the following:
(a) A forfeiture as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond
Schedules, plus costs, subject to § 938.37, Wis. Stats., and
subject to a maximum cumulative forfeiture amount as
prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules, plus
costs, for all violations committed during a school semester.
(b) All or part of the forfeiture plus costs may be assessed against
the person, the parents or guardian of the person, or both, if
the parents or guardian have, by any act or omission,
knowingly encouraged or contributed to the person's truancy
pursuant to § 948.45, Wis. Stats.
(c) An order for the person to attend school.
(2) A child under the age of 18 who is found to be a habitual truant
shall be subject to the following:
(a) Suspension of the child's operating privilege, as defined in
§ 340.01(40), Wis. Stats., for not less than 30 days nor more
than one year. Any license so suspended shall be immediately
taken by the court and forwarded to the Department of
Transportation together with a notice stating the reason for
and the duration of the suspension.
(b) A forfeiture as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond
Schedules, plus costs.
(c) An order for the person to attend school.
(d) Any other reasonable conditions consistent with this
subsection, including a curfew, restrictions as to going to or
remaining on specified premises and restrictions on
associating with other children or adults.
A. No person shall use the 911 Emergency Telephone System for regular
business or nonemergency calls.
B. No person shall dial the 911 Emergency Telephone number to report an
emergency, knowing the fact or situation reported does not exist.
99.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 415-16 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 415-18
1:290
§ 415-18. Swimming pool fencing.
§ 415-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as follows:
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prevent access to outside
swimming pools located in the Town of Grand Chute by persons,
especially children, who may be injured or killed as a result of their
inability to perceive the dangers existing in the use of swimming pools.
B. Definition. A swimming pool for the purpose of this section shall be
defined as any outside structure, basin, chamber or tank containing or
designed to contain or capable of containing any artificial body of water
for wading, swimming, diving, recreation, therapy or bathing having a
depth of two feet or more at any point when filled to capacity.
C. Protective requirements. All swimming pools as defined above, whether
in-ground or aboveground types, shall be enclosed with an adequate
and secure fence at least 44 inches high above adjoining grade to
prevent straying into the pool area. Required fences shall be
constructed to prevent passage of a four-inch sphere between or under
fence members. Any gates installed shall be provided with self-closing
and self-latching devices which shall be on the inside of the gate at least
30 inches above ground level. A pool dome or pool top fencing attached
to the pool which must extend at least 44 inches above the ground and a
pool cover capable of supporting 100 pounds per square foot of area are
acceptable substitutes for fencing. This pool cover shall be fixed
securely in place at all times when the pool is not supervised by a
responsible adult. The stairways, ladders or other means used for
access to pools, whether above ground or otherwise, shall be so secured
or removed or blocked off as to prevent access to the swimming pool
when said swimming pool is not in use.
D. Exception. Aboveground pools with walls that are at least 44 inches
high at all points around said pool or have platforms and railings that
are 44 inches or more in height above ground are not required to be
enclosed as provided in Subsection C of this section.
E. Building permit. A building permit is required for the installation of any
type of swimming pool.
F. Existing pools. Existing pools not in compliance with the above
enclosure requirement shall be made to conform within four months of
the adoption of this section.
G. Fees. Double fees shall be charged if work is commenced prior to the
issuance of a permit.
A. For a violation of § 415-5 of this chapter he shall forfeit an amount as
prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules and the costs
§ 415-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-19
1:291
of prosecution and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs
of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the county jail until the forfeiture
and costs of prosecution are paid, but not exceeding five days, provided
that for a first offense any person under 18 years of age who shall be
found violating the provisions of said section shall be warned of the
penalty for such violation by any police officer of the Town and shall be
taken and delivered to the custody of the person having legal custody
over him, and for a second or subsequent offense he shall be dealt with
according to the provisions of Ch. 48, Wis. Stats.
B. For a violation of any other provisions of this chapter, except § 415-11 of
this chapter, any person shall, upon proof and conviction thereof, forfeit
an amount as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules,
together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of the
forfeiture and costs of prosecution, or either of them, such convicted
person shall be committed to and confined within the county jail of
Outagamie County, Wisconsin, until such fine and costs of prosecution
are paid, but not to exceed 60 days.
C. Any person, firm, or corporation that shall violate § 415-11 of this
chapter shall forfeit an amount as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture
and Bond Schedules and the costs of prosecution and in default of
payment of the fine and costs of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the
county jail until said fine and the costs of prosecution are paid, but not
to exceed 30 days. Each day's violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Any person who shall violate § 415-12, or any part thereof, shall be
punished by forfeiture as provided in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond
Schedules for each offense, together with the costs thereof, and in
default of payment thereof shall be imprisoned in the county jail for not
exceeding 30 days.100
E. Any minor who violates § 415-15 shall be penalized pursuant to
§ 398-16 of this Code.
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 415-19 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 415-19
1:292
Chapter 423
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 220.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 224.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 291.
Hazardous substances — See Ch. 310.
Housing standards — See Ch. 317.
Nuisances — See Ch. 398.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 415.
Trees and shrubs — See Ch. 497.
Waste management — See Ch. 520.
§ 423-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Property Maintenance Code."
§ 423-2. Authority; findings; purpose.
Pursuant to its authority granted by the broad powers under §§ 60.10(2)(c)
and 60.22, Wis. Stats., and village powers under 61.34, Wis. Stats., which
confers the power to act for the government and good order of the Town, for
its commercial benefit and for the health, safety, welfare and convenience
of the public, the Town Board has found that maintenance of buildings,
structures and premises in the Town of Grand Chute affects the health,
safety, and general welfare of the residents of the community. The general
purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards governing the
maintenance, appearance and condition of residential and nonresidential
premises and to set certain responsibilities and duties upon owners and
operators and distinct and separate responsibilities and duties upon
occupants. The Town recognizes that there may presently be or in the
future be structures, yards and vacant lots, or unimproved areas, or any
combination thereof, in the Town which are dilapidated, unsafe, dangerous,
unhygienic, or inadequately maintained so as to constitute a threat to
the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the Town. The
establishment and enforcement of minimum property maintenance
standards are necessary to preserve both private and public interests,
with the overall purpose being to benefit the health, safety, welfare and
convenience of the public.
§ 423-3. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply uniformly to all land, buildings and
structures and surrounding areas within the Town, without regard to their
class, date of construction, alteration or repair.
§ 415-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-4
1:293
§ 423-4. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when referred to in this chapter,
shall have the respective meanings assigned to them, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BLIGHT — An impaired condition leading to deterioration.
DEBRIS — Includes but is not limited to boxes, wood pallets, bottles,
broken concrete, bricks, blocks, porcelain and other glass, lumber, posts,
brush, tree branches, cardboard, rubber, discarded goods and appliances,
junk lawn mowers, residues from burning, or any similar materials which
constitute health, fire or safety hazards or serious blighting influence upon
the neighborhood or the Town in general.
DETERIORATION — The condition or appearance of a building or structure,
or part thereof, characterized by breaks, holes, rot, crumbling, cracking,
peeling, rusting, chipping, inadequate paint or other evidence of decay,
neglect, lack of maintenance or excessive use.
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREA — Any lands designated as
floodway, floodplain or flood storage area, and mapped wetland areas. Steep
slopes equal to or greater than a 3:1 ratio, designated outlots, and areas
within 75 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of any navigable stream are
also included in this category.[Added 11-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-08]
GARBAGE — All waste animal, fish, fowl or vegetable matter incident to
and resulting from the use, preparation and storage of food for human
consumption.
GARDEN — A cultivated, well-defined area dedicated to growing
vegetables, fruits, and annual or perennial plants. Also referred to as
"cultivated flower bed."[Added 11-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-08]
JUNK — Includes, without limitation, old or scrap metal, metal alloy,
synthetic or organic material or waste and junked, ruined, dismantled or
wrecked motorized or nonmotorized vehicles or machinery, or any part
thereof, whether salvageable or not. An unlicensed motorized vehicle, at the
discretion of local law enforcement officers, may be construed to be a junk
vehicle.[Amended 2-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-03]
NATIVE PLANTS — Plants and grasses native to the state of
Wisconsin.[Added 11-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-08]
NATURAL LANDSCAPING — A planned, intentional and maintained area
on a property that may include native plants, ornamental grasses and
groundcovers, perennial plants, shrubs, trees, and rain gardens. No-mow
grasses, that are intended to grow to lengths up to 12 inches and mound
over as to not reach a height over six inches, are also included in this
category.[Added 11-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-08]
NOXIOUS WEEDS — See § 398-2B(6) of the Town of Grand Chute Municipal
Code.[Added 11-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-08]
OFFICER — Includes code enforcement officers, the Police Chief and all
police officers of the Town.
§ 423-4 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 423-4
1:294
ORNAMENTAL GRASSES OR GROUNDCOVERS — Grasses and
groundcovers not indigenous to the state of Wisconsin, excluding turf
grasses and noxious weeds.[Added 11-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-08]
RANK GROWTH — Vigorous and profuse growth of turf grass, noxious
weeds, brush or other vegetation that exceeds eight inches in height.
Exceptions include gardens, cultivated flower beds, environmentally
sensitive areas, and natural landscaping.[Added 11-1-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-08]
RUBBISH — Includes all waste materials except garbage, including but not
limited to solid waste consisting of both combustible and noncombustible
waste, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin, cans, yard
clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, and crockery as well as other
similar materials.
TURF GRASS — Any grass commonly used in groomed and maintained
lawns or play areas, including Bluegrass, Fescue and Rye Grass blends, or
other similar grasses.[Added 11-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-08]
§ 423-5. Responsibilities of owner.
The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures and exterior
property in compliance with the requirements provided for in this chapter.
A person should not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to
occupy a premises which is not in a sanitary and safe condition and which
does not comply with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 423-6. Vacant structures and land.
All vacant structures and premises thereof and vacant land shall be
maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided
herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public
health or safety.
§ 423-7. Exterior property standards.
A. General. The exterior of all structures shall be maintained in good
repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the
public health, safety or welfare.
B. Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a
clean, safe and sanitary condition. The occupants shall maintain the
exterior property areas in a clean manner, free from rubbish and
garbage.
C. Exterior surfaces. All exterior surfaces of any structure on a premises,
including but not limited to doors, door and window frames, porches,
trim, balconies, decks, roofs, stairways and fences, shall be maintained
in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces shall be protected by paint,
stain or other water- and weather-resistant treatment. Peeling, flaking
§ 423-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-7
1:295
and chipped paint, as well as other deterioration, shall be eliminated
and surfaces repainted.
D. Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and
loose or rotting materials and be maintained weatherproof and properly
maintained to prevent deterioration.
E. Defacement of property. No person shall damage, mutilate or deface
any exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or
public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti. It
shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises to restore any
surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair.
F. Foundations. Every foundation and exterior wall shall be reasonably
weathertight, rodentproof and insectproof, and the foundation elements
shall adequately support the building at all points.
G. Windows, doors and hatchways. Every window, door and hatchway shall
be kept in sound condition, good repair and weathertight. Every
window shall be fully supplied with transparent or translucent
windowpanes, without cracks or holes, weathertight and kept in good
condition and repair. Every window, exterior door and door frame shall
be kept in good condition and shall exclude rain and exclude wind from
entering the building or structure.
H. Exterior areas. All exterior property and premises, including all yard
areas and dumpster areas, shall be free from any accumulation of
rubbish, garbage, debris, junk, graffiti, pet fecal matter and/or refuse.
[Amended 2-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-03]
I. Rank growth of vegetation and noxious weeds. All premises and
exterior property shall be maintained free from noxious weeds and rank
growth of vegetation in excess of eight inches in height. This subsection
applies to properties zoned or used for residential, commercial and
industrial purposes, including vacant lots in platted subdivisions.
Exceptions include gardens, cultivated flower beds, environmentally
sensitive areas, and natural landscaping. [Amended 4-23-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-06; 11-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-08]
J. Emergency access road. Each property owner shall maintain a
driveway/private road clear and unobstructed for a width of 20 feet as a
fire apparatus/emergency vehicle access road.
K. Vandalism and dilapidation. If it is found upon inspection of any vacated
building within the Town that the building is in danger of vandalism
and/or dilapidation by the weather or any other reason, the Town shall
order the owner to make the building secure against vandalism and/or
dilapidation in a workmanlike manner. Any damaged or vacant
buildings shall be restored to comply with this chapter within a time set
by an enforcement officer of the Town of Grand Chute.
§ 423-7 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 423-7
1:296
L. Boarded-up windows. Boarded-up windows shall not be permitted
except in the case of fire, natural disaster, or act of God.
M. Natural landscaping. The purpose of this subsection is to promote the
planting and maintenance of natural landscaping. It is in the public's
interest to encourage diverse landscaping practices, particularly those
that promote native plantings and natural landscapes. When properly
implemented and managed, these treatments can increase biodiversity,
have a positive effect on soil and water conservation, and be an
economical and low maintenance landscaping option. Native plants also
provide habitat, food, and shelter for native pollinators. Nothing in this
subsection is intended to promote the rank growth of vegetation or
noxious weeds. Rank growth of vegetation and noxious weeds adversely
impact public health and safety, and can decrease adjacent property
values. Planned natural landscaping is not intended to allow property
owners to ignore proper maintenance duties. It is also not acceptable
for property owners to simply stop maintaining the existing turf grass
on their property. Implementation of natural landscaping does not
preclude the requirements to provide landscaping as identified in
§ 535-52 of the Town of Grand Chute Municipal Code. In such instances,
natural landscaping may be implemented in addition to those
requirements. [Added 11-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-08]
(1) Establishing natural landscaping. A natural landscaping permit
application must be received and approved by the Town before a
property owner can implement natural landscaping. Natural
landscaping elements are to be planted through transplanting or
seeding. Prior to implementing natural landscaping, turf grass and
any noxious weeds are to be eliminated.
(2) Required setback. A setback area, consisting of regularly cut turf
grass, trees, shrubs, mulch, wood chips or landscape stone must be
maintained between the natural landscaping area and an abutting
property line. The minimum setback distances are defined as:
(a) Three feet from any adjoining side and rear lot lines. No
setback is required on side or rear lot lines if any of the
following conditions exist:
[1] There is a sight-tight boundary fence in accordance with
§ 535-53 of the Town of Grand Chute Municipal Code.
[2] The natural landscaping area abuts a neighboring planned
natural landscaping area.
[3] The natural landscaping area abuts an environmentally
sensitive area.
(b) On corner lots, the vision triangle area, as defined in
§ 535-47A(1) of the Town of Grand Chute Municipal Code, must
be maintained.
§ 423-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-7
1:297
§ 423-8. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
(3) Maintenance. Natural landscaping must be maintained throughout
the growing season and remain free of noxious weeds. If prescribed
burning techniques are used for maintenance, the requirements
outlined in § 291-5M of the Town of Grand Chute Municipal Code
must be followed.
A. Inspection by officers. All officers are authorized to administer and
enforce the provisions of this chapter. Said officers shall enforce the
provisions of this chapter and are authorized and directed to make
inspections in response to a complaint or when they have good reason
to believe a violation is being committed.
B. Entrance into property. For the purpose of making an inspection,
officers are authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable
times the exterior portions of all buildings, structures and/or premises.
If an officer is denied access to a building, structure or premises he or
she may apply to the courts for a special inspection warrant.
C. Notice of violation. [Amended 4-23-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-06]
(1) In the event that an officer determines that a building, structure
and/or exterior area, excluding rank growth of vegetation and
noxious weeds, violates or fails to meet the requirements of this
chapter, he or she shall issue a notice in writing setting forth the
alleged failures or violations and advising the owner, occupant or
agent that such failures or violations must be corrected within 30
days of the date of the written notice of violation, unless a written
extension is granted by the officer. In determining whether or not
to grant an extension, the officer may consider the health of the
owner/occupant as it relates to his or her ability to correct the
violation in a timely manner, the length of time required to correct
the violation, the weather conditions and any other factors which
relate to the ability of the owner/occupant to correct the violation
within 30 days.
(2) In the event that an officer determines that rank growth of
vegetation or noxious weeds violates or fails to meet the
requirements of this chapter, he or she shall request that the Weed
Commissioner or his designee issue a written notice to the property
owner via first-class United States Mail. The property owner or
current occupant shall have three days to comply with this chapter.
Failure to comply will result in the Town performing the necessary
services to bring the property within compliance. The cost of
property maintenance services and equipment shall be in
accordance with the Town's current fee schedule and equipment
charge out rates. All costs of such service and equipment used will
be borne by the property owner and may be placed as a lien on the
property for a lack of payment.
§ 423-7 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 423-8
1:298
Chapter 440
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Special assessments and charges — See Ch.
57, Art. II.
Building construction — See Ch. 220.
Hazardous substances — See Ch. 310.
Housing standards — See Ch. 317.
Impact fees — See Ch. 330.
Nuisances — See Ch. 398.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 463.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 468.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 475.
Water — See Ch. 523.
(3) Chronic violations of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance
and be subject to enforcement as outlined in Chapter 398, Public
Nuisances. [Added 3-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-05]
D. Penalty. A violation, pursuant to Subsection C above, not corrected
within 30 days, or three days in the case of rank growth of vegetation
and noxious weeds, from the date of the written notice of violation, or
within the written time extension granted by the officer if granted, shall
be punishable by a fine or forfeiture for each violation committed
hereunder, plus reasonable costs of inspection and prosecution. The
amount of such fine and forfeiture shall be in accordance with bond and
forfeiture schedules in effect for the Town of Grand Chute. Under
emergency circumstances, determined by and at the discretion of an
officer, whereby a violation puts the public health, safety and/or welfare
at an imminent risk of harm, the officer may provide notice and order
the violation to be corrected within 24 hours instead of 30 days, or
three days in the case of rank growth of vegetation and noxious weeds.
[Amended 4-23-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-06]
E. Each day separate violation.
(1) Each day a violation exists and fails to be corrected within 30 days,
or three days in the case of rank growth of vegetation and noxious
weeds, of the written notice of violation, or within a written time
extension granted by the officer if granted, shall constitute a
separate violation of this chapter punishable pursuant to
Subsection D above.
(2) Enforcement and penalties set forth in this section shall be in
addition to all remedies of injunction, abatement and/or costs
whether existing under this chapter or otherwise.
(3) In addition to the penalties set forth herein the Town of Grand
Chute may commence a nuisance action in the Outagamie County
Circuit Court to abate a violation under this chapter, the Property
Maintenance Code.
§ 423-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-8
1:299

ARTICLE I
Sewer Use
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as Ch. 15 of the 1997 Code]
§ 440-1. Purpose.
The provisions herein shall regulate the use of public and private sewers
and drains, private sewage disposal, the installation and connection of
building sewers, and the discharge of waters and wastes into the public
sewer system and provide penalties for violations thereof.
§ 440-2. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this article shall be as follows. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is
permissive.
BOD (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in parts per million
by weight.
BUILDING DRAINAGE SEWER — A sewer which carries storm drainage,
surface water, foundation drainage, and roof drainage, but excludes sewage
and industrial wastes, from the building plumbing to a public storm sewer
or natural outlet.
BUILDING SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries only sewage and
industrial wastes from the building plumbing to the public sanitary sewer.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both direct surface runoff and
sewage.
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil
if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the
collection system.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of
food and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL USER —
Any customer of the Sanitary District which discharges industrial waste
and is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972,
Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented,
under the following divisions:
(1) Division A, Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing.
(2) Division B, Mining.
(3) Division D, Manufacturing.
A.
§ 440-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-2
1:301
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial processes, as
distinct from sanitary sewage.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface water or groundwater.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS — All costs incurred in the
operation and maintenance of the Sanitary District and/or the Grand Chute
- Menasha West Sewerage Commission wastewater treatment works.
Notwithstanding other accounting procedures as may be used by the
Sanitary District for other purposes, in the context of this article this class
of costs shall be understood to include equipment replacement costs and
shall be understood to exclude depreciation charges and debt retirement.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation,
or group.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch in
diameter.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights and which is controlled by public authority.
RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENT METER —
Division E, Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and
Sanitary Services.
(4)
(5) Division I, Services.
For the purpose of this article, a user in the divisions listed is excluded
if it is determined that it discharges primarily segregated domestic
wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences or that it discharges the
equivalent of 25,000 gallons per day or less of sanitary wastes, provided
that such discharge does not contain pollutants which interfere with
the treatment process, are toxic or incompatible, or contaminate or
otherwise reduce utility of the sludge.
B.
The relative demand on the sewer system of a customer compared with
a single-family residence, based on water meter size, according to the
following schedule:101
A.
101. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 440-2 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 440-2
1:302
RESIDENTIAL UNITS — The volume of sewage discharged by a nonmetered
customer as compared to a single-family residence based on the residential
meter equivalency.102
RESTAURANT USERS — Those customers that are required to obtain a
Class II restaurant license as defined by the Wisconsin Department of
Health Services. Restaurant users shall be billed using the following
strength parameters:103
SANITARY SEWAGE — Synonymous with "domestic sewage" and "domestic
wastewater" and shall mean any combination of liquid or water-carried
wastes discharged from sanitary plumbing facilities. Sanitary sewage shall
be assumed to have the following waste concentrations:
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
Meter Size
(inches)
Number of Residential Equivalent
Meters
5/8 1.0
3/4 1.0
1 2.5
1 1/2 5.0
2 8.0
3 15.0
4 25.0
6 50.0
When a customer is nonmetered, he shall be assigned a value from
the above schedule closest to the number of residential units of that
customer.
B.
A. Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD): 1,000 milligrams per liter.
B. Suspended solids (SS): 500 milligrams per liter.
C. Phosphorus (P): 20 milligrams per liter.
A. Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD): 200 milligrams per liter.
B. Suspended solids: 200 milligrams per liter.
C. Other: no substances as prohibited or limited in § 440-6.
102. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 440-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-2
1:303
SEWAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — A sewer which carries stormwater
or surface water and drainage but excludes sewage and polluted industrial
wastes.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of
or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
UTILITY SUPERINTENDENT — The Utility Superintendent of Sanitary
District No. 2 of the Town of Grand Chute, or his authorized deputy, agent
or representative, or the superintendent of such additional utility sanitary
districts established within the Town of Grand Chute.104
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
§ 440-3. Prohibited acts; connection to public sewer required.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner upon public or private property
within the Town of Grand Chute, or in any area under the jurisdiction of
said Town, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other
objectionable waste.
B. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Town of
Grand Chute, or any area under the jurisdiction of said Town, any
sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except
where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of this article.
C. It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault,
septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal
of sewage, except as provided hereinafter in § 440-4 herein.
D. It shall be unlawful to connect any sewer to a public sanitary sewer
which receives roof drainage, foundation drainage, surface water and
groundwater.
E. It shall be unlawful to construct combined sewers or other facilities
intended to receive both storm runoff and sewage.
F. Responsibility of owner. [Amended 5-20-1997]
(1) The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purpose situated
within the Town and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in
104. Editor's Note: Throughout this article, the term "Manager" was amended to read "Utility
Superintendent" at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 440-2 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 440-3
1:304
§ 440-4. Private sewage disposal.
which there is now located or may in the future be located public
sanitary sewer of the Town is hereby required at his expense to
install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities
directly to the proper public sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this article, upon reasonable notice, within 90 days
after the date that said sanitary sewer is available for use and
said sanitary sewer system is in operation, and after 90 days have
elapsed from the opening of said sanitary sewer system, suitable
toilet facilities must be installed and connected directly to the
proper public sewer in accordance with the public sanitary sewer
of the Town prior to use or occupancy. This subsection applies only
when said public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line.
(2) If the Sanitary District Commissioners find that an unusual
hardship exists or that special circumstances exist regarding
proposed public sewer services made available to residents within
the jurisdiction of the Sanitary District, then the ninety-day
connection can be modified in the sole discretion of the Sanitary
District Commissioners. In no event may the time for connection to
the public sewer system be extended beyond five years from the
date that service is first made available; provided, however, that
any time extension for connection to the public sewer system shall
be immediately terminated if the on-site sanitary sewer system is
deemed to be failing. In such event, the property in question shall
connect to the public sewer system as quickly as possible, but in no
event later than 30 days from the date the system is deemed failing.
A. Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§ 440-3F above, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this article.
B. The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of
Safety and Professional Services of the State of Wisconsin and shall
comply with all laws of the State of Wisconsin and of the Town of Grand
Chute and of Outagamie County, Wisconsin, including all zoning
ordinances and other applicable laws and statutes governing the area
in question.105
C. At such time as a public sanitary sewer becomes available to a property
served by a private sewage disposal system as provided in § 440-3F
above, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in
compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar
private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with
suitable material.
105. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 440-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-4
1:305
§ 440-5. Building sewers and connections.
D. The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the Town.
E. No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health
Officer or Building Inspector or Town of Grand Chute officials.
A. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Utility
Superintendent.
B. Classes of permits. [Amended 10-20-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-16]
(1) There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
(a) For residential; and
(b) For commercial and industrial.
(2) In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a
special form furnished by the Town. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the Utility Superintendent.
The permit and inspection fee shall be as listed on the Town's Fee
Schedule for residential and commercial buildings and for
industrial waste permits. If either the owner or his agent shall
commence construction/excavation without first obtaining said
permit, the permit fee shall then be double the amount stated in the
Fee Schedule. All fees shall be paid to the Town at the time the
application is filed.
C. All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection,
maintenance and repair of the building sewers from the main, including
the riser and connection thereto, to the building shall be borne by the
owner(s). Costs and expenses shall include any damage caused by the
owner and/or any agent or contractor of the owner either to the Town of
Grand Chute, the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 2, or any
third party where said damages result from said installation,
connection, maintenance or repair or result from the negligent
construction, negligent installation or negligent connection of building
sewers by the owner and/or any agent or contractor of the owner. The
owner and any agent/contractor of the owner shall indemnify the Town
for any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by
the installation, connection, maintenance or repair of the building
sewer, including any damages resulting from trenching, open cutting or
tunneling. To assure compliance by the owner and his agents/
contractors with this section and this article in general, the owner and
his agents/contractors shall post a bond with the Town as a guarantee
and indemnity that any and all damages the owner or his agents/
§ 440-4 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 440-5
1:306
contractors cause to the public sewer or any appurtenances thereto or
any abutting property thereto shall be repaired at the expense of the
owner and/or his agent or contractor, all to the complete satisfaction
of the Town. This bond shall be in the amount of $3,000 and may be
combined by the owner or his agent and contractors with the bond
requirement of $2,000 in § 523-33. Therefore, in all cases where the
owner employs an agent and/or contractor to install, connect, maintain
or repair sewers, the agent and/or contractor shall meet all of these
bond requirements. In all cases where the installation, connection,
maintenance or repair of building sewers shall include any construction
within a federal highway, state highway, or county highway right-ofway,
or any trenching, open cutting or tunneling of any federal highway,
state highway, or county highway, then the owner or any agent/
contractor hired by the owner to accomplish the project shall post a
bond with the Town as a guarantee and indemnity that any and all
damage caused to federal, state or county right-of-way, or any federal
highway, state or county highway, or any and all appurtenances thereto,
shall be repaired at the sole expense of owner or the agent/contractor
of the owner, all to the complete satisfaction of the Town. This bond
shall be in the amount of $50,000 when the installation, connection,
maintenance or repair of building sewers includes any trenching, open
cutting or tunneling within any federal, state or county highway or
federal, state, or county highway right-of-way. The combined bond
under this subsection and § 523-33 shall be in the amount of $50,000.
Damages are defined hereunder to include all damages resulting from
said installation, connection, maintenance or repair or negligent
construction. The term "damages" as utilized herein shall further
include any legal expenses incurred by the Town of Grand Chute or the
Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 2 as a result of damages
sustained during said installation, connection, maintenance or repair.
The bond required under this subsection shall include, within its terms
and conditions, that the bond shall remain in full force and effect for
one year after the date of completion of the installation and connection
of building sewers. [Amended 10-20-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-16106]
D. A separate and independent building sanitary sewer shall be provided
for every building; except that where one building stands at the rear of
another on an interior lot and no private sanitary sewer is available or
can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley,
court, yard, or driveway, the building sanitary sewer from the front
building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered
as one building sanitary sewer, and except when specific written
permission to include more than one building on a sanitary sewer is
granted the Utility Superintendent, based upon exigencies of the
situation and when not contrary to the interest of the public. In any
event, when more than one building is included on a sanitary sewer
106. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 440-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-5
1:307
hereunder, each of said buildings as included shall pay the initial user
connection charge under § 440-9B hereof.107
E. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Utility
Superintendent, to meet all requirements of this article.
F. The size, slope, alignment, and materials of construction of a building
sanitary sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the
pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the
requirements of the Building Regulations, Chapter 220, Article II of this
Code, or other applicable rules and regulations of the Town. In the
absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and
procedures as set forth in the appropriate specifications of the
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) and applicable
Water Environment Federation Manual of Practice and the State of
Wisconsin Plumbing Code shall apply.108
G. The size and slope of the building sanitary sewers shall be subject to the
approval of the Utility Superintendent, but in no event shall the
diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such pipe shall be not
less than 1/8 inch per foot.
H. Whenever possible, the building sewers shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an
approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
I. All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be
open trench work unless otherwise approved by the Utility
Superintendent. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in
accordance with the regulations as set forth in the Building
Regulations, Chapter 220, Article II of this Code, except that no backfill
shall be replaced until the work has been inspected.
J. All joints and connections in building sanitary sewers shall be made
gastight and watertight.
K. The applicant for the building sewer permits shall notify the Utility
Superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
shall again notify the Utility Superintendent when the building sewer is
ready for connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made
under the supervision of the Utility Superintendent or his
representative.
107. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
108. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 440-5 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 440-5
1:308
§ 440-6. Use of public sewers.
L. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the Town.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling
water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
B. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a
natural outlet approved by the Utility Superintendent.
C. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any
public sewer:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F.
(2) Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per
million, by weight, of fat, oil or grease.
(3) Any gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
(4) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
(5) Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, or any other solid or
viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in
sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the
sewage works.
(6) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5
or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage
or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage
works.
(7) Any cyanides, phenols or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous
substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any
sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage
treatment plant.
(8) Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such
character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is
required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant.
(9) Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance.
§ 440-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-6
1:309
D. Restaurants and other cooking facilities shall provide grease traps or
interceptors. Automobile and other vehicle repair and service facilities
shall provide oil and sand interceptors. Such traps and interceptors
shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Wisconsin
Department of Safety and Professional Services and shall be located as
to be readily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Owners of the
grease, oil and sand interceptors shall maintain records of cleaning,
maintenance and pumping by a licensed waste disposal firm. Owners or
the waste disposal firm shall furnish the Utility Superintendent with a
copy of all such records within 30 days after each cleaning. Grease
interceptors shall be cleaned or pumped at least quarterly (every three
months) or more frequently as required by the Utility Superintendent.
Oil and sand interceptors shall be cleaned or pumped at least once per
year or more frequently as required by the Utility Superintendent. The
use of emulsifiers and/or solvents which result in the flushing of the
collected material in an interceptor to the sanitary sewer is prohibited.
Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and
equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place shall
be gastight and watertight.109
E. Where installed, grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained
by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all
times.
F. The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having a
five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 200 parts per million
by weight, or containing more than 200 parts per million by weight of
suspended solids, or containing any quantity of substances having the
characteristics described in Subsection C, or having an average daily
flow greater than 2% of the average daily sewage flow of the Town, shall
be subject to the review and approval of the Utility Superintendent.
Where necessary in the opinion of the Utility Superintendent, the owner
shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be
necessary to reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 200 parts per
million and the suspended solids to 200 parts per million by weight, or
reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the
maximum limits provided for in Subsection C above, or control the
quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans,
specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed
pretreatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the Utility
Superintendent, and no construction of such facilities shall be
commenced until said approval is obtained in writing.
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 440-6 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 440-6
1:310
§ 440-7. Protection from damage.
No authorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenances, or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewerage
system.
§ 440-8. Right of entry.
The Utility Superintendent and other duly authorized officers and
employees of the Town shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for
the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing,
in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 440-9. Water meters on private wells; connection and user
charges.
G. Where pretreatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes,
they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at his expense.
H. When required by the Utility Superintendent, the owner of any property
served by a building sanitary sewer carrying industrial wastes, or any
other user if ordered by the Utility Superintendent, shall install a
suitable control manhole in the building sanitary sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole,
when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be
constructed in accordance with the plans approved by the Utility
Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his
expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible
at all times.
I. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in Subsections C and F shall be
determined in accordance with Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Wastewater and shall be determined at the control
manhole provided for in Subsection H or upon suitable samples taken at
said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected.110
J. No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the Town and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the Town for treatment, subject to
payment therefor by the industrial concern.
110. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 440-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-9
1:311
A. The Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 2 hereby requires all
private wells serving residential, commercial or industrial properties,
and where located within the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No.
2 (Sewer Utility), to have a municipal water meter placed upon said
private wells. The municipal boundaries for the Town of Grand Chute
Sanitary District No. 1 (water service) and Town of Grand Chute
Sanitary District No. 2 (sewer service) are not similar. Therefore, in
those parts of the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 2, property
owners receiving sewer service who have private wells used for either
residential, commercial or industrial purposes shall be required to
conform to all terms and conditions of this article. In the Town of Grand
Chute Sanitary District No. 1 (water services), where properties are
connected for water service to a municipal water main but have
retained a private well for outside use, there will be no requirement of
metering of these types of private wells.
(1) The Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 2 shall furnish the
water meter and shall place the same no further than six inches
after outlet of the private well pressure tank for each residential,
commercial or industrial private well user. It is the intention of the
Sanitary District that all water used within each structure shall be
metered. The cost of the water meter will be funded and paid for by
the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1 and/or No. 2. An
outside reader will be required.
(2) All such water meters as furnished and placed by the Town of
Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 2 shall be required to be
installed by each private well owner on or before the 30th day of
August 1989. Should any private well owner not comply with this
section by August 30, 1989, then the Sanitary District shall cause
such meter to be installed; any and all charges associated with said
installation of meter shall be charged directly to the respective
customer.
(3) The water meters as installed and operating upon private wells, as
defined above, will be read by Sanitary District No. 2.
(4) Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 2 sewer users, including
those with municipal water service or private wells, shall be
metered as hereinbefore provided and shall be charged a sewer
user charge based upon water consumption and meter size. User
rates shall be established and may be amended from time to time
by the Sanitary District No. 2 Commission at a regularly scheduled
meeting. Such rates shall be referred to as the "Grand Chute
Sanitary District No 2 Sewer User Rates," a schedule of which shall
be signed and dated upon approval by the Commission. A copy of
such rate schedule shall be filed with the Town Clerk.
(5) Inspections.
§ 440-9 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 440-9
1:312
(a) Each property owner having a private well and receiving sewer
service from the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 2
(Sewer Utility) shall be required to open his, her or its
premises for inspection by the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary
District No. 2 and for the installation of the water meter by the
Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 2, all as above
provided.
(b) Any property owner not allowing the Town of Grand Chute
Sanitary District No. 2 to inspect said premises and to install
said water meter upon and to a private well service shall be
issued a summons and complaint, returnable to the Municipal
Court of the Town of Grand Chute, as a violation of this article.
Any elected or appointed official of the Town of Grand Chute
Sanitary District No. 2, including the Utility Superintendent,
may issue said summons and complaint. The summons and
complaint shall be served by the Town of Grand Chute Police
Department upon the person violating this article. Upon
conviction thereof, the violator shall pay a forfeiture in the
amount as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond
Schedules for each violation, together with the costs of
prosecution, and in the event of default of payment of such
forfeiture and the costs of prosecution shall be imprisoned in
the county jail until such forfeiture and costs of prosecution are
paid, for a period not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a
property owner refuses to permit the Town of Grand Chute
Sanitary District No. 2 utility personnel to view the premises
and/or to install the water meter upon the private well shall be
considered a separate violation under this article.
B. Initial user service connection charge. As a fair and equitable charge
towards the capital costs of the sewer system, every user at the time of
initial hookup shall be charged an initial user service connection charge
as prescribed in the Town Fee Schedule.
C. Sewer connection charge. The sewer connection charge shall be as
follows:
(1) Users supplied by sewers installed by a private concern as part of a
subdivision development approved by the Town of Grand Chute
Board of Supervisors and/or Board of Commissioners of the Town of
Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 2 shall not be subject to a sewer
connection charge; however, the initial user service connection
charge under Subsection B above shall be paid.
(2) When connection to a sewer is part of a District-sponsored sewer
connection project, the sewer connection charge shall be as
prescribed in the Town Fee Schedule, and the initial user service
connection charge under Subsection B above shall be paid in
addition thereto.111
§ 440-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-9
1:313
D. The Sanitary District shall levy a charge upon all sewer users within its
jurisdiction, defined herein as the sewer user charge. The sewer user
charge will commence from the time the connection is made to the
main, regardless of when actual connection is made to the building, and
regardless of when actual use commences. No charge shall be made to
an industrial user for costs which are charged directly to that user
under a contract between that user and the Grand Chute - Menasha
West Sewerage Commission. The sewer user charge shall be adequate
to defray operation and maintenance charges made by the Grand Chute
- Menasha West Sewerage Commission to the Sanitary District and to
defray operation and maintenance costs of the Sanitary District's sewer
system. The Sanitary District shall levy those charges on its customers
in a manner so as nearly proportionate to their actual use as is
practical.
E. Upon receipt of notice from the Grand Chute - Menasha West Sewerage
Commission as to the estimated operation and maintenance charges for
the next succeeding fiscal year, the Sanitary Commission shall adopt by
resolution a schedule of sewer user charges according to the following
methodology:
(1) Industrial wastes.
(a) When industrial wastes exceed 200 milligrams per liter
average concentration of either BOD or suspended solids (SS)
or five milligrams per liter of phosphorus (P) during a billing
period, that excess shall be subject to a surcharge equal to the
unit operation and maintenance costs of the Grand Chute -
Menasha West Sewerage Commission for treating that waste
component. In addition to these surcharges, the discharger of
industrial wastes shall be subject to the volume charge as
computed in Subsection E(2).
(b) The rate of surcharge for BOD in excess of 200 milligrams per
liter, SS in excess of 200 milligrams per liter, and P in excess of
five milligrams per liter shall be determined annually by the
Grand Chute - Menasha West Sewerage Commission. A copy of
these surcharges is on file at Grand Chute Sanitary District No.
2 offices.
(2) Nonindustrial wastes. The total annual operation and maintenance
charges estimated by the Grand Chute - Menasha West Sewerage
Commission for the Sanitary District [less estimated revenue from
surcharges calculated in Subsection E(1)] shall be divided by the
estimated volume of sanitary sewage discharged by all sewer users.
The resulting rate, expressed in dollars per 1,000 gallons, rounded
up to the nearest whole cent, shall be the volume charge.
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 440-9 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 440-9
1:314
(3) Demand and billing charge. The annual costs of the operation and
maintenance of the sewer system of the Sanitary District shall be
divided by the number of residential equivalent meters and the
resulting quotient shall be the annual demand and billing charge.
(4) Any excess (or deficit) in sewer user charges collected by the
Sanitary District shall be credited (or debited) against the
estimated operation and maintenance charges for the remainder of
the current and/or the next succeeding fiscal year, at the discretion
of the Sanitary Commission.
(5) The Sanitary District shall notify its sewer users of the rate and
amount of the sewer user charge no less than annually in
conjunction with a regular bill for sewer user charges.
(6) Restaurant users. The sewer user charge for restaurant users shall
be as prescribed in the Town Fee Schedule. Restaurant users that
utilize water for other purposes besides restaurant use may install
a deduct meter at their expense to segregate other uses. If a deduct
meter is not feasible, a residential equivalency unit determination
may be made by the Utility Superintendent. Restaurant users may
monitor their wastes to determine their characteristics and pay the
rates established for industrial wastes, provided that:
(a) The wastewater is metered and sampled flow proportionately
for seven consecutive days each year. Sampling and metering
procedures shall be approved by the Utility Superintendent
prior to proceeding pursuant to this subsection. The annual
rate will be based on the average of the seven-day results.
(b) The wastewater shall be tested for BOD, SS and P by a certified
laboratory. Results shall be furnished to the Utility
Superintendent.
F. The sewer usage of a customer discharging nonindustrial waste shall be
charged using water meter readings and private well meters.
G. The sewer usage of a customer discharging industrial wastes shall be
charged using water meter readings and private well meters together
with the results of wastewater sampling and testing. The Utility
Superintendent shall decide upon the type of metering and frequency of
sampling which may be needed to adequately characterize industrial
wastes which are to be discharged.
H. The Sanitary Commission may, from time to time, recover other costs
along with the sewer user charge as long as those costs are reasonably
related to sanitary sewer services and are not applied in such a way to
offset the sewer user charge levied to defray operation and
maintenance costs.
I. It shall be the policy of the Sanitary District, until repealed or amended
hereafter, to obtain sufficient revenue to pay the actual costs of
§ 440-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-9
1:315
§ 440-10. Violations and penalties.112
constructing, installing and operating the sewage system through a
combination of system user charges, as defined herein, coupled with
a combination of Sanitary District utility assessment costs policies and
procedures. If at any time debt charges exist, it is the policy of the
Sanitary District that any such debt costs, to the extent not defrayed
by tax levies, shall be added to the operation and maintenance charges
established by the Commission in an amount sufficient and adequate to
retire any such debt obligations.
A. Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this article,
except § 440-7, shall be served by the Town with written notice stating
the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the time
period stated within such notice, permanently cease all violations.
B. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in Subsection A above shall, upon conviction thereof,
forfeit an amount as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond
Schedules for each violation, together with the costs of prosecution,
and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution
shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs of
prosecution are paid, not to exceed 90 days.
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become
liable to the Town of Grand Chute for any expenses, losses, or damages
occasioned to the Town by reason of such violation, which shall be
recovered by a civil action by the Attorney for the Town of Grand Chute.
D. Any person violating § 440-7 of this article and/or § 440-6 of this article
shall bear all costs and expenses incident to repairs, corrections and
installation of sewers upon property owned by the Town, and said
owner shall reimburse and/or indemnify the Town for any loss or
damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the person's
violation of said section. Said violator shall be liable to the Town of
Grand Chute for any expenses, losses, or damages occasioned by or to
the Town by reason of such violation, and any such expenses, losses or
damages shall be recovered, if unpaid or not indemnified by the owner,
by a civil action by the Attorney for the Town of Grand Chute.
E. Any person who shall violate § 440-3D shall be served by the Town of
Grand Chute or the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 2 with a
summons and complaint, returnable to the Municipal Court of the Town
of Grand Chute, for a violation of said subsection. Any elected or
appointed official of the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 2,
including the Utility Superintendent of the Town of Grand Chute
Sanitary District No. 2, may issue the summons and complaint. The
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 440-9 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 440-10
1:316
summons and complaint shall be served by the Town of Grand Chute
Police Department upon the person violating said subsection. Upon
conviction thereof, the violator shall pay a forfeiture in the amount
as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules for each
violation, together with the costs of prosecution, and in the event of
default of payment of such forfeiture and the costs of prosecution
shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs of
prosecution are paid, for a period not to exceed 90 days.
(1) Where any person, whether the owner of the real estate or a
general contractor or subcontractor to the owner thereof, is
convicted of a violation more than two times within one calendar
year, the owner and contractor/subcontractor involved with the
violation shall be prohibited from obtaining from the Town of Grand
Chute any building permits for a period of one year following the
second conviction within a calendar year. This will include the loss
of the right to receive sanitary and sewer permits for contractors
and subcontractors having violated this article.
(2) By creation of this article, it is understood and agreed by the Town
of Grand Chute and the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No.
2 that § 440-3D shall be construed to prohibit the owner of any real
estate or his or her agents, contractors or subcontractors from
allowing clear water and stormwater to enter the Town of Grand
Chute Sanitary District No. 2 sanitary sewers. For example, it has
come to the attention of the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District
No. 2 that owners and their contractors, when constructing new
homes and buildings within the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary
District No. 2, at the time that the foundation is being constructed,
allow stormwaters accumulated within the excavation area and
foundation area to flow into the Sanitary District sewers by way of
removal, knocking off of or other methods allowing such storm
drainage to enter the capped or uncapped sanitary sewer which
has been brought into and through the foundation but which is
required to remain capped and unavailable for use until power is
available to the construction premises and any sump pump for
stormwater drainage is available and functioning.
F. Any person violating § 440-3, Use of public sewers required, shall be
subject to a forfeiture as set forth in the immediately preceding
subsections. Therefore, it is understood that § 440-3, Use of public
sewers required, is amended to provide that a violation of said § 440-3,
or any part thereof, shall be subject to a forfeiture as set forth above. In
addition, any violation of § 440-3, Use of public sewers required, or any
violation of the aforementioned ordinances requiring a municipal water
meter to be installed and utilized upon all private wells may be further
enforced through a Circuit Court order for mandamus petitioned for
and obtained by the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 2. In
addition, the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 2 shall have the
right to seek any court order and/or injunctive relief so as to enforce all
§ 440-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-10
1:317
§ 440-11. Service outside municipal boundaries.
ordinances amended hereunder and/or all ordinances created
hereunder. All costs of the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 2,
being reasonable attorney fees and costs and disbursements incurred
in any Circuit Court action initiated so as to require a Circuit Court
order mandating a property owner to install a water meter upon a
private well, shall be collected as part of the court judgment against the
offending property owner.
G. When municipal sewers are available to abutting property owners, all
such connections to the municipal sewer mains shall be undertaken and
completed within 90 days of the date that sewer main service is made
available to the abutting property. Similarly, for all abutting property to
which municipal water service is made available by the placement and/
or extension of water mains, all buildings shall be connected to the
municipal water system not later than 90 days from the date that
service is first made available. Any violation of this subsection shall be
enforced by way of a summons and complaint in Municipal Court for the
Town of Grand Chute and shall be subject to the forfeiture set forth
above. In addition, the provisions set forth above providing for a court
order to compel hookup to water meter service for private wells are
readopted herein to provide for a statutory provision compelling
hookup to any water mains, all by Circuit Court order as above
provided.
A. Effective January 22, 1982, the Town of Grand Chute and the Town of
Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 2 shall not extend sewer mains or
sewer main laterals or make available sewer services to parcels of real
estate which are not within the municipal boundaries of either the Town
of Grand Chute or the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 2.
B. This section is adopted by the Town of Grand Chute and the Town of
Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 2 pursuant to and under the
authority of § 66.0813, Wis. Stats., as amended.
C. The Town of Grand Chute has attempted without success to negotiate
with the City of Appleton a statement of policy and procedure whereby
the Town of Grand Chute and/or the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary
District No. 2 and the City of Appleton would provide sewer service to
real estate parcels adjacent but not within their respective municipal
boundaries, where the parcel is not a part of the community that has
sewer mains available for service to the parcel, and further to provide
for the collection by the servicing community, from the parcel not within
the servicing community's municipal boundaries, of the regular sewer
service patron charges. Until such time as a reciprocal and mutual
statement of policy and procedure is agreed in writing between the
Town of Grand Chute and the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District
No. 2 and the City of Appleton, this section prohibiting sewer main
extensions or sewer main laterals to service parcels which are not
within the municipal boundaries of the Town of Grand Chute or the
§ 440-10 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 440-11
1:318
§ 440-12. Sewer main assessment procedure.114
§ 440-13. Reimbursement to Sanitary District for attachment costs.
Each person, firm, corporation or other entity petitioning the Town of Grand
Chute Sanitary District No. 2 for attachment of properties to the Town
of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 2 shall, prior to the date that the
Town of Grand Chute adopts the required order for attachment, be required
to prepay an amount as prescribed in the Fee Schedule to reimburse the
Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 2 for required publication costs,
attorney fees and engineering fees. In those cases where the real estate, as
petitioned, will be attached to both Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District
No. 1 for water services and Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No.
2 for sewer services and the real estate has the exact, similar description
and scale map, the total reimbursement fee to be paid to the two Sanitary
Districts shall be as prescribed in the Fee Schedule for required publication
costs, attorney fees and engineering fees.
§ 440-14. Lift station high-water warning devices.
From and following the effective date of adoption and posting of this article,
each lift station installed by the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District
No. 2 or installed (directly or indirectly) by a person, firm, corporation
or entity subdividing property within the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary
District No. 2 shall be required to have a lift station high-water warning
device similar in nature, function and quality to those high-water warning
devices as then being installed by the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District
No. 2. The Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 2 shall designate the
type, model, and manufacturer of the lift station high-water warning device
Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 2 shall remain in full force
and effect.113
A. Whenever the Board of Commissioners, Town of Grand Chute Sanitary
District No. 2 (sewer service), shall cause to be constructed a sewer
main in any street, alley, easement area or right-of-way within the Town
of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 2, the District shall assess abutting
property owners, utilizing its police powers, under the provisions of
Chs. 60 and 66, Wis. Stats., in particular § 66.0703(1)(b), Wis. Stats., as
amended. The rate, per front foot of charged special assessment, for
sewer main construction to abutting property owners shall be as
determined by the Board of Commissioners following public hearing
and final resolution procedures under the above-stated statutes.
B. Assessments shall be charged as per the Town of Grand Chute Special
Assessment Policy approved August 17, 1993.
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II). See also Ch. 57, Art. II, Special Assessments and Charges.
§ 440-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-14
1:319
to be installed in each lift station located within the Town of Grand Chute
Sanitary District No. 2.
§ 440-15. Service availability charge.
§ 440-16. Industrial waste.
A. All new residential developments and all new commercial and industrial
developments, or additions/expansions of existing commercial and
industrial developments, shall be assessed a service availability charge
(hereafter "SAC"). This charge represents the equity which existing
users presently have in the regional wastewater treatment facility for
reserved capacity.
B. The SAC shall be assessed on the following basis:
(1) For new residential developments, on a residential equivalent user
(hereafter "REU") basis. The REU SAC charge for each residential
lot shall be as prescribed in the Town Fee Schedule.115
(2) For commercial and industrial developments, or for additions/
expansions of existing commercial and industrial developments,
the REU basis will be employed only if the flows, BOD, suspended
solids (SS) and phosphorus (P) quantities are known. If any of these
constituents are unknown, the appropriate SAC charge can be
determined through the following method: determination of
residential equivalency based on water meter equivalency,
implementing the schedule set forth in the definition of "residential
equivalent meter" in § 440-2 of this article.116
(3) For new residential development, the SAC charge shall be assessed
and paid at the time of application for a building permit.
(4) For new commercial and industrial developments or additions/
expansions, the SAC shall be assessed and paid at the time of
application for a building permit.
C. For existing commercial and industrial establishments with known
wastewater flow and characteristics, the SAC shall be computed on a
unit loading basis, calculated as shown on the Grand Chute Sanitary
District Sewer Availability Charge and Industrial Waste Fee Schedule as
amended periodically by the Commission. Such schedule shall be and is
a part of this article.
A. Within 90 days after receipt of notice of the passage of this article, each
person who discharges industrial wastes to a public sewer shall prepare
and file with the Utility Superintendent a report that shall include
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
116. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 440-14 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 440-16
1:320
pertinent data relating to the quantity and characteristics of the wastes
discharged to the wastewater works. In addition, each person desiring
to make a new connection to a public sewer for the purpose of
discharging industrial waste shall prepare and file with the Utility
Superintendent a report that shall include actual or predicted data
relating to the quantity and characteristics of the waste to be
discharged. The minimum information required is as follows:
(1) Estimated volume of waste daily, weekly, monthly and annually.
(2) Variation in rates of discharge.
(3) Characteristics of waste.
(4) Strength of waste.
B. When it can be demonstrated that circumstances exist which would
create an unreasonable burden on the person to comply with the time
schedule imposed by Subsection A, a request for extension of time may
be timely presented for consideration of the Utility Superintendent.
C. If any waters or wastes are discharged or proposed to be discharged
into the public sewers, which waters or wastes contain substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in § 440-6 and which, in the
judgment of the Utility Superintendent, may have a deleterious effect
upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or
which otherwise create a hazard to life or health or constitute a public
nuisance, the Utility Superintendent may, in his sole discretion:
(1) Reject the wastes.
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge into
the public sewers.
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
(4) Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges.
(5) Require any combination of the foregoing conditions based upon
the review and analysis of the Utility Superintendent.
D. Industrial wastes.
(1) Each person discharging industrial wastes into a public sewer shall
construct and maintain one or more control manholes or access
points to facilitate observation, measurement and sampling of his
wastes, including domestic sewage.
(2) Control manholes or access facilities shall be located and built in a
manner acceptable to the Utility Superintendent. If measuring
devices are to be permanently installed, they shall be of a type
acceptable to the Utility Superintendent.
§ 440-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-16
1:321
(3) Control manholes, access facilities and related equipment shall be
installed by the person or entity discharging the waste, at the
expense of the discharging person, and shall be maintained by the
discharging person so as to be in safe condition, accessible and in
proper operating condition at all times. Plans for installation of the
control manholes or access facilities and related equipment shall
be approved by the Utility Superintendent prior to the beginning of
construction.
E. The volume of flow used for computing industrial waste collection and
treatment charges shall be the metered water consumption as shown in
the records of meter reading maintained by the owner.
F. In the event that a person discharging industrial waste into the public
sewers produces evidence satisfactory to the Utility Superintendent
that more than 10% of the total annual volume of water used for all
purposes does not reach the public sewer, then the determination of the
volume discharged into the public sewer may be made a matter of
agreement between the Utility Superintendent and the person.
G. Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required
by the Utility Superintendent if this volume cannot otherwise be
determined. Metering devices for determining the volume of waste
shall be installed, owned and maintained by the person discharging the
waste. Following approval and installation, such meters shall not be
removed without the written consent of the Utility Superintendent.
H. Inspection and sampling.
(1) Industrial wastes discharged into the public sewers shall be subject
to periodic inspection and a determination of character and
concentration of said wastes. The determinations shall be made by
the industry as often as may be deemed necessary by the Utility
Superintendent.
(2) Samples shall be collected in such a manner as to be representative
of the composition of the wastes. The sampling may be
accomplished either manually or by the use of mechanical
equipment acceptable to the Utility Superintendent.
(3) Installation, operation and maintenance of the sampling facilities
shall be the responsibility of the person discharging the waste and
shall be subject to the approval of the Utility Superintendent.
Access to sampling locations shall be granted to the Utility
Superintendent or his duly authorized representatives at all
reasonable items upon request. Care shall be exercised in the
collection of samples to ensure their preservation in a state
comparable to that at the time the sample was taken.
I. The Utility Superintendent may, at his option, install such structures
and equipment and perform monitoring, sampling and laboratory
analyses called for in Subsections D through H above. In such cases, all
§ 440-16 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 440-16
1:322
structures and equipment shall be considered a part of the wastewater
treatment works, and the cost of construction, operation and
maintenance of the same shall be incorporated in the service charge of
the industrial user.
J. When, in the opinion of the Utility Superintendent and in accordance
with 40 CFR 403 (as well as other applicable state and federal
regulations), pretreatment is required to modify or eliminate wastes
that are harmful to the structures, processes or operation of the
wastewater treatment facility, the person so discharging shall provide,
at his expense, such preliminary treatment or processing facility as the
Utility Superintendent may determine necessary to render his waste
acceptable for admission to the public sewers.
K. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided by the owner, at his
expense, when in the opinion of the Utility Superintendent they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes as described in
§ 440-6 or any flammable wastes, sands or other harmful ingredients.
All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Utility
Superintendent and shall be readily and easily accessible for cleaning
and inspection. In maintaining these interceptors, the owner(s) shall be
responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means
of the captured materials and shall maintain records of the dates and
means of disposal which are subject to review by the Utility
Superintendent. Any removal and handling of the collected materials
not performed by the owner's personnel must be performed by
currently licensed waste disposal firms.
L. Measurements, tests and analyses.
(1) All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall
be determined by a certified laboratory in accordance with 40 CFR
136 and in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater published by the
American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, locations,
times, duration and frequencies are to be determined on an
individual basis and subject to approval by the Utility
Superintendent.
(2) Determination of the character and concentration of the industrial
wastes shall be made by the person discharging them, or his agent,
as designated and required by the Utility Superintendent. The
Utility Superintendent may also make his own analysis on the
wastes, and these determinations shall be binding as a basis for
treatment service charges.
M. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to
proposed flow equalization, pretreatment or processing facilities shall
be submitted for review of the Utility Superintendent prior to the start
§ 440-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-16
1:323
of their construction if the effluent from such facilities is to be
discharged into the public sewers.
§ 440-16 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 440-16
1:324
ARTICLE II
Illicit Discharges and Connections to Storm Sewer System
[Adopted 6-12-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-03 (Ch. 23 of the 1997 Code)]
§ 440-17. Purpose and objectives.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the Town of Grand Chute through the regulation of
nonstormwater discharges to the MS4 to the maximum extent practicable
as required by federal and state law. This article establishes methods for
controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the Wisconsin
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (WPDES) permit process. The
objectives of this article are to:
§ 440-18. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — The Town of Grand Chute
Community Development Director and all employees or designees of said
Director, including but not limited to building inspectors, code enforcement
officers, permit technicians, interns and consultants.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS) — Structural or nonstructural
measures, practices, techniques or devices employed to avoid or minimize
soil, sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state.
CONTAMINATED STORMWATER — Stormwater that comes into contact
with material handling equipment or activities, raw materials, intermediate
products, final products, waste materials, by-products or industrial
machinery in the source areas listed in Ch. NR 216, Wis. Adm. Code
(effective August 1, 2004).
DEPARTMENT (DNR) — The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
DISCHARGE — As defined in Ch. 283, Wis. Stats. (November 1, 2005).
When used without qualification includes a discharge of any pollutant.
DISCHARGE OF POLLUTANT or DISCHARGE OF POLLUTANTS — As
defined in Ch. 283, Wis. Stats. (November 1, 2005), means any addition of
any pollutant to the waters of this state from any point source.
A. Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by stormwater
discharges by any user.
B. Prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4.
C. Establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance,
monitoring, and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure
compliance with this article.
§ 440-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-18
1:325
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Either of the following:
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any discharge to a municipal separate storm sewer
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except discharges
authorized by a WPDES permit or other discharge not requiring a WPDES
permit, such as landscape irrigation, individual residential car washing,
firefighting, diverted stream flows, uncontaminated groundwater
infiltration, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, discharges from potable
water sources, foundation drains, air-conditioning condensation, irrigation
water, lawn watering, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, and similar
discharges.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities subject to WPDES industrial permits
per Ch. NR 216, Wis. Adm. Code (effective August 1, 2004), and Ch. 283,
Wis. Stats. (November 1, 2005).
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — The Town of Grand Chute Town Board of
Supervisors.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, town, village, county, county utility district,
town sanitary district, town utility district, school district or metropolitan
sewage district or any other public entity created pursuant to law and
having authority to collect, treat or dispose of sewage, industrial wastes,
stormwater or other wastes.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — As defined in
Ch. NR 216, Wis. Adm. Code (effective August 1, 2004), a conveyance or
system of conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels or storm
drains, which meets all the following criteria:
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows an illicit discharge to enter the MS4, including but not limited
to any conveyances that allow any nonstormwater discharge, including
sewage, process wastewater, and wash water, to enter the MS4 and
any connections to the MS4 from indoor drains and sinks, regardless
of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed,
permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the MS4 which has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
B.
A. It is owned or operated by a municipality.
B. It is designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater.
§ 440-18 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 440-18
1:326
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the MS4 that is not
composed entirely of stormwater.
OUTFALL — The point at which stormwater is discharged to waters of the
state or to a storm sewer.
OWNER — Any person holding fee title, an easement or other interest in
property.
PERSON — An individual, owner, operator, corporation, partnership,
association, municipality, interstate agency, state agency or federal agency.
POLLUTANT — As defined in Ch. 283, Wis. Stats. (November 1, 2005), any
dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, refuse,
oil, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive substance, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into
water.
POLLUTION — As defined in Ch. 283, Wis. Stats. (November 1, 2005), any
man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological or
radiological integrity of water.
POLLUTION PREVENTION — Taking measures to eliminate or reduce
pollution.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
STORMWATER — Runoff from precipitation, including rain, snow, ice melt
or similar water, that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized
flow.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN/STORMWATER POLLUTION
PREVENTION PLAN — A document which describes the best management
practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to
identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions
to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater
conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent
practicable.
WASTEWATER — Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or artificial channel through which water
flows. These channels include all blue and dashed blue lines on the United
States Geological Survey (USGS) quadrangle maps, all channels shown on
It is not a combined sewer conveying both sanitary sewage and
stormwater.117
C.
It is not part of a publicly owned wastewater treatment works that
provides secondary or more stringent treatment.
D.
117. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 440-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-18
1:327
the soils maps in the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) soils
book for Outagamie County, all channels identified on the site, and new
channels that are created as part of a development. The term "watercourse"
includes waters of the state as herein defined.
WATERS OF THE STATE — As defined in Ch. 283, Wis. Stats. (November
1, 2005), those portions of Lake Michigan and Lake Superior within the
boundaries of Wisconsin and all lakes, bays, rivers, streams, springs, ponds,
wells, impounding reservoirs, marshes, watercourses, drainage systems and
other surface water or groundwater, natural or artificial, public or private,
within the state or under its jurisdiction, except those waters which are
entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a person.
WISCONSIN POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (WPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit issued pursuant to Ch. 283, Wis. Stats.
(November 1, 2005).
§ 440-19. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all water entering the MS4 generated on any lands
unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency.
§ 440-20. Administration.
The authorized enforcement agency and/or its agents shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted or
duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated
in writing by the director of the authorized enforcement agency to persons
or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency.
§ 440-21. Compatibility with other regulations.
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule,
regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are
in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation,
or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule,
regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive
or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the
environment shall control.
§ 440-22. Minimum standards.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article
are minimum standards; therefore this article does not intend or imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
§ 440-23. Discharge prohibitions.
§ 440-18 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 440-23
1:328
A. Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or
otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw,
drain, or otherwise discharge into the MS4 any pollutants or waters
containing any pollutants, other than stormwater.
B. Allowed discharges. The following are allowed discharges:
(1) Waterline flushing, landscape irrigation, diverted stream flows,
rising groundwater, uncontaminated pumped groundwater,
discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, airconditioning
condensation, irrigation water, springs, water from
crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering, individual
residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands,
dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, and street wash water.
(2) Discharges or flow from firefighting and other discharges specified
in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being
necessary to protect public health and safety.
(3) Discharges associated with dye testing; however, this activity
requires a verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency
and the Department of Natural Resources a minimum of one day
prior to the time of the test.
(4) Any nonstormwater discharge permitted under a WPDES permit,
waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and
administered under the authority of the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources. Any person subject to such a WPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of
such permit.
C. Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the MS4 is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4 or allows such a
connection to continue.
(4) Improper connections in violation of this article must be
disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved on-site
wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon
approval of the authorized enforcement agency.
(5) Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans,
maps or equivalent and which may be connected to the storm
sewer system shall be located by the owner or occupant of that
§ 440-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-23
1:329
§ 440-24. Watercourse protection.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse
so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or
physical integrity of the watercourse.
§ 440-25. Compliance monitoring.
property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the
authorized enforcement agency requiring that such locating be
completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within
which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be determined,
that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary
sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection
to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other
discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are
to be documented and provided to the authorized enforcement
agency.
A. Right of entry; inspecting and sampling. The authorized enforcement
agency shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to
regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to determine
compliance with this article.
(1) If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access
to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the authorized enforcement agency
ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records.
(3) The authorized enforcement agency shall have the right to set up
on any facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the
authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or
sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge.
(4) The authorized enforcement agency has the right to require the
discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The
facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the
discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure
stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their
accuracy.
§ 440-23 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 440-25
1:330
§ 440-26. Use of best management practices.
The owner or operator of any activity, operation, or facility which may cause
or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the MS4, or
waters of the state shall provide, at its own expense, reasonable protection
from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into
the municipal MS4 or watercourses through the use of these structural
and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property
or premises that is or may be the source of an illicit discharge may be
required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and
nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the
MS4. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid WPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity,
to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions
of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater management plan
(SWMP)/stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for
compliance.
§ 440-27. Notification of spills.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the
authorized enforcement agency and shall not be replaced. The
costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
(6) Unreasonable delay in allowing the authorized enforcement agency
access to a facility is a violation. A person who is the operator of a
facility commits an offense if the person denies the authorized
enforcement agency reasonable access to the facility for the
purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this
article.
B. Special inspection warrant. If the authorized enforcement agency has
been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater
is discharged and it is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe
that there may be a violation of this article or that there is a need to
inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order
issued hereunder or to protect the overall public health, safety, and
welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may
seek issuance of a special inspection warrant per § 66.0119, Wis. Stats.
A. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in
illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the MS4, or
waters of the state, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure
the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of
§ 440-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-27
1:331
§ 440-28. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately
notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency
dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials,
said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or
by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications
in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed
and mailed to the authorized enforcement agency within 72 hours of
the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates
from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator
of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the
discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records
shall be retained for at least seven years.
B. Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a
violation of this article.
A. Violations.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who
has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article
may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section
or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner
provided by law.
(2) In the event that the violation constitutes an immediate danger to
public health or public safety, the authorized enforcement agency is
authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without
giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate
the violation. The authorized enforcement agency is authorized to
seek costs of the abatement as outlined in § 440-31.
B. Warning notice. When the authorized enforcement agency finds that
any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
article or any order issued hereunder, the authorized enforcement
agency may serve upon that person a written warning notice specifying
the particular violation believed to have occurred and requesting the
discharger to immediately investigate the matter and to seek a
resolution whereby any offending discharge will cease. Investigation
and/or resolution of the matter in response to the warning notice in no
way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations occurring
before or after receipt of the warning notice. Nothing in the subsection
shall limit the authority of the authorized enforcement agency to take
action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action,
without first issuing a warning notice.
C. Notice of violation.
§ 440-27 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 440-28
1:332
(1) Whenever the authorized enforcement agency finds that a person
has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this
article, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance
by written notice of violation to the responsible person.
(2) The notice of violation shall contain:
(a) The name and address of the alleged violator;
(b) The address when available or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring or has
occurred;
(c) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
(d) A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore
compliance with this article and a time schedule for the
completion of such remedial action;
(e) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed;
(f) A statement that the determination of violation may be
appealed to the authorized enforcement agency by filing a
written notice of appeal within three days of service of notice
of violation; and
(g) A statement specifying that, should the violator fail to restore
compliance within the established time schedule, the work will
be done by a designated governmental agency or contractor
and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
(3) Such notice may require, without limitation:
(a) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(b) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(c) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease
and desist;
(d) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(e) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation
costs; and
(f) The implementation of BMPs.
D. Suspension of MS4 access.
(1) Emergency cease and desist orders.
§ 440-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-28
1:333
(a) When the authorized enforcement agency finds that any
person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of
this article or any order issued hereunder, or that the person's
past violations are likely to recur, and that the person's
violation(s) has (have) caused or contributed to an actual or
threatened discharge to the MS4 or waters of the United
States which reasonably appears to present an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons
or to the environment, the authorized enforcement agency may
issue an order to the violator directing it immediately to cease
and desist all such violations and directing the violator to:
[1] Immediately comply with all requirements of this article;
and
[2] Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed
to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including immediately halting operations and/or
terminating the discharge.
(b) Any person notified of an emergency order directed to it under
this subsection shall immediately comply and stop or eliminate
its endangering discharge. In the event of a discharger's
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the emergency
order, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps
as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize harm to the MS4
or waters of the United States and/or endangerment to persons
or to the environment, including immediate termination of a
facility's water supply, sewer connection, or other municipal
utility services. The authorized enforcement agency may allow
the person to recommence its discharge when it has
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the authorized enforcement
agency that the period of endangerment has passed, unless
further termination proceedings are initiated against the
discharger under this article. A person that is responsible, in
whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent
endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the
measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the
authorized enforcement agency within 72 hours of receipt of
the emergency order. Issuance of an emergency order shall not
be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against the violator.118
(2) Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The
authorized enforcement agency may, without prior notice, suspend
MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 440-28 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 440-28
1:334
or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the
MS4 or waters of the state. If the violator fails to comply with
a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized
enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to
prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United
States or to minimize danger to persons.
(3) Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge.
(a) Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article
may have its MS4 access terminated if such termination would
abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized
enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed
termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the
authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and
hearing.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4
access to premises terminated pursuant to this section without
the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency.
E. Prosecution and penalties.
(1) Any person that has violated or continues to violate this article shall
be liable to prosecution to the fullest extent of the law. In the event
that the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set
forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the
violations described therein within the set time period specified by
the authorized enforcement agency, after the authorized
enforcement agency has taken one or more of the actions described
above, the violator shall be subject to a penalty as prescribed in the
Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules for each day the violation
remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation.119
(2) Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is not complied
with promptly, the authorized enforcement agency shall request
the Town Attorney to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or
in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, and the
violator shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined as provided
hereinbefore for each violation together with the costs of
prosecution. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.120
(3) Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not preclude the Town Attorney from instituting
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 440-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-28
1:335
§ 440-29. Appeal of notice of violation.121
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of
the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received
by the authorized entity within three days from the date of the notice
of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority or
its designee shall take place within 45 days from the date of receipt of
the notice of appeal. The appeal shall be heard by the Town Board of
Supervisors, which shall be defined as the "municipal authority" for
purposes of this article.
§ 440-30. Enforcement measures after appeal.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation or, in the event of an appeal, the municipal
authority upheld the decision of the authorized enforcement agency, then
representatives of the authorized enforcement agency are authorized to
enter upon the subject private property and authorized to take any and
all measures necessary to abate the violation. It shall be unlawful for any
person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to
allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the
premises for the purposes set forth above.
§ 440-31. Recovery of abatement costs.
Within 60 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property
will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs.
If the amount due is not paid by the date determined by the municipal
authority, the charges shall become a special charge against the property
and shall constitute a lien on the property.
§ 440-32. Abatement of nuisance.
Any condition in violation of any of the provisions of this article and declared
and deemed a nuisance may be summarily abated or restored at the
violator's expense.
appropriate action to prevent, correct or abate a violation or to stop
an unlawful or illegal act.
(4) The authorized enforcement agency shall have the option and
authority to prosecute any citation or civil forfeiture in either the
Town of Grand Chute Municipal Court or Outagamie County Circuit
Court. With respect to any action to prevent, correct or abate a
violation, or any other cause of action provided for in this article or
by the laws of the State of Wisconsin, the same shall be brought in
Outagamie County Circuit Court unless otherwise provided by law.
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 440-28 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 440-33
1:336
§ 440-33. Remedies not exclusive; recovery of expenses.
§ 440-34. Enforcement obligations.
Nothing contained in this article shall require the Town of Grand Chute
or the authorized enforcement agency to engage in any enforcement
obligations that exceed the obligations required under the laws of the State
of Wisconsin, including but not limited to Ch. NR 216, Wis. Adm. Code.
A. The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other
remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and
it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek
cumulative remedies.
B. The authorized enforcement agency may recover all attorney fees,
court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this
article, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
§ 440-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-34
1:337
Chapter 456
SPECIAL EVENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 190.
Dances and dance halls — See Ch. 252.
Fireworks — See Ch. 295.
Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages — See Ch. 335.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 409.
§ 456-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXPRESSIVE ACTIVITY — Conduct, the sole or principal object of which is
the expression dissemination or communication by verbal, visual, literary or
auditory means of opinion, views or ideas and for which no fee or donation
is charged or required as a condition of participation in or attendance at
such activity. It includes public oratory and distribution of literature, and
picketing.
HIGHWAYS OR STREETS — For the purpose of this section, the words have
the meaning set forth in § 340.01 Wis. Stats., and also include areas owned
by the Town, which are used primarily for pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
SPECIAL EVENTS — Events that include, but are not limited to, fun runs,
roadway foot races, fundraising walks, bicycle races, parades, carnivals,
shows, gatherings, circuses, block parties, festivals, fireworks and/or
involve one or more of the following factors:
The event is to be conducted on public property or right-of-way; or the
event is to be conducted on private property, and is open to the public
and not within the normal and ordinary use of the property.
A.
The event will cause a significant impact on traffic congestion or traffic
flow to and from the event over public streets or rights-of-way, or will
significantly impact public streets or rights-of-way near the event.
B.
The event is likely to create the need for Town-provided emergency
services, such as police, fire or medical aid.
C.
D. The event will have a presumptive impact on neighboring properties.
The nature of the event requires additional permits, inspections, or
variances.
E.
The event will be held at a Town park, and expected attendance will
exceed the maximum capacity set by the Parks Department. Such
special event permit shall be in addition to any street, park use, or other
regular permits as may be required by ordinance.
F.
§ 440-34 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 456-1
1:338
SPECIAL EVENTS COMMITTEE — A committee comprised of the Town
Clerk or his/her designee, the Police Chief or his/her designee, the Fire
Chief or his/her designee, and the Chief Building Inspector or his/her
designee. The Town Clerk or his/her designee shall serve as the Committee
Chair. The role of the Committee is to evaluate events to determine if they
are in the best interest of the community and to assess issues such as the
health and safety of the public and need for Town services.
§ 456-2. Permits.
§ 456-3. Application.
G. The Town reserves the right to deem an event a "special event."
A. A special event permit or authorization from the Town is required for
any event that meets the definition of "special event," found in § 456-1.
B. A special event permit is not required for the following, unless the event
is deemed to have a significant impact on Town services and/or the
community:
(1) Parades, athletic events or other special events that occur
exclusively on Town property and are sponsored or conducted in
full by the Town of Grand Chute.
(2) Funeral and wedding processions.
(3) Military convoys.
(4) Groups required by law to be so assembled.
(5) Gatherings not exceeding maximum capacity in a Town park,
unless merchandise or services are offered for sale or trade.
(6) Temporary sales conducted by businesses, such as holiday sales,
grand opening sales, or anniversary sales.
(7) Garage sales and rummage sales.
(8) The exhibition of films or motion pictures.
(9) Other similar events and activities which do not directly affect or
use Town services or property.
(10) A gathering for the specific purpose of expressive activity.
A. Any person desiring to sponsor a special event shall apply for a special
event permit by filing an application with the Town Clerk at least 45
days prior to the date on which the event is to occur.
B. Upon a showing of good cause, or at the discretion of the Special Events
Committee, the Committee shall consider an application that is filed
after the filing deadline if there is sufficient time to process and
investigate the application and obtain police and other Town services
§ 456-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 456-3
1:339
§ 456-4. Permit fee.
§ 456-5. Permit approval.
for the event. Good cause can be demonstrated by the applicant
showing that the circumstance that gave rise to the permit application
did not reasonably allow the participants to file within the time
prescribed.
A. A fee will be required at the time of application for any special event
permit necessitated by this chapter. The Town Board shall establish a
list of approved fees. No permit shall be issued without payment of the
basic permit fee(s).
B. A special event permit filed after the forty-five-day application deadline
shall be subject to an additional fee in accordance with the Town fee
schedule.
C. No permit fee shall be refunded after initiation of the permit approval
process.
A. All Special Events Committee representatives receiving a copy of a
special events permit application shall recommend either approval or
denial of the permit. Recommendations for denial of an application
should include a reason for the denial. Each department head or his/her
designee shall review the application based upon the following criteria:
(1) Impact on department resources.
(2) Cost to the department.
(3) Any perceived public health or safety problems.
(4) Impact on Town property.
(5) The presumptive impact the event may have on neighboring
properties.
B. The Special Events Committee is authorized to approve or deny special
event permits pursuant to criteria established in this section, unless
one of the conditions identified in Subsection C, below, exist. In such
case, the matter shall be referred to the Town Board for approval or
denial.
C. Special events requiring Town Board approval include:
(1) Events that may have a substantial impact on Town services and/or
the community.
(2) Events that require the use of public roadways and/or public
facilities and may exceed 500 people.
§ 456-3 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 456-5
1:340
§ 456-6. Town services deposit.
§ 456-7. Cleanup deposit.
§ 456-8. Permit conditions.
(3) An event that requires closure of an arterial roadway within the
Town and may have a significant impact on vehicle or pedestrian
traffic.
(4) An event that may have a detrimental effect on the Town of Grand
Chute.
(5) Fireworks.
A. In addition to the basic permit fee(s), the Town Clerk shall determine,
upon recommendation of the Police Department, Fire Department and
Public Works Department, the estimated direct and indirect event
related costs for Town resources.
B. Upon approval of an application for a permit for a special event, the
Town Clerk shall provide the applicant with a statement of the
estimated cost of providing Town personnel and equipment. The
applicant/sponsor of the event must prepay these estimated costs for
Town services and equipment 10 days prior to the special events. Town
services and equipment may include the use of Police Department
employees for traffic and crowd control, Town employees for pickup and
delivery of traffic control devices, picnic tables, extraordinary street
sweeping, and any other needed, requested or required Town service
and the cost of operating the equipment to provide such services.
C. If the actual cost for Town services and equipment on the date(s) of the
event is less than the estimated cost, the applicant/sponsor will be
refunded the difference by the Town in a timely manner. If the actual
cost for Town services and equipment on the date(s) of the event is
greater than the estimated cost, the applicant/sponsor will be billed for
the difference.
A. The Special Events Committee may require a cleanup deposit from an
applicant/sponsor of an event involving the sale of food or beverages for
immediate consumption, erection of structures, horses or other large
animals, water aid stations or any other event likely to create a
substantial need for a cleanup.
B. The cleanup deposit may be returned after the event if the area used for
the permitted event has been cleaned and restored to the same
condition as existed prior to the event.
C. If the property used for the event has not been properly cleaned or
restored, the applicant/sponsor shall be billed for the actual cost by the
Town for cleanup and restoration. The cleanup deposit shall be applied
toward the payment of the bill.
§ 456-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 456-8
1:341
A. Sponsors of Special Events must comply with all applicable Town
ordinances, traffic rules, park rules, state health laws, fire codes, and
liquor licensing regulations.
B. The Town may condition the issuance of a special event permit by
imposing reasonable requirements concerning the time, place and
manner of the event, and such requirements as are necessary to protect
the safety and rights of persons and property, and the control of traffic.
These conditions may include:
(1) Alteration of the time, place and manner of the event proposed on
the event application.
(2) Conditions concerning the area of assembly and disbanding of an
event occurring along a route.
(3) Conditions concerning accommodation of pedestrians or vehicular
traffic, including restricting the event to only a portion of the street
or right-of-way.
(4) Such other conditions as determined by the Town Board suitable
for the specific event, that are reasonable or necessary, to protect
the health, safety and general welfare of the Town and its residents
and/or participants in the event.
C. Further conditions on special events permits may include, but are not
limited to:
(1) Requirements for the use of traffic cones or barricades.
(2) Requirements for the provision of first aid or sanitary facilities;
including, but not limited to, portable toilets.
(3) Requirements for use of event monitors and providing notice of
permit conditions to event participants.
(4) Restrictions on the number and type of vehicles, animals or
structures at the event, and inspection and approval of floats,
structures, and decorated vehicles for firesafety.
(5) Compliance with animal protection ordinances and laws.
(6) Requirements for use of garbage containers, cleanup, and
restoration of Town property.
(7) Restrictions on the use of amplified sound and compliance with
noise ordinance, regulations and laws.
(8) Notice to residents and/or businesses regarding any activity which
would require a street closure or restrictions.
(9) Compliance with restrictions on the sale and/or consumption of
alcohol.
§ 456-8 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 456-8
1:342
§ 456-9. Grounds for denial of application.
§ 456-10. Appeal procedure.
(10) Elimination of an activity which cannot be mitigated to a point as to
ensure public safety and welfare, or which causes undue liability to
the Town.
(11) Requirements regarding the use of Town personnel and equipment.
(12) Compliance with any other applicable federal, state or local law or
regulation.
D. Street closures. If special event requires any street(s) to be closed, the
event organizer or their contractor shall be required to provide an
acceptably prepared traffic control plan (TCP) to the Special Events
Committee for review and approval no less than four weeks prior to the
event. The plan shall comply with the Federal Highway Administration's
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition. Temporary
traffic control devices/services shall be provided by a contractor which
has extensive experience in the industry and is approved in advance by
the Special Events Committee.
A. The Town may deny an application for a special event permit if any of
the following apply:
(1) The applicant provides false or misleading information; the
applicant fails to complete the application or to supply other
required information of documents; or the applicant declares or
shows an unwillingness or inability to comply with the reasonable
terms or conditions contained in the proposed permit.
(2) The proposed event would conflict with another proximate event,
interfere with construction or maintenance work in the immediate
vicinity, or unreasonably infringe upon the rights of abutting
property.
(3) The proposed event would unreasonably disrupt the orderly or safe
circulation of traffic or would present an unreasonable risk of injury
or damage to property.
(4) The event would have a presumptive impact on neighboring
properties.
(5) The event is deemed to be not in the best interest to the community.
(6) The applicant has unpaid permit or services fees as outlined in
§ 456-6.
B. In the event that Subsection A(2) or (3), above, applies, the Town shall
offer the applicant the opportunity to submit an alternative date or
place for the proposed event before denying the application.
§ 456-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 456-10
1:343
§ 456-11. Revocation of permits.
§ 456-12. Violations and penalties.
A. The applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a permit or a
permit condition. The applicant shall also have the right to appeal the
amount of fees or deposits imposed pursuant to §§ 456-6 and 456-7.
B. The Town Board may hear the appeal on the record during a scheduled
Town Board meeting. The Town Board will determine whether the
permit shall be approved, reevaluated by the Special Events
Committee, or denied. The decision of the Town Board is final.
A. Any permit issued under this chapter may be summarily revoked by a
representative from the Grand Chute Police or Fire Department at any
time when, a representative from the Town determines the safety of the
public or property requires such immediate revocation.
B. The Town may also summarily revoke any permit issued pursuant to this
chapter if the Town finds that the permit has been issued based upon
false information or when the permittee exceeds the scope of the permit
or fails to comply with any condition of the permit.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to sponsor or conduct a special event
requiring a special event permit pursuant to this chapter unless a valid
permit has been issued and remains in effect for the event. It is
unlawful for any person to participate in such an event with the
knowledge that the sponsor of the event has not been issued a required,
valid permit or with knowledge that a once valid permit has expired or
been revoked.
B. The special event permit authorizes the permittee/sponsor to conduct
only such an event as is described in the permit, and in accordance with
the terms and conditions of the permit. It is unlawful for the permittee/
sponsor to willfully violate the terms and conditions of the permit, or for
any event participant with knowledge thereof to willfully violate the
terms and conditions of the permit or to continue with the event if the
permit is revoked or expired.
C. Any person or organization violating the provisions of this chapter shall
be subject to a penalty of a fine as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture
and Bond Schedules.
§ 456-10 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 456-12
1:344
Chapter 463
STORMWATER UTILITY AND MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 220.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 275.
Sewers — See Ch. 440.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 475.
§ 456-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 456-12
1:345

ARTICLE I
Sanitary District No. 3
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as Ch. 22 of the 1997 Code]
§ 463-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to promote the health, safety and welfare of
the Town's citizens, property owners and business operators by establishing
the rules and regulations for collecting, storing, treating and disposing of
the Town's surface water runoff.
§ 463-2. Authority and title.
This article is adopted under the authority granted by § 60.77(5), Wis.
Stats., and shall be known as the "Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District
No. 3 Ordinance."
§ 463-3. Jurisdiction.
Those elements of the system which provide for the control of the Town's
surface water runoff are of benefit and provide services to all property
within the Town of Grand Chute. including those not currently served by
the storm elements of the system. Therefore, Sanitary District No. 3 shall
encompass the entire Town of Grand Chute as set forth in Exhibit A of
the order creating the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 3 dated
September 2, 1997.
§ 463-4. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this article shall be as follows. "Shall" is mandatory, while "may" is
permissive.
AGRICULTURAL PROPERTY — Pursuant to this article and the functions of
Sanitary District No. 3 is defined by § 93.50(1), Wis. Stats.
COMMISSION or BOARD — Refers to the Grand Chute Sanitary District No.
3 Board of Commissioners.
CUSTOMER — The property owner receiving bills for either a stormwater
user fee or special assessment.
DEVELOPED PROPERTY — Real property which has been altered from its
natural state by the addition of any improvements, which may include a
building, structure, impervious surface, change of grade or landscaping. For
new construction, a property shall be considered developed pursuant to this
article upon issuance of a building permit.
DIRECTOR — Refers to the person charged with carrying out the day-to-day
administrative and managerial functions of Sanitary District No. 3.
DISTRICT or UTILITY — Refers to the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary
District No. 3.
§ 463-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 463-4
1:347
EXISTING DEVELOPMENT — Real property developed prior to the
enactment of this article.
IMPERVIOUS AREA OR SURFACE — Areas that have been paved, covered
or compacted to inhibit the natural infiltration of water into the soil or cause
water to run off the area in greater quantities or at an increased rate of
flow from that present under natural conditions as undeveloped property.
Such areas may include, but are not limited to, roofs, roof extensions,
patios, porches, driveways, sidewalks, pavement, gravel, athletic courts and
compacted surfaces. Excluded from this definition are undisturbed land,
lawns and fields.
NEW DEVELOPMENT — Real property developed at any time after
enactment of this article.
NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Includes all property within the district
limits not defined as residential property. This includes, but is not limited
to, agricultural, commercial, industrial, institutional, governmental, and
transient rental property as well as churches and schools.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS — All costs incurred in the
operation and maintenance of Sanitary District No. 3 in accordance with
standard Town accounting procedures.
RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENT UNIT or REU — The average impervious area
of a single-family residential developed property located within the Town of
Grand Chute as established by Commission resolution.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any lot or parcel developed exclusively for
residential purposes, including but not limited to single-family homes,
manufactured homes, and multifamily dwellings, including apartment
buildings, town homes and condominiums.
REU RATE — The dollar amount charged on each REU as established by
Commission resolution.
RUNOFF — The surface water, including rain and snow melt, that is
inhibited by impervious surfaces from naturally infiltrating into soil.
SANITARY DISTRICT NO. 3 FUND or FUND — Refers to the account
designated herein to hold revenues, interest and fees generated for purpose
of carrying out the functions of Sanitary District No. 3.
SPECIAL ASSESSMENT — Refers to charges levied upon property in a
limited and determinable area for special benefits conferred upon such
property by any municipal work or improvement.
STORMWATER FACILITIES — All constructed facilities or natural features
used for collecting, storing, and conducting stormwater to, through and
from drainage areas to the point of final outlet. Stormwater facilities
collectively constitute a stormwater system.
UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY — Real property left in or returned to a natural
state without any improvements such as a building, structure, impervious
surface, change of grade or landscaping.
§ 463-4 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 463-4
1:348
USER FEES — Charges to property owners based on their property's
classification and current REU rate.
§ 463-5. District authority.
§ 463-6. Rates and charges.
A. Sanitary District No. 3 may acquire, construct, lease, own, operate,
maintain, extend, expand, replace, clean, dredge, repair, conduct,
manage and finance such facilities as are deemed by the District to be
proper and reasonably necessary for a system of surface water
management. These facilities may include, without limitation by
enumeration, surface and underground drainage facilities, sewers,
watercourses, retaining walls and ponds and such other facilities as will
support a stormwater management system.
B. The Grand Chute Town Board of Supervisors shall serve as the Sanitary
District No. 3 Commission and exercise due authority pursuant to
§§ 60.74 through 60.79, Wis. Stats. This includes the authority to fix and
collect charges, levy special assessments, lease or acquire any real and
personal property that may be needed for the purposes of surface water
management, and enact and enforce ordinances to implement this
authority.
C. The Town Administrator will serve as Director of Sanitary District No. 3
if or until such time as the Commission designates otherwise by
resolution.
D. Commissioners, the District Director, other authorized employees of the
Town or District, or its authorized agents shall be permitted to enter
upon all properties in the Town for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, testing, construction or
enforcement of this article in accordance with laws governing the
authority of the Town.
A. The cost of creating, operating and maintaining all stormwater
management systems and the financing of existing and necessary
repairs, replacement, improvements and extensions shall be born by
Sanitary District No. 3. Pursuant to its powers and duties under
§§ 60.77 and 60.78, Wis. Stats., the District Commission may fix and
collect charges, levy special assessments, and borrow money or issue
municipal bonds to meet its obligations.
B. User fee. Sanitary District No. 3 shall establish fees upon all existing
and new developments within its jurisdiction, defined herein as a
stormwater user fee. The fee will be designed to collect the
administrative, operational and maintenance costs of the District and
the portion of capital costs not covered by special assessments.
§ 463-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 463-6
1:349
§ 463-7. Rate setting, commencement and adjustment.
(1) The user fee will be based on the impervious area associated with
each developed parcel. The average imperious area of the REU
shall be established by Commission resolution.
(2) For purposes of imposing user fees, all parcels within the Sanitary
District are classified into three categories:
(a) Single-family residential;
(b) Multifamily residential; and
(c) Nonresidential.
(3) The charges imposed for a single-family home shall be the fee rate
of one REU as established by resolution.
(4) The Commission shall also establish by resolution a method for
determining the number of REUs for multifamily residential
property and a method for determining the number of REUs for
nonresidential property.
(5) The number of REUs assigned to a property shall be rounded to the
nearest whole REU according to mathematical convention (below
0.5 rounded down; 0.5 and greater rounded up).
C. Special assessments. Pursuant to § 60.77(5)(f), Wis. Stats., the Sanitary
District may impose special assessments on property that is in an area
specifically benefited by a particular stormwater management facility.
Assessments will be based on the general benefits received by that area
as determined by the Commission.
(1) Assessments will be developed for the benefits/services received by
a particular area that may not be appropriate to spread to property
throughout the Town.
(2) The rate, per front foot of charged special assessment, for facility
construction to abutting property owners shall be as determined by
the Board of Commissioners, following public hearing and final
resolution procedures under the above-stated statutes and Chapter
57, Article II of this Code.
A. The REU equivalent area, the REU rate, and REU methods and any
future changes in those determinations shall be made by resolution.
B. Stormwater user fees for existing development will commence from the
effective date of this article or at such time as the Commission
establishes an REU rate.
C. Stormwater user fees for new development will commence from the
date of construction permit issuance. The property owner shall be
responsible for completing a Sanitary District No. 3 service application
§ 463-6 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 463-7
1:350
§ 463-8. Billing and terms of payment.
§ 463-9. Credits.
form any time a building permit is issued (exclusive of those issued to
existing single-family residences).
D. The Commission shall review these classifications and determinations
at least biannually and maintain its current settings with the Town
Clerk.
A. Stormwater user fees shall be included with quarterly water and sewer
bills for properties receiving such bills. A bill for Sanitary District No. 3
charges will be issued quarterly to properties in Grand Chute not
serviced by Town Sanitary Districts. All charges and bills related to
Sanitary District No. 3 shall be payable in accordance with the
procedures and penalties in effect for Sanitary District bills.
B. Bills for special assessments are subject to the provisions of § 66.0703,
Wis. Stats.
A. It is the intent of Sanitary District No. 3 that all developed property
(existing and new) within the district boundaries contribute to the
operation, maintenance and improvement of the stormwater
management system in proportion to the runoff emanating from that
property.
B. The Board of Commissioners may provide credits against certain of the
charges set forth above for facilities installed and maintained by the
property owner for the purpose of lessening the surface water runoff
from that given property.
C. Credit will only be allowed for properties where structural controls are
maintained in fully functional condition and according to maintenance
criteria and design standards issued by the Sanitary District.
D. Customers seeking credit for private facilities must file a written
application with the Town Clerk on a form provided by Sanitary District
No. 3. Applications must include all information necessary to fully
explain the basis of the credit request, include an amount the customer
asserts is an appropriate credit, and be accompanied by the appropriate
application fee. The Commission shall, by resolution, set a fee for
residential and nonresidential applications for credit. Application fees
shall be set to reflect the cost to the Sanitary District of inspecting and
verifying subject facility. Current application fees will be maintained
with the Town Clerk.
E. The Director shall review a submitted application and recommend an
action to the Commission within 90 days of receiving the application.
The Commission must notify the applicant in writing of its decision
within 30 days of receiving the Director's recommendation. The
Commission's determination regarding credit applications is final.
§ 463-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 463-9
1:351
§ 463-10. Appeals.
F. In no event shall credit provided to an applicant exceed 85% of the
charges levied on the property. The remaining 15% represents that
portion of the charges attributed to administering the Sanitary District
for the benefit of the entire community.
G. Sanitary District No. 3 reserves the right to inspect periodically all
stormwater facilities for which a credit has been given to ascertain
whether they are operating properly. If such a facility fails to operate
properly, the Director shall issue an order to repair the facility. If the
repairs are not completed within 60 days of the Director's order, the
Director may issue an order eliminating or reducing credits to an
appropriate level. Any such facility shall not be eligible to reapply for
credit for a period of 24 months following any credit reduction or
elimination ordered by the Director.
H. The issuance of any building permit or other action which changes or
intensifies the existing land development or a nonresidential property
shall be cause for an adjustment of the charges or credits on that
property. It is the property owner's obligation to inform the Director in
writing of any such changes. Failure to inform the Director within 60
days of the permit issuance or land development change may result in
an increase in charges on or the elimination or reduction of credit to the
subject property by resolution of the Commission.
A. The stormwater user fee may be appealed by filing a written appeal
with the Town Clerk prior to the user fee due date as set out on the
utility bill or within 30 days of payment after the due date.
B. Any appeal shall include a survey prepared by a land surveyor showing
impervious surface area, total parcel area, the amount of user fee the
customer asserts is appropriate, and other information pertaining to
the appeal. Failure to file an appeal within 30 days of payment waives
all right to later appeal the user fee.
C. The Director of the Sanitary District will review written appeals for
conformity with the procedures for appeal described herein and
recommend an action to the Board of Commissioners to uphold, modify
or deny the appeal. The Commission will have 30 days to act upon
receiving the Director's recommendation. The Commission will make a
determination to uphold, modify or deny the appeal. The Commission
may act with or without a hearing and will inform the customer in
writing of its decision. The Commission's determination is final.
D. The amount associated with a successful appeal will be credited in full
or in part to successive future bills until such time as the appealed
amount is returned. The entire amount may be refunded at the
discretion of the Director.
§ 463-9 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 463-10
1:352
§ 463-11. Violations and penalties.
§ 463-12. Sanitary District No. 3 Fund; annual budget.
E. The filing of a written appeal does not remove the customer from an
obligation to pay the user fee under appeal. All appealed user fees are
subject to the terms of payments specified elsewhere in this article.
F. Special assessments may be appealed in accordance with
§ 66.0703(12), Wis. Stats.
A. Failure to pay a stormwater user fee or special assessment when due
shall constitute a violation of this article and is subject to the penalties
in effect for water and sewer bills issued by the Town of Grand Chute
Sanitary District No. 1 and No. 2.
B. Easements intended for periodic or occasional use as conductors for the
flow of surface water runoff shall be maintained in an unobstructed
condition by the owners of the properties they cross. When specified, as
by restrictive covenant, the Sanitary District shall have the right to
determine if any obstruction exists and to repair and maintain, or
require such repair and maintenance by the property owner, as shall be
reasonably necessary to keep the conductors unobstructed.
C. It shall be a violation of this article to connect or outlet, either directly
or indirectly, any discharge line or sewer carrying anything other than
stormwater, surface water runoff, or groundwater to a stormwater
sewer, ditch or conveyance structure.
D. It shall be a violation of this article to dump or dispose of junk, rubbish,
trash, garbage, yard waste, household waste, industrial waste or debris
in a stormwater sewer, ditch, or conveyance structure.
E. All site development and redevelopment shall include adequate and
proper stormwater drainage and erosion control provisions in
accordance with applicable zoning and subdivision control
ordinances.122
F. Any person violating or failing to comply with the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit an amount as prescribed in
the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules plus the cost of prosecution
for each violation and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs
shall be imprisoned in the county jail until payment thereof, but not
exceeding 30 days. Each violation and each day a violation exists or
continues shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, the remedies
authorized by §§ 236.30, 236.31 and 235.32, Wis. Stats., shall be
available to the Town.
122. Editor's Note: See Ch. 475, Subdivision of Land, and Ch. 535, Zoning.
§ 463-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 463-12
1:353
A. All revenues and interest earned and fees collected for stormwater
service and special assessments shall be deposited in a segregated fund
titled "Sanitary District No. 3 Fund."
B. Disbursements from this fund will be authorized by the Board of
Commissioners and will be used exclusively for the operation,
maintenance and improvement of the Town's stormwater system.
C. The fund shall not revert to any other Town district or general fund and
may not be transferred for any other purpose, including to avoid a
default on bonds not issued by Sanitary District No. 3.
D. The Sanitary District shall prepare an annul budget, which is to include
all operation and maintenance costs, debt service and other costs
related to the operation of the Sanitary District. The budget is subject
to approval by the Board of Commissioners.
E. Any excess of revenues over expenditures in a year will be retained by
the stormwater fund.
§ 463-12 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 463-12
1:354
ARTICLE II
Stormwater Management
[Adopted 9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-14123]
§ 463-13. Authority; effect on other laws.
§ 463-14. Findings of fact.
The Town of Grand Chute Board finds that uncontrolled post-construction
stormwater runoff has a significant impact upon water resources and the
health, safety and general welfare of the community and diminishes the
public enjoyment and use of natural resources. Specifically, uncontrolled
post-construction runoff can:
A. This article is adopted by the Town of Grand Chute Board under the
authority granted by § 60.627, Wis. Stats. This article supersedes all
provisions of an ordinance previously enacted in accordance with
§ 60.62, Wis. Stats., that relate to post-construction stormwater
management regulations. Except as otherwise specified in § 60.627,
Wis. Stats., the provisions in § 60.62, Wis. Stats., apply to this article
and to any amendments to this article.
B. The provisions of this article are deemed not to limit any other lawful
regulatory powers of the same governing body.
C. The Town of Grand Chute Board hereby designates the Plan
Commission and the Community Development Department to
administer and enforce the provisions of this article.
D. The requirements of this article do not preempt more stringent
stormwater management requirements that may be imposed by any of
the following:
(1) Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative rules,
permits or approvals, including those authorized under §§ 281.16
and 283.33, Wis. Stats.
(2) Targeted performance standards promulgated in rules by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under § NR 151.004,
Wis. Adm. Code.
A. Degrade physical stream habitats by increasing stream bank erosion,
increasing streambed scour, diminishing groundwater recharge,
diminishing stream base flows and increasing stream temperature.
B. Diminish the capacity of lakes and streams to support fish, aquatic life,
recreational uses, and water supplies by increasing pollutant loading of
sediment, suspended solids, nutrients, heavy metals, bacteria,
pathogens and other urban pollutants.
123. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. II, Stormwater Management,
adopted 1-7-1997 as Ch. 26 of the 1997 Code, as amended.
§ 463-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 463-14
1:355
§ 463-15. Purpose and intent.
C. Alter wetland communities by changing wetland hydrology and
increasing pollutant loads.
D. Reduce the quality of groundwater by increasing pollutant loading.
E. Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by
overtaxing storm sewers, drainageways, and other minor drainage
facilities.
F. Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by
increasing major flood peaks and volumes.
G. Undermine floodplain management efforts by increasing the incidence
and levels of flooding.
A. Purpose. The general purpose of this article is to establish long-term,
post-construction runoff management requirements that will diminish
the threats to public health, safety, welfare and the aquatic
environment. Specific purposes are to:
(1) Further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions.
(2) Prevent and control the adverse effects of stormwater; prevent and
control soil erosion; prevent and control water pollution; protect
spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites,
placement of structures and land uses; preserve ground cover and
scenic beauty; and promote sound economic growth.
(3) Control exceedance of the safe capacity of existing drainage
facilities and receiving water bodies; prevent undue channel
erosion; control increases in the scouring and transportation of
particulate matter; and prevent conditions that endanger
downstream property.
B. Intent. It is the intent of the Town of Grand Chute Board that this article
regulates post-construction stormwater discharges to waters of the
state. This article may be applied on a site-by-site basis. The Town of
Grand Chute Board recognizes, however, that the preferred method of
achieving the stormwater performance standards set forth in this
article is through the preparation and implementation of
comprehensive, systems-level stormwater management plans that
cover hydrologic units, such as watersheds, on a municipal and regional
scale. Such plans may prescribe regional stormwater devices, practices
or systems, any of which may be designed to treat runoff from more
than one site prior to discharge to waters of the state. Where such plans
are in conformance with the performance standards developed under
§ 281.16, Wis. Stats., for regional stormwater management measures
and have been approved by the Town of Grand Chute Board, it is the
intent of this article that the approved plan be used to identify postconstruction
management measures acceptable for the community.
§ 463-14 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 463-16
1:356
§ 463-16. Applicability; jurisdiction; exclusions; maintenance of
effort.
§ 463-17. Definitions.
A. Applicability.
(1) Where not otherwise limited by law, this article applies to all postconstruction
sites, unless the site is otherwise exempt pursuant to
§ 463-16A(2).
(2) A post-construction site that meets any of the following criteria is
exempt from the requirements of this article:
(a) One- and two-family residential dwellings that are not part of a
larger common plan of development or sale and that result in
less than one acre of disturbance.
(b) Nonpoint discharges from agricultural activity areas.
(c) Nonpoint discharges from silviculture activities.
(d) Mill and crush operations.
(3) Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in § 463-16A(1),
this article applies to post-construction sites of any size that, in the
opinion of the administering authority, are likely to result in runoff
that exceeds the safe capacity of the existing drainage facilities or
receiving body of water, that causes undue channel erosion, that
increases water pollution by scouring or the transportation of
particulate matter, or that endangers property or public safety.
B. Jurisdiction. This article applies to post-construction sites within the
boundaries and jurisdiction of the Town of Grand Chute.
C. Exclusions. This article is not applicable to activities conducted by a
state agency, as defined under § 227.01(1), Wis. Stats., but also
including the office of district attorney, which is subject to the state plan
promulgated or a memorandum of understanding entered into under
§ 281.33(2), Wis. Stats.
D. Maintenance of effort. For a redevelopment site where the land
disturbing construction activity will be replacing older development
that was subject to post-construction performance standards of this
article in effect on or after January 1, 2005, the responsible party shall
meet either the water quality, peak discharge, infiltration, protective
area, and petroleum sheen standards applicable to the older
development or the redevelopment standards of this article, whichever
are more stringent.
A. For the purposes of this article, the following shall apply as indicated
throughout the article:
§ 463-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 463-17
1:357
(1) The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual.
(2) The present tense includes the future tense, and the singular
includes plural.
(3) The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive.
(4) The word "used" or "occupied" also means intended, designed or
arranged to be used or occupied.
B. Definition of terms. For the purpose of this article, the following terms
are defined:
ADEQUATE SOD or SELF-SUSTAINING VEGETATIVE COVER —
Maintenance of sufficient vegetation types and densities such that the
physical integrity of the streambank or lakeshore is preserved. Selfsustaining
vegetative cover includes grasses, forbs, sedges and duff
layers of fallen leaves and woody debris.
ADMINISTERING AUTHORITY — A governmental employee or their
designees empowered under § 60.627, Wis. Stats., to administer this
article. For the purpose of this article, it is the Town of Grand Chute
Community Development Department, under guidance from the Plan
Commission.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY AREA — The part of the farm where there
is planting, growing, cultivating and harvesting of crops for human or
livestock consumption and pasturing or outside yarding of livestock,
including sod farms and silviculture. Practices in this area may include
waterways, drainage ditches, diversions, terraces, farm lanes,
excavation, filling and similar practices. The agricultural activity area
does not include the agricultural production area.
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION AREA — The part of the farm where
there is concentrated production activity or impervious surfaces.
Agricultural production areas include buildings, driveways, parking
areas, feed storage structures, manure storage structures, and other
impervious surfaces. The agricultural production area does not include
the agricultural activity area.
ATLAS 14 — The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA) Atlas 14 Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States,
Volume 8 (Midwestern States), published in 2013.
AVERAGE ANNUAL RAINFALL — A typical calendar year of
precipitation as determined by the Wisconsin DNR for users of models
such as SLAMM, P8, or equivalent methodology. The average annual
rainfall is chosen from a Wisconsin DNR publication for the location
closest to the municipality.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Structural or nonstructural
measures, practices, techniques or devices employed to avoid or
§ 463-17 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 463-17
1:358
minimize soil, sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the
state. Also referred to as "BMPs."
BUSINESS DAY — A day the office of the administering authority is
routinely and customarily open for business.
CEASE-AND-DESIST ORDER — A court-issued order to halt land
disturbing construction activity that is being conducted without the
required permit.
COMBINED SEWER SYSTEM — A system for conveying both sanitary
sewage and stormwater runoff.
COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE — A development or
sale where multiple separate and distinct land disturbing construction
activities may be taking place at different times on different schedules
but under one plan. A common plan of development or sale includes,
but is not limited to, subdivision plats, certified survey maps, and other
developments.
CONNECTED IMPERVIOUS — An impervious surface connected to the
waters of the state via a separate storm sewer, an impervious flow path,
or a minimally pervious flow path.
CONSTRUCTION SITE — An area upon which one or more land
disturbing construction activities occur, including areas that are part of
a larger common plan of development or sale.
DESIGN STORM — A hypothetical discrete rainstorm characterized
by a specific duration, temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return
frequency, and total depth of rainfall. The TP-40, Type II, twenty-fourhour
design storms for the Town of Grand Chute are: one-year, 2.2
inches; two-year, 2.5 inches; five-year, 3.3 inches; ten-year, 3.8 inches;
twenty-five-year, 4.4 inches; fifty-year, 4.9 inches; and one-hundredyear,
5.3 inches. The Atlas 14, MSE4, twenty-four-hour design storms
for the Town of Grand Chute are: one-year, 2.14 inches; two-year, 2.45
inches; five-year, 3.01 inches; ten-year, 3.51 inches; twenty-five-year,
4.24 inches; fifty-year, 4.85 inches; and one-hundred-year, 5.50 inches.
DEVELOPMENT — Residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, or
other land uses and associated roads.
DIRECT CONDUITS TO GROUNDWATER — Wells, sinkholes, swallets,
fractured bedrock at the surface, mine shafts, nonmetallic mines, tile
inlets discharging to groundwater, quarries, or depressional
groundwater recharge areas over shallow fractured bedrock.
DIVISION OF LAND — The creation, from one or more parcels or
building sites, of additional parcels or building sites where such
creation occurs at one time or through the successive partition within a
five-year period.
DRY POND — A stormwater detention facility with perennial vegetation
growth in the pond bottom. Water levels located above the pond bottom
§ 463-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 463-17
1:359
and vegetation growth fluctuate in response to rainfall events. Dry
ponds are used for flood control, but not water quality treatment.
EFFECTIVE INFILTRATION AREA — The area of the infiltration system
that is used to infiltrate runoff and does not include the area used for
site access, berms or pretreatment.
EROSION — The process by which the land's surface is worn away by
the action of wind, water, ice or gravity.
EXCEPTIONAL RESOURCE WATERS — Waters listed in § NR 102.11,
Wis. Adm. Code.
EXISTING DEVELOPMENT — Development in existence on January 1,
2005, or development for which a stormwater permit in accordance
with Subchapter III of Ch. NR 216, Wis. Adm. Code, was received on or
before January 1, 2005.
EXTRATERRITORIAL — The unincorporated area within three miles of
the corporate limits of a first-, second-, or third-class city, or within 1.5
miles of a fourth-class city or village.
FILTERING LAYER — Soil that has at least a three-foot deep layer with
at least twenty-percent fines; or at least a five-foot deep layer with at
least ten-percent fines; or an engineered soil with an equivalent level of
protection as determined by the administering authority for the site.
FINAL STABILIZATION — The point in time when all land disturbing
construction activities at the construction site have been completed and
that a uniform, perennial, vegetative cover has been established, with a
density of at least 70% of the cover, for the unpaved areas and areas not
covered by permanent structures, or that employ equivalent permanent
stabilization measures.
FINANCIAL GUARANTEE — A performance bond, maintenance bond,
surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or similar guarantees
submitted to the administering authority by the responsible party to
assure that requirements of the article are carried out in compliance
with the stormwater management plan.
GOVERNING BODY — Town Board of Supervisors, County Board of
Supervisors, City Council, Village Board of Trustees, or Village Council.
GROUNDWATER — Waters of the state, as defined in § 281.01(18), Wis.
Stats., occurring in a saturated subsurface geological formation of rock
or soil.
HIGH GROUNDWATER LEVEL OR SUBSURFACE SATURATION —
Higher of either the elevation to which the soil is saturated as observed
as a free water surface in an unlined hole, or the elevation to which
the soil has been seasonally or periodically saturated as indicated by
soil color patterns throughout the soil profile, as defined in Technical
Standard 1002, Site Evaluation for Stormwater Infiltration.
HIGHWAY — Has the meaning given in § 340.01(22), Wis. Stats.
§ 463-17 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 463-17
1:360
HIGHWAY RECONDITIONING — Has the meaning given in
§ 84.013(1)(b), Wis. Stats.
HIGHWAY RECONSTRUCTION — Has the meaning given in
§ 84.013(1)(c), Wis. Stats.
HIGHWAY RESURFACING — Has the meaning given in § 84.013(1)(d),
Wis. Stats.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — An area that releases as runoff all or a
large portion of the precipitation that falls on it, except for frozen soil.
Rooftops, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots and streets are examples
of surfaces that typically are impervious. Gravel surfaces are
considered impervious, unless specifically designed and constructed to
encourage infiltration.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE DISTURBANCE — Any land disturbing
construction activity in which any new impervious surfaces are created
or existing impervious surfaces are redeveloped.
INFILL — An undeveloped area of land or new development area
located within an existing urban sewer service area, surrounded by
development or development and natural or man-made features where
development cannot occur. Infill does not include any undeveloped area
that was part of a larger new development for which a stormwater
permit in accordance with Subchapter III of Ch. NR 216, Wis. Adm.
Code, was required to be submitted after January 1, 2005, to the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources or Wisconsin Department
of Safety and Professional Services (formerly Department of
Commerce).
INFILTRATION — The entry and movement of precipitation or runoff
into or through soil.
INFILTRATION SYSTEM — A device or practice such as a basin, trench,
rain garden or swale designed specifically to encourage infiltration, but
does not include natural infiltration in pervious surfaces such as lawns,
redirecting of rooftop downspouts onto lawns or minimal infiltration
from practices, such as swales or roadside channels designed for
conveyance and pollutant removal only.
LAND DISTURBING CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Any man-made
alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the topography or
existing vegetative or nonvegetative soil cover that may result in runoff
and lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of pollutants
into the municipal separate storm sewer or waters of the state. Land
disturbing construction activity includes clearing and grubbing,
demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading
activities, and soil stockpiling. Also referred to as "disturbance."
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legal document that provides for
long-term maintenance of stormwater management and best
management practices.
§ 463-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 463-17
1:361
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE — The highest level of
performance that is achievable, but not equivalent to a performance
standard identified within this article. "Maximum extent practicable"
applies when the permit applicant demonstrates to the administering
authority's satisfaction that a performance standard is not achievable
and that a lower level of performance is appropriate. In making the
assertion that a performance standard is not achievable and that a
level of performance different from the performance standard is the
maximum extent practicable, the permit applicant shall take into
account the best available technology, cost effectiveness, geographic
features, and other competing interests such as protection of public
safety and welfare, protection of endangered and threatened resources,
and preservation of historic properties. Also referred to as "MEP."
MINOR RECONSTRUCTION OF A HIGHWAY — Reconstruction of a
highway that is limited to 1.5 miles in continuous or aggregate total
length of realignment and that does not exceed 100 feet in width of
roadbed widening and that does not include replacement of a vegetated
drainage system with a nonvegetated drainage system except where
necessary to convey runoff under a highway or private road or
driveway.
MSE4 DISTRIBUTION — A specific precipitation distribution developed
by the USDA, NRCS, using precipitation data from Atlas 14.
NAVIGABLE WATERS and NAVIGABLE WATERWAY — Has the meaning
given in § 30.01(4m), Wis. Stats.
NEW DEVELOPMENT — That portion of a post-construction site where
impervious surfaces are being created or expanded. Any disturbance
where the amount of impervious area for the post-development
condition is greater than the pre-development condition is classified as
new development. For purposes of this article, a post-construction site
is classified as new development, redevelopment, routine maintenance,
or some combination of these three classifications as appropriate.
OFF SITE — Located outside the property boundary described in the
permit application.
ON SITE — Located within the property boundary described in the
permit application.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — Has the meaning given in § NR
115.03(6), Wis. Adm. Code.
OUTSTANDING RESOURCE WATERS — Waters listed in § NR 102.10,
Wis. Adm. Code.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The highest rate of stormwater flow that occurs
at a specific location and for a specific storm event. Peak discharge is
measured in cubic feet per second of stormwater flow.
PERCENT FINES — The percentage of a given sample of soil that
passes through a No. 200 sieve.
§ 463-17 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 463-17
1:362
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A narrative or measurable number
specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or practice.
PERMIT — A written authorization by the administering authority to
the applicant, granting permission to conduct land disturbing
construction activity or to discharge post-construction runoff to waters
of the state.
PERMIT ADMINISTRATION FEE — A sum of money paid to the
administering authority by the permit applicant for the purpose of
recovering the expenses incurred by the authority in administering the
permit.
PERVIOUS SURFACE — An area that releases as runoff a small portion
of the precipitation that falls on it. Lawns, gardens, fields, parks, forests
or other similar vegetated areas are examples of surfaces that typically
are pervious.
POLLUTANT — Has the meaning given in § 283.01(13), Wis. Stats.
POLLUTION — Has the meaning given in § 281.01(10), Wis. Stats.
POST-CONSTRUCTION SITE — A construction site after the completion
of land disturbing construction activity and final site stabilization.
POST-DEVELOPMENT — The extent and distribution of land cover
types present after the completion of land disturbing construction
activity and final site stabilization.
PRE-DEVELOPMENT — The extent and distribution of land cover types
present before the initiation of land disturbing construction activity,
assuming that all land uses prior to development activity are managed
in an environmentally sound manner.
PREVENTIVE ACTION LIMIT — The meaning given in § NR 140.05(17),
Wis. Adm. Code.
PROTECTIVE AREA — An area of land that commences at the top of
the channel of lakes, streams and rivers, or at the delineated boundary
of wetlands, as measured horizontally from the top of the channel or
delineated wetland boundary to the closest impervious surface. For the
purposes of this article, a protective area does not include any area of
land adjacent to any stream enclosed within a pipe or culvert, such that
runoff cannot enter the enclosure at this location.
REDEVELOPMENT — That portion of a post-construction site where
existing impervious surfaces from older development are being
reconstructed, replaced, or reconfigured to accommodate new
development. Any disturbance where the amount of impervious area
for the post-development condition is equal to or less than the predevelopment
(existing) condition is classified as redevelopment. For
purposes of this article, a post-construction site is classified as new
development, redevelopment, routine maintenance, or some
combination of these three classifications as appropriate.
§ 463-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 463-17
1:363
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Any entity holding fee title to a property or
other person contracted or obligated by other agreement to implement
and maintain post-construction stormwater BMPs.
ROUTINE MAINTENANCE — That portion of a post-construction site
where pre-development impervious surfaces are being maintained to
preserve the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, drainage
pattern, configuration, or purpose of the facility. Remodeling of
buildings and resurfacing of parking lots, streets, driveways, and
sidewalks are examples of routine maintenance, provided the lower
1/2 of the impervious surface's granular base is not disturbed. The
disturbance shall be classified as redevelopment if the lower 1/2 of the
granular base associated with the pre-development impervious surface
is disturbed or if the soil located beneath the impervious surface is
exposed. For purposes of this article, a post-construction site is
classified as new development, redevelopment, routine maintenance, or
some combination of these three classifications as appropriate.
RUNOFF — Stormwater or precipitation including rain, snow or ice
melt or similar water that moves on the land surface via sheet or
channelized flow.
SEDIMENT — Settleable solid material that is transported by runoff,
suspended within runoff, or deposited by runoff away from its original
location.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER — A conveyance or system of conveyances,
including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs,
gutters, ditches, constructed channels or storm drains, which meets all
of the following criteria:
SILVICULTURE ACTIVITIES — Activities including tree nursery
operations, tree harvesting operations, reforestation, tree thinning,
prescribed burning, and pest and fire control. Clearing and grubbing of
an area of a construction site is not a silviculture activity.
SITE — The entire area included in the legal description of the property
on which the land disturbing construction activity occurred.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued by the administering authority
that requires all construction activity on the site be stopped.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A comprehensive plan
designed to reduce the discharge of pollutants from stormwater
following completion of the land disturbance construction activity and
after the site has undergone final stabilization.
(1) Is designed or used for collecting water or conveying runoff.
(2) Is not part of a combined sewer system.
Is not part of a publicly owned wastewater treatment works that
provides secondary or more stringent treatment.
(3)
(4) Discharges directly or indirectly to waters of the state.
§ 463-17 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 463-17
1:364
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM PLAN — A comprehensive
plan designed to reduce the discharge of runoff and pollutants from
hydrologic units on a regional or municipal scale.
TARGETED PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A performance standard
that will apply in a specific area where additional practices beyond
those contained in this article are necessary to meet water quality
standards. A total maximum daily load is an example of a targeted
performance standard.
TECHNICAL STANDARD — A document that specifies design,
predicted performance, and operation and maintenance specifications
for a material, device or method.
TOP OF CHANNEL — An edge, or point on the landscape, landward
from the ordinary high-water mark of a surface water of the state,
where the slope of the land begins to be less than 12% continually for
at least 50 feet. If the slope of the land is 12% or less continually for the
initial 50 feet landward from the ordinary high-water mark, the top of
the channel is the ordinary high-water mark.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD — The amount of pollutants specified
as a function of one or more water quality parameters that can be
discharged per day into a water quality limited segment and still ensure
attainment of the applicable water quality standard. Also referred to as
"TMDL."
TP-40 — The Technical Paper No. 40, Rainfall Frequency Atlas of the
United States, published in 1961.
TR-55 — The United States Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service (previously Soil Conservation Service),
Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Second Edition, Technical
Release 55, June 1986, which is incorporated by reference for this
article.
TRANSPORTATION FACILITY — A public street, a public road, a public
highway, a railroad, a public mass transit facility, a public-use airport,
a public trail, or any other public work for transportation purposes
such as harbor improvements under § 85.095(1)(b), Wis. Stats.
Transportation facility does not include building sites for the
construction of public buildings and buildings that are places of
employment that are regulated by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources pursuant to § 281.33, Wis. Stats.
TYPE II DISTRIBUTION — A rainfall type curve as established in the
United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service,
Technical Paper 149, published 1973, which is incorporated by
reference for this article. The Type II curve is applicable to all of
Wisconsin and represents the most intense storm pattern.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Has the meaning given in § 283.01(20), Wis.
Stats.
§ 463-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 463-17
1:365
§ 463-18. Technical standards.
The following methods shall be used in designing and maintaining the
water quality, peak discharge, infiltration, protective area, fueling/vehicle
maintenance, and swale treatment components of stormwater practices
needed to meet the water quality standards of this article:
WET POND — A stormwater detention facility with a permanent pool
of water in the pond bottom. Water levels located above the permanent
pool of water fluctuate in response to rainfall events. Wet ponds are
used for flood control and potentially for water quality. Wet ponds are
required to satisfy Code 1001 Wet Detention Pond Technical Standard
to receive water quality credit.
A. Technical standards identified, developed or disseminated by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under Subchapter V of Ch.
NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code.
B. Technical standards and guidance identified within the Town of Grand
Chute Stormwater Reference Guide.
C. Where technical standards have not been identified or developed by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, other technical standards
may be used, provided that the methods have been approved by the
administering authority.
D. In this article, the following year and location has been selected as
average annual rainfall(s): Green Bay, 1969 (March 29 through
November 25).
E. Stormwater facilities located within an airport zoning district shall be
designed, operated, and maintained in conformance with Chapter 10 of
the Outagamie County Code of Ordinances.
F. Safety standards in addition to Ch. NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code. The
following additional standards shall apply to any wet pond constructed
on a parcel or site located in a residential zoning district or adjoining a
residential zoning district, a school, day-care facility, or similar use:
(1) To achieve water quality and peak discharge requirements, the
applicant may use a wet pond design as a stormwater treatment
facility. The wet pond design shall meet the following safety
specifications:
(a) Side slope to wet pond of 4:1 or flatter.
(b) Underwater safety shelf measuring eight feet wide or more
with an average water depth of less than 18 inches.
(c) Vegetation or plantings installed in the safety shelf and side
slope in accordance with Town specifications and policies.
§ 463-17 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 463-18
1:366
§ 463-19. Performance standards.
(d) Grating covers for all structure inlets and outlets greater than
six inches in size.
(2) The stormwater treatment facility maintenance plan shall identify
the maintenance procedures for the vegetation so as to discourage
access to the wet pond.
(3) If an applicant for a post-construction runoff permit cannot meet
both the water quality and peak discharge standards and also the
wet pond safety specifications described herein, the applicant shall
at a minimum meet the water quality and peak discharge standards
and submit a wet pond safety report. This report shall identify any
variance from the safety specifications and identify any
supplemental safety features that are incorporated into the design
of the wet pond as a result. An applicant is not required to erect a
fence around a wet pond; however, the applicant may include a
fence in the safety features for the facility design. Any fence to be
constructed as a wet pond safety feature shall be subject to the
provisions of § 535-53 of the Town of Grand Chute Municipal Code
and of Chapter 40 of the Outagamie County Code of Ordinances.
(4) Ponds created for purposes other than stormwater management
are exempt from this article.
A. Responsible party. The responsible party shall develop and implement a
post-construction stormwater management plan that incorporates the
requirements of this section.
B. Plan. A written stormwater management plan shall be developed and
implemented by the responsible party in accordance with § 463-21 of
this article, and shall meet all other applicable requirements contained
herein.
C. Requirements. The stormwater management plan shall meet the
following minimum requirements to the maximum extent practicable:
(1) Water quality. BMPs shall be designed, installed and maintained to
control pollutants carried in runoff from the post-construction site.
The design shall be based on the average annual rainfall, as
compared to no runoff management controls.
(a) The following is required for a post-construction site adding
4,000 square feet or more of new impervious surfaces, and/or a
site with one acre or more of land disturbance.
[1] Except as provided in § 463-19C(1)(a)[2], a pollutant
reduction is required as follows:
§ 463-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 463-19
1:367
Total Suspended Solids (TSS) and Total Phosphorus
(TP) Reduction
New
DevelopmentRedevelopment
Routine
Maintenance
Watershed TSS TP TSS TP TSS TP
Apple
Creek
80% 41% 52% 41% 52% 41%
Bear Creek 80% 30% 40% 30% 40% 30%
Fox River 80% 41% 72% 41% 72% 41%
Mud Creek 80% 48% 43% 48% 43% 48%
[2] A pollutant reduction is not required for routine
maintenance areas that are part of a post-construction site
with less than five acres of disturbance.
(b) Sites, including common plan of development sites, with a
cumulative addition of 20,000 square feet or greater of
impervious surfaces after January 1, 2005, are required to
satisfy the performance standards pursuant to
§ 463-19C(1)(a)[1] and [2].
(c) The amount of pollutant control previously required for the site
shall not be reduced as a result of the proposed development
or disturbance.
(d) When designing BMPs, runoff draining to the BMP from off-site
areas shall be taken into account in determining the treatment
efficiency of the practice. Any impact on the BMP efficiency
shall be compensated for by increasing the size of the BMP
accordingly. The pollutant load reduction provided by the BMP
for an off-site area shall not be used to satisfy the required onsite
pollutant load reduction unless otherwise approved by the
administering authority, in accordance with § 463-19E of this
article.
(e) If the design cannot meet the water quality performance
standards of § 463-19C(1)(a) through (d), the stormwater
management plan shall include a written, site-specific
explanation of why the water quality performance standards
cannot be met and why the pollutant load will be reduced only
to the maximum extent practicable. Except as provided in
§ 463-19F, the administering authority may not require any
person to exceed the applicable water quality performance
standards to meet the requirements of maximum extent
practicable.
(2) Peak discharge. BMPs shall be designed, installed and maintained
to control peak discharges from the post-construction site.
§ 463-19 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 463-19
1:368
(a) The following is required for a post-construction site adding
4,000 square feet or more of new impervious surfaces, and/or a
site with one acre or more of land disturbance:
[1] For a post-construction site adding less than 20,000
square feet of new impervious surface, the peak postdevelopment
discharge rate shall not exceed the peak predevelopment
discharge rate for the one-year and two-year,
twenty-four-hour design storms. For a post-construction
site adding 20,000 square feet or more of new impervious
surface and/or a post-construction site with one acre or
more of land disturbance, the peak post-development
discharge rate shall not exceed the peak pre-development
discharge rate for the one-year, two-year, ten-year, and
one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour design storms.
[2] Peak discharge control is not required for routine
maintenance areas, except when runoff from the routine
maintenance area discharges into a proposed peak flow
control facility.
[3] Peak discharge calculations shall use TR-55 methodology.
Atlas 14 rainfall depths and the MSE4 rainfall distribution
shall be used unless the site is to be served by a previously
constructed peak discharge facility. At the permittee's
discretion, the TP-40 rainfall depths and the Type II
rainfall distribution can be used for sites that are to be
served by a previously constructed peak discharge facility.
The meaning of "hydrologic soil group" and "runoff curve
number" are as determined in TR-55. Unless the site is
currently woodland, peak pre-development discharge
rates shall be determined using the following runoff curve
numbers for a meadow vegetative cover:
Maximum Pre-Development Runoff Curve Numbers
Hydrologic Soil Group
Vegetative
Cover A B C D
Meadow 30 58 71 78
Woodland 30 55 70 77
(b) Sites with a cumulative addition of 20,000 square feet or
greater of impervious surfaces after January 1, 2005, are
required to satisfy the performance standards pursuant to
§ 463-19C(2)(a)[1] through [3].
(c) The amount of peak discharge control previously required for
the site shall not be reduced as a result of the proposed
development or disturbance.
§ 463-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 463-19
1:369
(d) When designing BMPs, runoff draining to the BMP from off-site
areas shall be taken into account in determining the
performance of the practice. Any impact on the BMP
performance shall be compensated for by increasing the size of
the BMP accordingly. The peak discharge reduction provided
by the BMP for an off-site area shall not be used to satisfy the
required on-site peak discharge reduction unless otherwise
approved by the administering authority in accordance with
§ 463-19E of this article.
(e) An adequate outfall shall be provided for each point of
concentrated discharge from the post-construction site and
shall consist of:
[1] Nonerosive discharge velocities and reasonable
downstream conveyance.
[2] Discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system,
waters of the state, or an appropriate drainage easement.
If a site is not able to meet this requirement, an adequate
outfall may be permitted if it diffuses the discharge within
the site boundary in accordance with the Town of Grand
Chute Stormwater Reference Guide.
(f) New buildings with basements shall be designed to provide a
minimum one foot of vertical separation between the lowest
floor surface and the estimated high groundwater level. If less
than one foot of vertical separation is provided, groundwater
flow shall be estimated for each basement during site or
subdivision design. In addition, the on-site stormwater systems
shall be designed to accommodate the additional water flow
and volume from groundwater.
(g) New development sites that discharge into direct conduits to
groundwater shall be designed in conformance with Chapter
38 of the Outagamie County Code of Ordinances.
(h) New development sites located near a closed depression and/
or flood-prone area shall be designed to provide a minimum
one foot of vertical separation between the lowest ground
surface elevation at the building's perimeter and the overland
relief elevation for the flood-prone area. Outagamie County
and the Town of Grand Chute maintain a flood-prone area map
to assist with identifying higher risk areas. If less than one foot
of vertical separation is provided, a detailed stormwater
analysis shall be performed to identify and reasonably manage
one-hundred-year flooding risks for buildings or structures
located within the flood-prone area.
(i) Agricultural production areas shall meet the intent of this
article by following the BMPs listed in the Town of Grand Chute
Stormwater Reference Guide.
§ 463-19 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 463-19
1:370
(j) Exemptions. The peak discharge performance standards
described herein do not apply to the following:
[1] A transportation facility where the discharge is directly
into a lake of over 5,000 acres or a stream or river segment
draining more than 500 square miles.
[2] Except as provided in § 463-19C(2)(c) through (e), a
highway reconstruction site.
[3] Except as provided in § 463-19C(2)(c) through (e), a
transportation facility that is part of a redevelopment
project.
(3) Infiltration. BMPs shall be designed, installed, and maintained to
infiltrate runoff from the post-construction site, except as provided
in § 463-19C(3)(h) through (l) of this article.
(a) The following is required for a post-construction site with one
acre or more of land disturbance:
[1] Low imperviousness. For development with up to 40%
connected imperviousness, such as parks, cemeteries, and
low-density residential development, infiltrate sufficient
runoff volume so that the post-development infiltration
volume shall be at least 90% of the pre-development
infiltration volume, based on an average annual rainfall.
However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems
to meet this requirement, no more than 1% of the postconstruction
site is required as an effective infiltration
area.
[2] Moderate imperviousness. For development with more
than 40% and up to 80% connected imperviousness, such
as medium- and high-density residential, multifamily
development, industrial and institutional development,
and office parks, infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that
the post-development infiltration volume shall be at least
75% of the pre-development infiltration volume, based on
an average annual rainfall. However, when designing
appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement,
no more than 2% of the post-construction site is required
as an effective infiltration area.
[3] High imperviousness. For development with more than
80% connected imperviousness, such as commercial
districts and retail centers, infiltrate sufficient runoff
volume so that the post-development infiltration volume
shall be at least 60% of the pre-development infiltration
volume, based on an average annual rainfall. However,
when designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet
this requirement, no more than 2% of the post-
§ 463-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 463-19
1:371
construction site is required as an effective infiltration
area.
(b) Pre-development condition shall assume good hydrologic
conditions for appropriate land covers as identified in TR-55 or
an equivalent methodology approved by the administering
authority. The meaning of "hydrologic soil group" and "runoff
curve number" are as determined in TR-55. The actual predevelopment
vegetative cover and the following predevelopment
runoff curve numbers shall be used:
Maximum Pre-Development Runoff Curve Numbers
Hydrologic Soil Group
Vegetative
Cover A B C D
Woodland 30 55 70 77
Grassland 39 61 71 78
Cropland 55 69 78 83
(c) Sites with a cumulative addition of 20,000 square feet or
greater of impervious surfaces after January 1, 2005, are
required to satisfy the performance standards pursuant to
§ 463-19C(3)(a) and (b) of this article.
(d) The amount of infiltration previously required for the site shall
not be reduced as a result of the proposed development or
disturbance.
(e) Agricultural production areas shall infiltrate runoff volume
using BMPs from the Town of Grand Chute Stormwater
Reference Guide.
(f) When designing BMPs, runoff draining to the BMP from off-site
areas shall be taken into account in determining the
performance of the practice. Any impact on the BMP
performance shall be compensated for by increasing the size of
the BMP accordingly. The runoff volume reduction provided by
the BMP for an off-site area shall not be used to satisfy the
required on-site runoff volume reduction unless otherwise
approved by the administering authority, in accordance with
§ 463-19E of this article.
(g) Pretreatment. Before infiltrating runoff, pretreatment shall be
required for parking lot runoff and for runoff from road
construction in commercial, industrial and institutional areas
that will enter an infiltration system. The pretreatment shall be
designed to protect the infiltration system from clogging prior
to scheduled maintenance and to protect groundwater quality
in accordance with § 463-19C(3)(n). Pretreatment options may
§ 463-19 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 463-19
1:372
include, but are not limited to, oil/grease separation,
sedimentation, biofiltration, filtration, swales or filter strips.
(h) Source area prohibitions. Runoff from the following areas may
not be infiltrated and may not qualify as contributing toward
meeting the requirements of § 463-19C(3), unless
demonstrated to meet the conditions of § 463-19C(3)(n):
[1] Areas associated with a Tier 1 industrial facility, as
identified in § NR 216.21(2)(a), Wis. Adm. Code, including
storage, loading, and parking. Rooftops may be infiltrated
with the concurrence of the administering authority.
[2] Storage and loading areas of a Tier 2 industrial facility, as
identified in § NR 216.21(2)(b), Wis. Adm. Code.
[3] Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas. Rooftops of
fueling and vehicle maintenance areas may be infiltrated
with the concurrence of the administering authority.
[4] Agricultural production areas that contain livestock,
animal waste, or feed storage.
(i) Source area exemptions. Runoff from the following areas may
be credited by the administering authority toward meeting the
requirement when infiltrated, but the decision to infiltrate
runoff from these sources is optional:
[1] Parking areas and access roads of less than 5,000 square
feet for commercial development.
[2] Parking areas and access roads of less than 5,000 square
feet for industrial development not subject to the
prohibitions in § 463-19C(3)(h) of this article.
[3] Except as provided in § 463-19C(3)(d), redevelopment and
routine maintenance areas.
[4] Infill development areas of less than five acres.
[5] Roads in commercial, industrial and institutional land
uses, and arterial residential roads.
[6] Except as provided in § 463-19C(3)(d), transportation
facilities, highway reconstruction and new highways.
(j) Prohibitions. Infiltration practices may not be located in the
following areas:
[1] Areas within 1,000 feet upgradient or within 100 feet
downgradient of direct conduits to groundwater.
[2] Areas within 400 feet of a community water system well as
specified in § NR 811.16(4), Wis. Adm. Code, or within the
§ 463-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 463-19
1:373
separation distances listed in § NR 812.08, Wis. Adm.
Code, for any private well or noncommunity well for runoff
infiltrated from commercial development, including
multifamily residential, industrial, and institutional land
uses, or regional devices for one- and two-family
residential development.
[3] Areas where contaminants of concern, as defined in § NR
720.03(2), Wis. Adm. Code, are present in the soil through
which infiltration will occur.
(k) Separation distances.
[1] Infiltration practices shall be located so that the
characteristics of the soil and the separation distance
between the bottom of the infiltration system and the
elevation of seasonal high groundwater or the top of
bedrock are in accordance with the following:
Separation Distances and Soil Characteristics
Source Area
Separation
Distance
Soil
Characteristics
Industrial,
commercial,
institutional
parking lots and
roads
5 feet or more Filtering layer
Residential
arterial roads
5 feet or more Filtering layer
Roofs draining to
subsurface
infiltration
practices
1 foot or more Native or
engineered soil
with particles finer
than coarse sand
Roofs draining to
surface
infiltration
practices
Not applicable
All other
impervious source
areas
3 feet or more Filtering layer
[2] Notwithstanding the provisions in § 463-19C(3)(k)[1],
applicable requirements for injection wells classified
under Ch. NR 815, Wis. Adm. Code, shall be followed.
(l) Infiltration rate exemptions. Infiltration practices located in
the following areas may be credited by the administering
authority toward meeting the requirement under the following
§ 463-19 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 463-19
1:374
conditions, but the decision to infiltrate runoff under these
conditions is optional:
[1] Where the infiltration rate of the soil measured at the
proposed bottom of the infiltration system is less than 0.6
inch per hour, using a scientifically credible field test
method.
[2] Where the least permeable soil horizon to five feet below
the proposed bottom of the infiltration system, using the
United States Department of Agriculture method of soils
analysis, is one of the following: sandy clay loam, clay
loam, silty clay loam, sandy clay, silty clay, or clay.
(m) Alternate uses. Where alternate uses of runoff are employed,
such as for toilet flushing, laundry, irrigation, or storage on
green roofs where an equivalent portion of the runoff is
captured permanently by rooftop vegetation, such alternate
use shall be given equal credit toward the infiltration volume
required in § 463-19C(3) of this article.
(n) Groundwater standards.
[1] Infiltration systems designed in accordance with
§ 463-19C(3) shall, to the extent technically and
economically feasible, minimize the level of pollutants
infiltrating to groundwater and shall maintain compliance
with the preventive action limit at a point of standards
application in accordance with Ch. NR 140, Wis. Adm.
Code. However, if site-specific information indicates that
compliance with a preventive action limit is not
achievable, the infiltration BMP may not be installed or
shall be modified to prevent infiltration to the maximum
extent practicable.
[2] Notwithstanding the provisions in § 463-19C(3)(n)[1], the
discharge from BMPs shall remain below the enforcement
standard at the point of standards application.
(o) Where the requirements in § 463-19C(3)(h) through (l) limit or
restrict the use of infiltration practices, the performance
standards pursuant to § 463-19C(3) shall be met to the
maximum extent practicable.
(4) Protective areas.
(a) Protective areas are required adjacent to the following natural
features, at the widths specified herein:
[1] For outstanding resource waters and exceptional resource
waters: 75 feet.
§ 463-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 463-19
1:375
[2] For perennial and intermittent streams identified on a
United States geological survey 7.5-minute series
topographic map, or a county soil survey map, whichever
is more current: 50 feet.
[3] For lakes: 50 feet.
[4] For highly susceptible wetlands: 75 feet. Highly
susceptible wetlands include the following types:
calcareous fens, sedge meadows, open and coniferous
bogs, low prairies, coniferous swamps, lowland hardwood
swamps, and ephemeral ponds.
[5] For less susceptible wetlands: 10% of the average wetland
width, but no less than 10 feet nor more than 30 feet. Less
susceptible wetlands include: degraded wetlands
dominated by invasive species such as reed canary grass;
cultivated hydric soils; and any gravel pits, or dredged
material or fill material disposal sites that take on the
attributes of a wetland.
[6] For all other wetlands not subject to the characterization
in § 463-19C(4)(a)[4] or [5]: 50 feet.
[7] For concentrated flow channels with drainage areas
greater than 130 acres: 10 feet.
[8] Notwithstanding the provisions in § 463-19C(4)(a)[1]
through [7], the greatest protective area width shall apply
where rivers, streams, lakes, and wetlands are contiguous.
(b) Wetlands shall be delineated. Wetland boundary delineations
shall be made in accordance with § NR 103.08(1m), Wis. Adm.
Code. The wetland delineator shall be approved by the
administering authority. The requirements in § 463-19C(4) do
not apply to wetlands that have been completely filled in
compliance with all applicable state and federal regulations.
The protective area for wetlands that have been partially filled
in compliance with all applicable state and federal regulations
shall be measured from the wetland boundary delineation after
fill has been placed. Where there is a legally authorized
wetland fill, the protective area standard need not be met in
that location.
(c) Determinations of the extent of the protective area adjacent to
wetlands shall be made on the basis of the sensitivity and
runoff susceptibility of the wetland, in accordance with the
standards and criteria in § NR 103.03, Wis. Adm. Code.
(d) The requirements in § 463-19C(4) apply to all postconstruction
sites located within a protective area, except
§ 463-19 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 463-19
1:376
those areas exempted pursuant to § 463-19C(4)(g) in this
article.
(e) The following protective area requirements shall be met:
[1] Impervious surfaces shall be kept out of the protective
area entirely or to the maximum extent practicable. If
there is no practical alternative to locating an impervious
surface in the protective area, the stormwater
management plan shall contain a written, site-specific
explanation.
[2] Where land disturbing construction activity occurs within
a protective area, adequate sod or self-sustaining
vegetative cover of 70% or greater shall be established
and maintained in areas where no impervious surface is
present. The adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative
cover shall be sufficient to provide for bank stability,
maintenance of fish habitat, and filtering of pollutants
from upslope overland flow areas under sheet flow
conditions. Nonvegetative materials, such as rock riprap,
may be employed on the bank as necessary to prevent
erosion, such as on steep slopes or where high velocity
flows occur.
[3] BMPs such as filter strips, swales, or wet detention ponds,
which are designed to control pollutants from nonpoint
sources, may be located in the protective area.
(f) A protective area established or created after January 1, 2005,
shall not be eliminated or reduced, except as allowed in
§ 463-19C(4)(g)[2], [3], or [4] in this article.
(g) Exemptions. The following areas are not required to meet the
protective area requirements in § 463-19C(4):
[1] Redevelopment and routine maintenance areas, provided
the minimum requirements in § 463-19C(4)(f) are satisfied.
[2] Structures that cross or access surface waters, such as
boat landings, bridges and culverts.
[3] Structures constructed in accordance with § 59.692(1v),
Wis. Stats.
[4] Areas of post-construction sites from which the runoff does
not enter the surface water, including wetlands, without
first being treated by a BMP to meet the requirements of
§ 463-19C(1) and (2), except to the extent that vegetative
ground cover is necessary to maintain bank stability.
[5] Notwithstanding the provisions in § 535-53 of the Town of
Grand Chute Municipal Code and Chapter 40 of the
§ 463-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 463-19
1:377
Outagamie County Code of Ordinances, the construction
of a fence on a property zoned or used for single-family
residential or two-family residential purposes is not
required to meet the protective area requirements in
§ 463-19C(4)(a)[4] through [6]; however, any such fence
shall be constructed and placed a minimum distance of one
foot from any wetland boundary delineation.
(5) Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas. Fueling and vehicle
maintenance areas shall have BMPs designed, installed and
maintained to reduce petroleum within runoff, so that the runoff
that enters waters of the state contains no visible petroleum sheen,
or to the maximum extent practicable.
(6) Swale treatment for transportation facilities. Except for
transportation facilities that are part of a larger common plan of
development or sale, the following requirements shall be met:
(a) Requirement. Except as provided in § 463-19C(6)(b),
transportation facilities that use swales for runoff conveyance
and pollutant removal are exempt from the requirements of
§ 463-19C(1) through (3), if the swales are designed to do all of
the following, or to the maximum extent practicable:
[1] Swales shall be vegetated. However, where appropriate,
nonvegetative measures may be employed to prevent
erosion or provide for runoff treatment, such as rock
riprap stabilization or check dams.
[2] Swales shall comply with the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources Technical Standard 1005, Vegetated
Infiltration Swale, except as otherwise authorized in
writing by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources.
(b) Other requirements. Notwithstanding the requirements in
§ 463-19C(6)(a), the administering authority may, consistent
with water quality standards, determine that other
requirements, in addition to swale treatment, be met on a
transportation facility with an average daily traffic rate greater
than 2,500 and where the initial surface water of the state at
which the runoff directly enters is any of the following:
[1] An outstanding resource water.
[2] An exceptional resource water.
[3] Waters listed in Section 303(d) of the federal Clean Water
Act that are identified as impaired in whole or in part, due
to nonpoint source impacts.
§ 463-19 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 463-19
1:378
[4] Waters where targeted performance standards are
developed pursuant to § NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code.
(7) Exemptions. The following areas are not required to meet the
performance standards in § 463-19C:
(a) Underground utility construction such as water, sewer, gas,
electric, telephone, cable television, and fiber optic lines. This
exemption does not apply to the construction of any
aboveground structures associated with utility construction.
(b) The following transportation facilities are exempt, provided the
transportation facility is not part of a larger common plan of
development or sale.
[1] A transportation facility post-construction site with less
than ten-percent connected imperviousness, based on the
area of land disturbance, provided the cumulative area of
all impervious surfaces is less than one acre.
Notwithstanding this exemption, the protective area
requirements in § 463-19C(4) still apply.
[2] Reconditioning or resurfacing of a highway.
[3] Minor reconstruction of a highway. Notwithstanding this
exemption, the protective area requirements in
§ 463-19C(4) still apply.
[4] Routine maintenance for transportation facilities that have
less than five acres of land disturbance if performed to
maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or
original purpose of the facility.
[5] Routine maintenance, if performed for stormwater
conveyance system cleaning.
D. General considerations. The following considerations for on-site and offsite
stormwater management measures shall be observed in managing
runoff:
(1) Natural topography and land cover features, such as natural
swales, natural depressions, native soil infiltrating capacity, and
natural groundwater recharge areas, shall be preserved and used,
to the extent possible, to meet the requirements of this section.
(2) Emergency overland flow for all stormwater facilities shall be
provided to prevent exceeding the safe capacity of downstream
drainage facilities and prevent endangerment of downstream
property or public safety.
E. BMP location and credit.
§ 463-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 463-19
1:379
(1) General. To comply with the performance standards in § 463-19C,
the BMPs may be located on site or off site as part of a regional
stormwater device, practice or system.
(2) Off-site or regional BMP.
(a) The amount of credit that the administering authority may give
an off-site or regional BMP for purposes of determining
compliance with the performance standards in § 463-19C is
limited to the treatment capability or performance of the BMP.
(b) The administering authority may authorize credit for an off-site
or regional BMP, provided all of the following conditions are
satisfied:
[1] The BMP received all applicable permits.
[2] The BMP shall be installed and operational before the
construction site has undergone final stabilization.
[3] The BMP shall be designed and adequately sized to
provide a level of stormwater control equal to or greater
than that which would be afforded by on-site BMPs
meeting the performance standards in § 463-19C of this
article.
[4] The owner of the BMP has entered into a maintenance
agreement with the administering authority, as provided in
§ 463-22, such that the BMP has a legally obligated entity
responsible for its long-term operation and maintenance.
Legal authority exists if a municipality owns, operates and
maintains the BMP.
[5] The owner of the BMP has provided written authorization
that indicates the permittee may use the BMP in
compliance with the performance standards in § 463-19C
of this article.
[6] Where an off-site or regional BMP option exists such that
the administering authority exempts the owner from
meeting all or part of the minimum on-site stormwater
management requirements, the owner shall be required to
pay a fee in an amount determined in negotiation with the
administering authority. In determining the fee for postconstruction
runoff, the administering authority shall
consider an equitable distribution of the cost for land,
engineering design, construction, and maintenance of the
off-site or regional BMP.
(3) BMP in nonnavigable waters. For purposes of determining
compliance with the performance standards in § 463-19C, the
administering authority may give credit for BMPs that function to
§ 463-19 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 463-19
1:380
provide treatment for runoff from existing development and postconstruction
runoff from new development, redevelopment, and
routine maintenance areas and that are located within
nonnavigable waters.
(4) BMP in navigable waters.
(a) New development runoff. Except as provided in
§ 463-19E(4)(b), BMPs designed to treat post-construction
runoff from new development areas may not be located in
navigable waters, and for purposes of determining compliance
with the performance standards in § 463-19C, the
administering authority may not give credit for such BMPs.
(b) New development runoff exemption. BMPs designed to treat
post-construction runoff from new development areas may be
located within navigable waters and may be creditable by the
administering authority under the provisions in § 463-19C, if
both of the following conditions are met:
[1] The BMP was constructed prior to October 1, 2002, and
received all applicable permits.
[2] The BMP functions or will function to provide runoff
treatment for the new development area.
(c) Existing development and post-construction runoff from
redevelopment, routine maintenance, and infill development
areas. Except as provided in § 463-19E(4)(d), BMPs designed
to treat post-construction runoff for existing development and
post-construction runoff from redevelopment, routine
maintenance and infill development areas may not be located
in navigable waters, and for purposes of determining
compliance with the performance standards in § 463-19C, the
administering authority may not give credit for such BMPs.
(d) Existing development and post-construction runoff from
redevelopment, routine maintenance, and infill development
areas exemption. BMPs that function to provide treatment of
runoff from existing development and post-construction runoff
from redevelopment, routine maintenance and infill
development areas may be located within navigable waters,
and for purposes of determining compliance with the
performance standards in § 463-19C, the administering
authority may give credit for such BMPs, if either of the
following are met:
[1] The BMP was constructed, contracts were signed or bids
were advertised and all applicable permits were received
prior to January 1, 2011.
§ 463-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 463-19
1:381
§ 463-20. Permitting requirements, procedures and fees.
[2] The BMP is on an intermittent waterway and all applicable
permits are received.
(5) Water quality trading. To comply with the performance standards
in § 463-19C(1), the administering authority may authorize credit
for water quality trading, provided all of the following conditions
are satisfied:
(a) The treatment practices associated with a water quality trade
shall be in place, effective and operational before credit can be
authorized.
(b) The water quality trade shall comply with applicable trading
ratios established by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources or the Town of Grand Chute.
(c) The water quality trade shall comply with applicable
regulations, standards, and guidance developed by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources or the Town of
Grand Chute.
(d) The responsible party shall furnish a copy of executed water
quality trading agreements or other related information
deemed necessary by the administering authority in order to
authorize credit.
F. Targeted performance standards. The administering authority may
establish numeric water quality requirements that are more stringent
than those set forth in § 463-19C in order to meet targeted performance
standards, total maximum daily loads, and/or water quality standards
for a specific water body or area. The numeric water quality
requirements may be applicable to any permitted site, regardless of the
size of land disturbing construction activity.
G. Alternate requirements. The administering authority may establish
stormwater management requirements more stringent than those set
forth in this article if the administering authority determines that an
added level of protection is needed to protect sensitive resources. Also,
the administering authority may establish stormwater management
requirements less stringent than those set forth in this article if the
administering authority determines that less protection is needed to
protect sensitive resources and provide reasonable flood protection.
However, the alternative requirements shall not be less stringent than
those requirements promulgated in rules by Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources Ch. NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code. The established
additional requirements shall be provided to the applicant in writing.
A. Permit required. No responsible party may undertake a land disturbing
construction activity without receiving a post-construction runoff
§ 463-19 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 463-20
1:382
permit from the administering authority prior to commencing the
proposed activity.
B. Permit application and fees. Unless specifically excluded by this article,
any responsible party desiring a permit shall submit to the
administering authority a permit application made on a form provided
by the administering authority for that purpose.
(1) Unless otherwise excepted by this article, a permit application
must be accompanied by a stormwater management plan, a
maintenance agreement and a nonrefundable permit
administration fee.
(2) The stormwater management plan shall be prepared to meet the
requirements in §§ 463-19 and 463-21; the maintenance agreement
shall be prepared to meet the requirements in § 463-22; the
financial guarantee shall meet the requirements in § 463-23; and
fees shall be those established by the Town of Grand Chute Board
as set forth in § 463-24 of this article.
C. Review and approval of permit application. The administering authority
shall review any permit application that is submitted with a stormwater
management plan, maintenance agreement, and the required fee. The
following approval procedure shall be used:
(1) If the stormwater permit application, plan and maintenance
agreement are approved, or if an agreed-upon payment of fees in
lieu of stormwater management practices is made pursuant to
§ 463-19E, the administering authority shall issue the permit.
(2) If the stormwater permit application, plan or maintenance
agreement is disapproved, the administering authority shall detail,
in writing, the reasons for disapproval.
(3) The administering authority may request additional information
from the applicant. If additional information is submitted, the
administering authority shall inform the applicant that the plan and
maintenance agreement are either approved or disapproved.
D. Permit requirements. All permits issued under this article shall be
subject to the following conditions, and holders of permits issued under
this article shall be deemed to have accepted these conditions. The
administering authority may suspend or revoke a permit for violation of
a permit condition, following written notification to the responsible
party. An action by the administering authority to suspend or revoke
this permit may be appealed in accordance with the provisions in
§ 463-26 of this article.
(1) Compliance with this permit does not relieve the responsible party
of the obligation to comply with all other applicable federal, state,
and local laws and regulations.
§ 463-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 463-20
1:383
(2) The responsible party shall design and install all structural and
nonstructural stormwater management measures in accordance
with the approved stormwater management plan and this permit.
(3) The responsible party shall notify the administering authority at
least 10 business days before commencing any work in conjunction
with the stormwater management plan and within 10 business days
upon completion of the stormwater management practices. If
required as a special condition pursuant to § 463-20E, the
responsible party shall make additional notification according to a
schedule set forth by the administering authority so that practice
installations can be inspected during construction.
(4) Practice installations required as part of this article shall be
certified "as built" by a licensed professional engineer. Completed
stormwater management practices must pass a final inspection by
the administering authority or its designee to determine if they are
in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan and
this article. The administering authority or its designee shall notify
the responsible party, in writing, of any changes required in such
practices to bring them into compliance with the conditions of this
permit.
(5) The responsible party shall notify the administering authority of
any significant modifications it intends to make to an approved
stormwater management plan. The administering authority may
require that the proposed modifications be submitted to it for
approval prior to incorporation into the stormwater management
plan and execution by the responsible party.
(6) The responsible party shall inspect BMPs annually and after runoff
events in accordance with the stormwater management plan and
maintenance agreement. The responsible party shall have a
licensed professional engineer submit a stamped written inspection
report to the administering authority for review and approval every
five years. All written inspection reports prepared by the
responsible party shall accompany the stamped report prepared by
the licensed professional engineer.
(7) The responsible party shall maintain all stormwater management
practices in accordance with the stormwater management plan
until the practices either become the responsibility of the Town of
Grand Chute or are transferred to subsequent private owners as
specified in the approved maintenance agreement.
(8) The responsible party authorizes the administering authority to
perform any work or operations necessary to bring stormwater
management measures into conformance with the approved
stormwater management plan and consents to a special
assessment or charge against the property as authorized under the
provisions in § 463-23 of this article.
§ 463-20 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 463-20
1:384
§ 463-21. Stormwater management plan.
(9) If so directed by the administering authority, the responsible party
shall repair, at the responsible party's own expense, all damage to
adjoining municipal facilities and drainageways caused by runoff,
where such damage is caused by activities that are not in
compliance with the approved stormwater management plan.
(10) The responsible party shall permit property access to the
administering authority or its designee for the purpose of
inspecting the property for compliance with the approved
stormwater management plan and this permit.
(11) Where site development or redevelopment involves changes in
direction, increases in peak rate and/or total volume of runoff from
a site, the administering authority may require the responsible
party to make appropriate legal arrangements with affected
property owners concerning the prevention of endangerment to
property or public safety.
(12) The responsible party is subject to the enforcement actions and
penalties provided in § 463-25 if the responsible party fails to
comply with the terms of this permit.
(13) The permit applicant shall post the certificate of permit coverage in
a conspicuous location at the construction site.
E. Permit conditions. Permits issued under this subsection may include
conditions established by the administering authority, in addition to the
performance standards in § 463-19 or the financial guarantee
requirements pursuant to § 463-23.
F. Permit duration. Permits issued under this subsection shall be valid
from the date of issuance through the date the administering authority
notifies the responsible party that all stormwater management
practices have passed the final inspection required under the provisions
in § 463-20D(4) of this article.
G. Alternate requirements. The administering authority may prescribe
alternative requirements for applicants seeking an exemption from the
on-site stormwater management performance standards in § 463-19E,
or for applicants seeking a permit for a post-construction site with less
than 20,000 square feet of impervious surface disturbance.
A. Plan requirements. The stormwater management plan required under
the provisions in §§ 463-19B and 463-20B shall comply with the Town of
Grand Chute Stormwater Reference Guide and contain at a minimum
the following information:
(1) Name, address, and telephone number of the landowner and
responsible parties.
§ 463-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 463-21
1:385
§ 463-22. Maintenance agreement.
(2) A legal description of the property proposed to be developed.
(3) Pre-development site map with property lines, disturbed limits, and
drainage patterns.
(4) Post-development site map with property lines, disturbed limits,
and drainage patterns.
(a) Total area of disturbed impervious surfaces within the site.
(b) Total area of new impervious surfaces within the site.
(c) Performance standards applicable to site.
(d) Proposed best management practices.
(e) Groundwater, bedrock, and soil limitations.
(f) Separation distances. Stormwater management practices shall
be adequately separated from wells to prevent contamination
of drinking water.
(5) Inspection and maintenance schedules for stormwater BMPs.
B. Alternate requirements. The administering authority may prescribe
alternative submittal requirements for applicants seeking an exemption
from the on-site stormwater management performance standards in
§ 463-19E or for applicants seeking a permit for a post-construction site
with less than 20,000 square feet of impervious surface disturbance.
A. Maintenance agreement required. The maintenance agreement
required under the provisions in § 463-20B for stormwater
management practices shall be an agreement between the Town of
Grand Chute and the responsible party to provide for maintenance of
stormwater practices beyond the duration period of a post-construction
runoff permit. The maintenance agreement shall be filed with the
Outagamie County Register of Deeds as a property deed restriction so
that it is binding upon all subsequent owners of the land served by the
stormwater management practices.
B. Agreement provisions. The maintenance agreement shall contain the
following information and provisions and be consistent with the plan
required under the provisions in § 463-20B:
(1) Identification of the stormwater facilities and designation of the
drainage area served by the facilities.
(2) A schedule for regular maintenance of each aspect of the
stormwater management system consistent with the stormwater
management plan required under the provisions in § 463-20B.
§ 463-21 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 463-22
1:386
§ 463-23. Financial guarantee.
(3) Identification of the responsible party(ies), organization or city,
county, town or village responsible for long-term maintenance of
the stormwater management practices identified in the stormwater
management plan required under the provisions in § 463-20B.
(4) Requirement that the responsible party(ies), organization, or city,
county, town or village shall maintain stormwater management
practices in accordance with the schedule required under the
provisions in § 463-22B(2).
(5) Authorization for the administering authority to access the
property to conduct inspections of stormwater management
practices as necessary to ascertain that the practices are being
maintained and operated in accordance with the agreement.
(6) A requirement on the administering authority to maintain public
records of the results of the site inspections, to inform the
responsible party responsible for maintenance of the inspection
results, and to specifically indicate any corrective actions required
to bring the stormwater management practice into proper working
condition.
(7) Agreement that the party designated as responsible for long-term
maintenance of the stormwater management practices shall be
notified by the administering authority of maintenance problems
which require correction. The specified corrective actions shall be
undertaken within a reasonable time frame as set by the
administering authority.
(8) Authorization of the administering authority to perform the
corrected actions identified in the inspection report if the party
designated as responsible for long-term maintenance of the
stormwater management practices does not make the required
corrections in the specified time period. The administering
authority shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect the
money as a special charge against the property, pursuant to
Subchapter VII of Ch. 66, Wis. Stats.
C. Alternate requirements. The administering authority may prescribe
alternative requirements for applicants seeking an exemption from the
on-site stormwater management performance standards in § 463-19E
or for applicants seeking a permit for a post-construction site with less
than 20,000 square feet of impervious surface disturbance.
A. Establishment of the guarantee. The administering authority may
require the submittal of a financial guarantee, the form and type of
which shall be acceptable to the administering authority. The financial
guarantee shall be in an amount determined by the administering
authority to be the estimated cost of construction and the estimated
§ 463-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 463-23
1:387
§ 463-24. Fee schedule.
Fees referred to in this article shall be established by the Town of Grand
Chute Board and may be modified from time to time. A schedule of the fees
established by the Town Board shall be available for review upon request.
§ 463-25. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
cost of maintenance of the stormwater management practices during
the period which the designated party in the maintenance agreement
has maintenance responsibility. The financial guarantee shall grant the
administering authority the authorization to use the funds to complete
the stormwater management practices, if the responsible party defaults
or does not properly implement the approved stormwater management
plan, upon written notice to the responsible party by the administering
authority that the requirements of this article have not been met.
B. Conditions for release. Conditions for the release of the financial
guarantee are as follows:
(1) The administering authority shall release the portion of the
financial guarantee established under this section, less any costs
incurred by the administering authority to complete installation of
practices, upon submission of as-built plans by a licensed
professional engineer. The administering authority may make
provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the financial guarantee
based on the completion of various development stages.
(2) The administering authority shall release the portion of the
financial guarantee established under this section to assure
maintenance of stormwater practices, less any costs incurred by
the administering authority, at such time that the responsibility for
practice maintenance is passed on to another entity via an
approved maintenance agreement.
C. Alternate requirements. The administering authority may prescribe
alternative requirements for applicants seeking an exemption from the
on-site stormwater management performance standards in § 463-19E
or for applicants seeking a permit for a post-construction site with less
than 20,000 square feet of impervious surface disturbance.
A. Any land disturbing construction activity or post-construction runoff
initiated after the effective date of this article by any person, firm,
association, or corporation subject to the article provisions shall be
deemed a violation, unless conducted in accordance with the
requirements of this article.
B. The administering authority shall notify the responsible party by
certified mail of any noncomplying land disturbing construction activity
or post-construction runoff. The notice shall describe the nature of the
§ 463-23 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 463-25
1:388
violation, remedial actions needed, a schedule for remedial action, and
additional enforcement action which may be taken.
C. Upon receipt of written notification from the administering authority
pursuant to § 463-25B, the responsible party shall correct work that
does not comply with the stormwater management plan or other
provisions of a post-construction runoff permit. The responsible party
shall make corrections as necessary to meet the specifications and
schedule set forth in the notice.
D. If the violations to a permit issued pursuant to this article are likely to
result in damage to properties, public facilities, or waters of the state,
the administering authority may enter the land and take emergency
actions necessary to prevent such damage. The costs incurred by the
administering authority, plus interest and legal costs, shall be billed to
the responsible party.
E. The administering authority is authorized to post a stop-work order on
all land disturbing construction activity that is in violation of this article
or to request that the Town Attorney obtain a cease-and-desist order in
any court with jurisdiction.
F. The administering authority may revoke a permit issued under this
article for noncompliance with article provisions.
G. Any permit revocation, stop-work order, or cease-and-desist order shall
remain in effect unless retracted by the administering authority or by a
court with jurisdiction.
H. The administering authority is authorized to refer any violation of this
article, or any stop-work order or cease-and-desist order issued
pursuant to this article, to the Town Attorney for the commencement of
further legal proceedings in any court with jurisdiction.
I. Any person, firm, association, or corporation who does not comply with
the provisions of this article shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided
in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules per offense, together
with the costs of prosecution. Each day that the violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense.
J. Compliance with the provisions of this article may also be enforced by
injunction in any court with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary to
prosecute for forfeiture or a cease-and-desist order before resorting to
injunctional proceedings.
K. When the administering authority determines that the holder of a
permit issued pursuant to this article has failed to follow practices set
forth in the stormwater management plan, or has failed to comply with
schedules set forth in said stormwater management plan, the
administering authority or a party designated by the administering
authority may enter upon the land and perform the work or other
operations necessary to bring the condition of said lands into
§ 463-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 463-25
1:389
§ 463-26. Appeals.
§ 463-27. Variances.
In any particular case where a landowner can show that, by reason of
exceptional topography or other physical condition, strict compliance with
any requirement of this article would cause unnecessary hardship, the
Plan Commission may grant a variance from the provisions of this article,
provided such relief may be granted without detriment to the public good
and without impairing the intent and purpose of this article or the desirable
general development of the Town of Grand Chute. No variance shall be
granted by the Plan Commission that is contrary to provisions of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code or the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 463-28. Limitations on municipal responsibility.
Nothing in this article creates or imposes, nor shall be construed to create
or impose, any greater obligation or responsibility on the Town of Grand
Chute than those minimum requirements specifically required by State of
Wisconsin Statutes and Department of Natural Resources regulations.
conformance with requirements of the approved plan. The
administering authority shall keep a detailed accounting of the costs
and expenses of performing this work. These costs and expenses shall
be deducted from any financial security posted pursuant to § 463-23
of this article. Where such a security has not been established, or
where such a security is insufficient to cover these costs, the costs and
expenses shall be entered on the tax roll as a special charge against the
property and collected with any other taxes levied thereon.
A. Appeals. The Town of Grand Chute Plan Commission, created pursuant
to § 16-2 of The Town of Grand Chute Municipal Code, shall hear and
decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order,
decision or determination made by the administering authority in
administering this article. The Plan Commission shall also use the rules,
procedures, duties, and powers authorized by statute in hearing and
deciding appeals. Upon appeal, the Plan Commission may authorize
variances from the provisions of this article that are not contrary to the
public interest and where owing to special conditions a literal
enforcement of the article will result in unnecessary hardship.
B. Who may appeal. Appeals to the Plan Commission may be taken by any
aggrieved person or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the
Town of Grand Chute affected by any decision of the administering
authority.
§ 463-25 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 463-28
1:390
Chapter 468
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 440.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 463.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 475.
Trees and shrubs — See Ch. 497.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 515.
§ 468-1. Driveways and culverts.
A. Approval required.
(1) No person shall construct or maintain any driveway across any
sidewalk or curbing or enter any road without first obtaining a
driveway permit from the Town Board or a designated
representative thereof, including the Street Superintendent if so
designated. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
(2) No building permit shall be issued nor excavation begun, where a
culvert will be installed, unless prior thereto a permit for the
proper size and type of culvert first is obtained from the proper
Town of Grand Chute authority and the actual placing and covering
of the installed culvert is accomplished and approval of the
completed installation is obtained in writing from the proper Town
of Grand Chute authority.
(3) The individual property owner shall pay the total cost of all
culverts.
(4) The property owner shall pay the total cost of installing such
culverts, including the cost of the culvert itself, at the time and
before a building permit will be issued by the Building Inspector for
the Town of Grand Chute.
(5) All culverts on Town roads in the Town of Grand Chute, Outagamie
County, Wisconsin, shall be installed according to the grade set by
the Town of Grand Chute Director of Public Works, Town Engineer,
or designee. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
(6) Only galvanized steel culvert pipe shall be allowed to be used for
installations by the Town. The minimum length of any installation
shall be 30 feet, and the maximum length shall be 60 feet.
Installations may be made in excess of 60 feet only on the
permission of the Town Board and only under conditions set for
said installation by the Board.
§ 463-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 468-1
1:391
(7) Persons so designated by the Town of Grand Chute shall designate
the size and diameter of the culvert to be installed. In the event of
disagreement by the owner with the Town inspector, the owner may
request the Town Board to review the matter and set the required
diameter.
B. Specifications for driveway construction. [Amended 12-20-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-30; 3-5-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-05]
(1) No driveway shall exceed 30 feet in width at the outer or road edge
of the driveway unless special permission is obtained from the
Director of Public Works.
(2) At road intersections, a driveway shall not provide direct ingress or
egress to or from the road intersection area and shall not occupy
areas of the roadway deemed necessary by the Town Board for
effective traffic control or for highway signs or signals.
(3) No driveway apron shall extend out into the road further than the
face of the curb, and under no circumstances shall such driveway
apron extend into the gutter area.
(4) All driveway entrances and approaches shall be so constructed that
they shall not interfere with the drainage of roads onto the right-ofway.
When required by the Town Board to provide for adequate
surface water drainage along the street, the property owner shall
provide any necessary culvert pipe at his own expense.
(5) No more than one driveway entrance and approach shall be
constructed for any lot or premises, except where deemed
necessary and feasible without undue impairment of safety,
convenience and utility of the road by the Town Board. Any two
approaches shall be at least 10 feet apart. The permittee shall
assume all responsibility for any injury or damage to persons or
property resulting directly or indirectly during construction or
repair of driveway approaches or entrances.
(6) Driveway access in areas with curb and gutter may be formed by
cutting the back of the curb in a neat, workmanlike manner to form
a driveway access. The access formed by cutting the curb head
must maintain a minimum one-and-one-half-inch rise from the
gutter line. The outside end limits of the removed curb head shall
be tapered up at a maximum 2:1 slope. Failure to maintain the
required rise or an uneven cut will result in the required removal of
the entire curb and gutter between existing joints on either side of
the desired access location.
(7) If the curb and gutter is removed to create a driveway opening, the
new curb and gutter shall be poured of equivalent acceptable
material, doweled into the old concrete at both joints, and restored
in a neat, workmanlike manner.
§ 468-1 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 468-1
1:392
§ 468-2. Road, sidewalk and alley excavations and openings.
(8) Driveway surfaces shall connect with the road pavement, curb and
gutter or sidewalk in a neat, workmanlike manner.
(a) In areas with sidewalks, driveway surface material between
the curb and gutter and the sidewalk shall be concrete.
(b) All driveway surfaces abutting curb and gutter shall be a hard
surface within the right-of-way: asphalt or concrete.
(c) Concrete driveway surface material shall end a minimum of 10
feet from any rural, asphalt roadway surface. The last 10 feet
shall be asphalt or aggregate.
A. No individual, partnership or corporation shall cause any excavation to
be made in the public roads, sidewalks and alleys of the Town of Grand
Chute without first having obtained the approval of the Town Board and
a construction permit from the Director of Public Works or his
designee.124
B. For the purpose of this section the public roads and alleys are construed
to be the areas as designated by the Town of Grand Chute and recorded
as such in the Town records.
C. The Town Board may prescribe the conditions under which the
excavation shall be made, and it shall be the duty of the Director of
Public Works, under the direction of the Town Board, to see that the
person doing the excavating complies with such conditions. The Town
Board may, in its discretion, require a performance bond from the
excavator conditioned upon his faithfully carrying out the terms under
which he is allowed to excavate in the public roads, sidewalks or alleys.
The bond required shall be adjusted in light of the anticipated danger of
damages.125
D. Before a permit for excavating or opening any road or public way may
be issued, the applicant must execute and deposit with the Town Clerk
an indemnity bond, approved by the Town Chairperson, in the sum of
$10,000 conditioned that he will indemnify and save harmless the Town
of Grand Chute and its officers from all liability for accidents and
damage caused by any of the work covered by his permit and that he
will fill up and place in good and safe condition all excavations and
openings made in the road and will replace and restore the pavement
over any opening he may make as near as can be to the state and
condition in which he found it and keep and maintain the same in such
condition, normal wear and tear excepted, to the satisfaction of the
Town Board for a period of one year and that he will pay all fines
124. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
125. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 468-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 468-2
1:393
imposed upon him for any violation of any rule, regulation or ordinance
governing road openings or drain laying adopted by the Town Board
and will repair any damage done to existing improvements during the
progress of the excavation in accordance with the ordinances, rules
and regulations of the Town. Such bond shall also guarantee that if
the Town shall elect to make the road repair, the person opening the
road will pay all costs of making such repair and of maintaining the
same for one year. Recovery on such bond for any accident, injury, or
violation of law, ordinance, rule or regulation shall not exhaust the bond
but it shall cover any and all accidents, injuries or violations during
the period of excavation for which it is given. An annual bond may
be given under this section covering all excavation work done by the
principal for one year beginning January 1, which shall be conditioned
as specified above and in the amount determined by the Town Board as
necessary to adequately protect the public and the Town.
E. Prior to commencement of excavation work, a permittee must furnish
the Director of Public Works satisfactory written evidence that he has in
force and will maintain during the life of the permit and the period of
excavation public liability insurance of not less than $100,000 for one
person and $300,000 for one accident and property damage insurance
of not less than $50,000.126
F. Regulations governing road and sidewalk openings.127
(1) Frozen ground. No openings in the roads or sidewalks for any
purpose shall be permitted when the ground is frozen, except
where necessary as determined by the Director of Public Works.
(2) Removal of paving. In opening any road or other public way, all
paving or blasting materials shall be removed with the least
possible loss of or damage to surfacing material and together with
the excavated material from trenches shall be placed so as to cause
the least practicable inconvenience to the public and permit free
flow of water along gutters and ditches.
(3) Protection of public. Each excavation shall be enclosed with
sufficient barriers to alert and protect the public from this hazard
in the roads or public ways of the Town. All machinery and
equipment shall be locked or otherwise effectively safeguarded
from unauthorized use when not being used by the permittee, his
agents or employees. Warning lights shall be kept burning from
sunset to sunrise, one warning light to be placed at each end of the
opening in the road or public way and other warning lights in a
number approved by the Director of Public Works and properly
spaced to give adequate advance warning. Except by special
permission from the Director of Public Works, no trench shall be
126. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
127. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 468-2 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 468-2
1:394
§ 468-3. Excavation in new road limited; emergency excavations.128
Whenever the Town Board determines to provide for the permanent
improvement or repaving of any road, such determination shall be made not
less than 30 days before the work of improvement or repaving shall begin.
Immediately after such determination by the Town Board, the Director of
Public Works shall notify in writing each person, utility, Town department,
including sanitary and utility districts, or other agency owning or
controlling any sewer, water main, conduit or other utility in or under said
road or any real property abutting said road that all such excavation work
in such road must be completed within 30 days. After such permanent
improvement or repaving, no permit shall be issued to open, cut or excavate
said road for a period of five years after the date of improvement or
repaving unless, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, an
emergency exists which make it absolutely essential that the permit be
issued. In the event of an emergency, any person owning or controlling
excavated more than 250 feet in advance of pipe laying nor left
unfilled more than 500 feet where pipe has been laid. All necessary
precautions shall be taken to guard the public effectually from
accidents or damage to persons or property through the period of
the work. Each person making such opening shall be held liable for
all damages, including costs incurred by the Town in defending any
action brought against it for damages, as well as cost of any appeal,
that may result from the neglect by such person or his employees
of any necessary precaution against injury or damage to persons,
vehicles or property of any kind.
(4) Replacing road surface. In opening any road or sidewalk, the
paving materials, sand, gravel and earth or other material moved
or penetrated and all surface monuments or hubs must be removed
and replaced as nearly as possible in their original condition or
position and the same relation to the remainder as before. Any
excavated material which, in the opinion of the Director of Public
Works, is not suitable for refilling shall be replaced with approved
backfill material. All rubbish shall be immediately removed, leaving
the street or sidewalk in perfect repair, the same to be so
maintained for a period of one year. In backfilling the opening, the
earth must be placed in layers not more than six inches in depth
and each layer compacted or tamped to prevent after-settling.
When the sides of the trench will not stand perpendicular,
sheathing and braces must be used to prevent caving. No timber,
bracing, lagging, sheathing or other lumber shall be left in any
trench. The Town may elect to have the Town make the pavement
repair for any road or sidewalk opening, in which case the cost of
making such repair and of maintaining it for one year shall be
charged to the person making the road opening.
128. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 468-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 468-3
1:395
any sewer, water main, conduit or utility in or under any road and his
agents or employees may take immediate proper emergency measures to
remedy dangerous conditions for the protection of property, life, health or
safety without obtaining an excavation permit, provided that such person
shall apply for an excavation permit not later than the end of the next
succeeding business day and shall not make any permanent repairs without
first obtaining permit hereunder.
§ 468-4. Town work excluded.129
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to excavation work under the
direction of the Street Superintendent by Town employees or contractors
performing work under contract with the Town necessitating openings or
excavations in Town roads. "Town" for the purpose of this section shall apply
to utility and sanitary districts operating within the Town.
§ 468-5. Encroachments and construction in Town right-of-way.
[Amended 1-5-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-02]
A. Permit required. No person, persons, partnership, company or
corporation shall erect or install any structure, sign, fence, lighting,
wall, pavement or other vehicle access nor perform or arrange for any
construction within or upon the Town road right-of-way without first
obtaining a written permit from the Town, with the exception of a
mailbox and boxes installed for the delivery of newspapers.
B. Obstructions and encroachments.
(1) No person, persons, partnership, company or corporation shall
encroach upon or in any way obstruct or encumber any road, alley,
sidewalk, public grounds or land dedicated to public use, or any
part thereof, or permit such encroachment or encumbrance to be
placed or remain on any public way adjoining the premises of which
he is the owner or occupant.
(2) Any existing structure, sign, fence, wall, pavement or other
obstruction (including trees) which, in the judgment of the Town,
will prevent proper snow removal from the pavement and
shoulders or mowing of the ditches of the Town roadway shall be
removed by the owner or occupant of the adjacent property within
15 days of receiving written notice from the Town. If the owner or
occupant does not remove said structure or obstruction within the
allotted time, the Town shall remove it or make arrangements to
have the obstruction removed, and the expense of removal shall be
charged to the adjacent property as a special assessment, after
notice and hearing.
129. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 468-3 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 468-5
1:396
C. Exceptions. The prohibition of Subsections A and B shall not apply to
the following:
(1) Public utility encroachments duly authorized by state law or the
Town Board.
(2) Excavations and openings permitted under §§ 468-1 and 468-2.
D. Obstruction of water flow. No person shall allow, permit or cause the
accumulation of any materials in or upon the roadways or road ditches
of the Town which in any manner obstruct the flow of water causing
diversion of water from the ditch or causing the stagnation of water
flowing therein.
E. Mailboxes. Mailboxes shall be installed in accordance with United
States Postal Service regulations but as far from the Town roadway
pavement as those regulations allow. Mailbox supports and
attachments shall be strong enough to withstand the pressure and
thrust of plowed, wet snow but shall not be so formidable and massive
as to damage vehicles and cause serious injury to people who may
accidentally strike them.
F. Encroachments affecting public safety. [Added 10-5-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-12]
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, cause to grow, allow to
grow or to maintain any trees, shrubs, bushes, hedges or
vegetation of any kind that creates an obstruction to the clear and
complete vision of any traffic sign or driveway approach to any
street or street intersection in the Town of Grand Chute. It shall be
the duty of every owner of such tree, shrub, bush, hedge or
vegetation to remove such obstruction.
(2) The Town of Grand Chute shall have the right to prune any tree or
shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread
of light along the street from a streetlight, or interferes with
visibility of any traffic control device or sign, or interferes with the
vision of traffic vehicle operators at any street intersection. Any
tree, shrub, bush, hedge or other vegetation of any kind that
obstructs the view at any intersection or the view of a traffic sign
shall be deemed to be dangerous to public travel, and the Town
Board may order, by written notice, the owner or occupant of any
private place or premises upon which there stands a tree or shrub
that unreasonably interferes with or encroaches upon the street or
sidewalk to take such steps as are necessary to remove such
interference. If such owner or occupant fails, within seven days of
receipt of notice, to take such necessary steps, the Town Board
shall order the Building Inspector and/or Public Works Department
to remove the interference. The costs of removing the interference
shall be levied and collected as a special tax upon the property
upon which or in front of which such tree or shrub stands.
§ 468-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 468-6
1:397
§ 468-6. Road privilege permit.130
A. Permits for the use of the roads, alleys, sidewalks or other public ways
or places of the Town may be granted to applicants by the Town Board
for the purpose of encumbering the road, alley, sidewalk or way with
materials necessary in and about the construction or demolition of any
building or structure, provided that such applicant has complied with
the other requirements of this subsection and has obtained a building
permit if required by this Code.
B. No road privilege permit shall be issued until the applicant shall
execute and file with the Town Clerk a bond, in an amount determined
by the Town Board, conditioned that the applicant will indemnify and
save harmless the Town of Grand Chute from all liability for accidents
or damage caused by reason of operations under said permit and will
remove such encumbrance upon termination of the operations and will
leave the vacated premises in a clean and sanitary condition and repair
any and all damage to the roads, alleys, sidewalks or public property of
the Town resulting from such building operations.
C. The fee for a road privilege permit shall be as prescribed in the Town
Fee Schedule.
D. The permission to occupy or obstruct the roads, alleys, sidewalks or
public grounds is intended only for use in connection with the actual
erection, alteration, repair, or removal of buildings or structures and
shall be given upon the following terms and conditions and subject to
revocation without notice by the Town Board for violation thereof:
(1) Such temporary obstruction shall cover not more than 1/3 of any
road or alley.
(2) Obstructions shall be sufficiently lighted at night so as to be in full
view of the public from all directions.
(3) Upon termination of the work necessitating such obstruction, all
parts of the roads, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds occupied
under the permit shall be vacated, cleaned of all rubbish and
obstructions and placed in a safe condition for public travel at the
expense of the permittee.
E. Termination. All road privilege permits shall automatically terminate at
the end of three months from the date of issuance unless an earlier
termination date is specified thereon at the direction of the Town Board.
F. In addition to any other penalty imposed, if the owner or occupant of
the premises adjoining any unlawfully obstructed road shall refuse or
neglect to remove such obstruction within 24 hours after notice from
the Town Board to do so, it shall be the duty of the Town Board to direct
130. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 468-6 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 468-6
1:398
§ 468-7. Sidewalks. [Amended 2-1-2000; 7-6-2000]
removal of such obstruction and make return of the cost and expense
thereof to the Town Clerk, who shall enter such cost on the next
annual tax roll as a special charge against the property abutting such
obstructed road, and such sum shall be levied and collected as other
special taxes against real estate.
A. Snow and ice removal.
(1) Removal from sidewalks. The owner, occupant or person in charge
of any parcel or lot which fronts upon or adjoins any sidewalk shall
keep said sidewalk clear of all snow and ice. In the event of snow
accumulating on said sidewalk due to natural means and/or by any
other means, said sidewalks shall be cleared of all accumulated
snow and/or ice within 24 hours from the time the snow ceases to
accumulate on said sidewalk. Sidewalks are to be kept clear of
snow and ice to their maximum width. In the event that ice has
formed on any sidewalk in such a manner that it cannot be
removed, the owner, occupant or person in charge of the parcel or
lot which fronts upon or adjoins said sidewalk shall keep the
sidewalk sprinkled with sand and/or salt to permit safe travel by
pedestrians.
(a) Exceptions. In single- and two-family residential zones, in the
event that the subject property has multiple frontages, the
property owner shall not be responsible for clearing the
sidewalk on the frontage to which access is physically or
legally restricted. Town crews shall be responsible for snow or
ice removal in this area.
(2) Notice and removal of snow from sidewalks. If the owner, occupant
or person in charge of any parcel or lot which fronts upon or
adjoins any sidewalk shall fail to keep said sidewalk clear of snow
and ice as set forth in Subsection A(1), the Street Superintendent
or Town law enforcement officers shall take the following action:
(a) Hazardous conditions. If the Street Superintendent or Town
law enforcement officer determines that the failure to remove
the snow and ice from the sidewalk creates an immediate
danger to the public health and/or safety, he/she shall cause
the issuance of a written notice to the owner, occupant or
person in charge of any parcel or lot directing that the snow
and ice be removed within two hours from the delivery of the
notice. In the event that the property owner, occupant or
person in charge of said parcel or lot is unavailable to receive a
written notice, the Street Superintendent or police officer shall
immediately cause the removal of the snow and/or ice. The
Street Superintendent or police officer shall send a written
notice to the last known address of the property owner
§ 468-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 468-7
1:399
notifying the owner that a hazardous condition existed which
required immediate abatement.
(b) Nonhazardous conditions. If the owner, occupant or person in
charge of the subject parcel or lot fails to remove the snow
within the time period established in Subsection A(1), the
Street Superintendent or police officer shall cause the issuance
of a written notice to said owner, occupant or person in charge
of the subject parcel or lot directing the responsible person (as
defined) to remove said snow and ice no later than 12:00 noon
of the day following the issuance of said notice. The written
notice shall be hand delivered when possible or mailed to the
last known address of the owner of the subject property as
identified on the records in the Town Assessor's office.
(c) Snow and ice not to encroach. In accordance with § 398-5, no
person shall push, blow, shove or in any way deposit any snow
or ice onto any public street, alley, sidewalk or public lands
dedicated to public use.
(3) Enforcement. The Street Superintendent, his designees and all
sworn police officers are hereby authorized and directed to enforce
the provisions of this section.
(4) Continued violations. Each twenty-four-hour period where a
violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense under this
section for enforcement purposes. Repeated violations or
subsequent additional accumulations of snow and/or ice shall not
nullify any pending notice issued under this section.
(5) Abatement after notice. Failure of the owner, occupant or person in
charge of any parcel or lot to cause the removal of snow and/or ice
within the time established under Subsection A(2)(a) and (b) after
receiving a written notice shall result in the Street Superintendent
causing the removal of said snow and/or ice.
(6) Expense. An account of the expenses incurred by the Town to abate
the snow and/or ice hazard shall be kept, and such expenses shall
be charged to and paid by the parcel or lot owner. Notice of the bill
for the removal of snow and/or ice shall be mailed to the last known
address of the owner of the parcel or lot and shall be payable within
30 calendar days from the receipt thereof. Any unpaid costs and
expenses that remain after 30 days shall carry an interest charge of
12%. Repeat violations shall be subject to a charge which is double
the actual costs to abate the snow and/or ice hazard. Any costs not
paid by October 1 in any year shall be entered onto the tax roll by
the Town Clerk as a special tax as provided by § 66.0907(5), Wis.
Stats.131
131. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 468-7 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 468-7
1:400
(7) Penalty. In addition to the provisions set forth in this section, any
person, firm or corporation who or which violates the provisions of
this section shall be subject to a penalty as provided in the Uniform
Forfeiture and Bond Schedules.
B. Sidewalk construction.
(1) Purpose. In order to enhance the safety of pedestrian traffic and
provide an alternative mode of transportation along the Town's
traffic corridors, the Town may approve and direct the construction
of sidewalks on the basis of need, safety, available funds, and
maintenance considerations.
(2) Construction of sidewalks.
(a) Petitioned sidewalks. The Town Board may approve the
construction of sidewalks by resolution after a petition of
abutting property owners. The petition must be signed by the
property owners of more than 50% of all parcels of property
abutting the proposed sidewalk improvement or a sufficient
number of property owners accounting for more than 50% of
the frontage of the abutting properties.
(b) Nonpetitioned sidewalks. The Town Board may elect to
construct sidewalks in designated areas without a petition. The
following general criteria will be considered to determine if
sidewalks will be constructed without a petition. Areas meeting
these criteria will generally receive greater consideration for
sidewalks. However, meeting these criteria does not
necessarily mandate the installation of sidewalks.
[1] Adjoining street is an urbanized state or county highway or
an urbanized Town collector street as indicated on the
Town's road designation map.
[2] Pedestrian destinations are located on the adjoining street
or a reasonable distance that would connect a given area
with pedestrian destinations. Pedestrian destinations may
include the following: schools, including private schools
and post-secondary schools; institutions, such as hospitals,
state or local government buildings, etc.; bus stops;
connections to other planned or designated pedestrian
trails; residential zoned areas; or neighborhood
commercial areas.
[3] Parcels have direct access to adjoining street.
(c) Approval of construction. Based on the petitions received, or
the evaluation of the above criteria set forth in Subsection
B(2)(b) above, the Town Board may direct the construction of
sidewalks on one or both sides of a nonpetitioned street. If one
§ 468-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 468-7
1:401
§ 468-8. Parking lot restrictions.
§ 468-9. New Town roads. [Amended 7-15-2003133]
side is selected for construction, it will generally be the side
that would generate the most pedestrian traffic.
(3) Funding of sidewalk construction.
(a) Petitioned sidewalks. One hundred percent of the cost shall be
special assessed in accordance with the Town's special
assessment policy.132
(b) Nonpetitioned sidewalks: In single-family and two-family
residential zoned areas, the Town shall assume 100% of the
costs of sidewalk construction. In commercial, industrial, and
multifamily residential zoned areas, 100% of the cost shall be
special assessed in accordance with the Town's special
assessment policy.
A. Parking of automobiles or other motorized vehicles on private premises
shall be so regulated as not to interfere with the use of any Town road
or public right-of-way. Where parking lots or areas are located
immediately adjacent to a public road or right-of-way, a physical divider
shall be placed at the edge of the parking lot or area adjacent to the
public road to prevent invasion of the public right-of-way. Points of
ingress or egress to private parking areas shall be plainly marked, and
no single parking area shall have more than one point of ingress or
egress per 100 feet along such public road. The physical barriers shall
not be less than two feet above the parking lot surface. Applications for
variations of the number or distance of points of egress or ingress may
be granted in writing by the Town Board. The owner of any such
premises shall be liable hereunder.
B. Violations of this section shall be punishable by the imposition of a fine
or forfeiture as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond
Schedules for each day of violation. Upon a finding of guilty of a
violation hereunder and failure to pay the forfeiture imposed, said
convicted person may be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 10 days
for each violation.
A. General requirements.
(1) In accordance with § 475-15A and B, the developer shall have an
initial consultation with Town staff and submit a conceptual plan
for review and consideration by the Town of Grand Chute Plan
Commission. The developer or the developer's designee shall
attend the meeting and present the concept plan to Town Plan
132. Editor's Note: See Ch. 57, Art. II, Special Assessments and Charges.
133. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 468-7 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 468-9
1:402
Commission. Failure of the developer or designee to attend the
meeting or provide a complete roadway development checklist may
result in the denial of the concept plan.
(2) Upon approval of the conceptual plan by the Plan Commission, the
developer shall prepare the preliminary plat or certified survey
map for review by the Plan Commission and approval by the Town
Board in accordance with §§ 475-15C and 475-17. Concurrent with
the submittal of the preliminary plat or certified survey map, the
developer shall make written application to the Town of Grand
Chute for construction of any new roads, including ditching or
storm sewer, indicating the location, use, name, type of surface,
desired time schedule, and detailed construction plan. The
construction plans must meet the Town of Grand Chute
requirements contained in the General Specifications, Town of
Grand Chute, that are in effect at the time of the application.
(3) No Town road shall be accepted by dedication or deed unless the
person desiring to dedicate and deed to the Town said road shall
have first obtained the approval of the Town Board of the points of
access to existing Town roads and shall have improved said
roadway to the grade, road base and surface requirements of the
Town Board and shall have provided documentation that the
roadways to be dedicated are free of liens, encumbrances or other
impairments to clear title to the property.
(4) The liability for accident or injury occurring on any proposed
roadway shall be the liability of the owner until both dedication and
deeding are completed and accepted by the Town Board.
(5) Failure to obtain and comply with Town Board requirements shall
constitute basis for refusal to accept said dedication and/or deed.
The Town will not maintain Town roads until dedication and
deeding are completed and accepted by the Town.
(6) Streetlight installation.
(a) All new streets within the Town of Grand Chute shall have
streetlights installed at the time the street is constructed in
accordance with a streetlighting plan that has been approved
by the Town Board.
(b) The cost of installation shall be paid by the developer in
accordance with the procedures listed under § 57-17, Cost of
improvements, of this Code.
(7) All construction contractors of all roads must be included on the
Town list of qualified contractors. The Town shall supply this list to
all developers upon request. The list of contractors shall be
updated on an annual basis. All contractors who qualify for
Wisconsin Department of Transportation work shall automatically
be qualified to perform construction of roadways in the Town of
§ 468-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 468-9
1:403
Grand Chute for the type of work they are qualified. Any
construction contractor not on the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation list can prequalify pursuant to forms supplied by
the Town of Grand Chute.
(8) The Town Engineer shall have the sole discretion to inspect the
installation of all Town roads during any part of the construction
process, including installation of all storm sewers, roadway
subgrade elevations, aggregate base course placement, paving and
restoration work. The Town Engineer shall have the authority to
complete any other inspections the Town Engineer feels applicable
for the particular roadway construction on a project-by-project
basis.
B. Construction of new Town public roads and streets under a Town
construction contract.
(1) Following receipt of the application, the Town of Grand Chute Town
Board shall refer the application to the Town of Grand Chute's
Engineer for the preparation of bid documents. No advertisement
for bids will be published until the developer has entered into an
escrow agreement with the Town and deposited cash escrow funds
with the Town in an amount equal to 125% of the total estimated
project costs as determined by the Town Engineer. To assure that
the cash escrow is adequate to cover the cost of the bid to be
awarded, all bid documents shall contain notation that the award of
the bid shall be subject to the developer depositing a cash escrow
with the Town of Grand Chute for 125% of the amount of the
awarded bid and that no contract shall be signed until the required
escrow has been received by the Town of Grand Chute.
(2) The Town of Grand Chute Engineer shall prepare bid documents for
construction of the roadway subgrade, aggregate base course, road
drainageways or curb and gutter and storm sewer, municipal
utilities and lower layer asphalt pavement. The installation cost for
streetlights shall be obtained from the appropriate utility prior to
the award of the bid. The cost for furnishing and installing all
required road signs, including but not limited to stop signs, speed
limit signs, and informational signs, shall be obtained from the
Town of Grand Chute.
(3) Upon receipt of the bid, the developer shall amend the cash escrow
deposit with the Town of Grand Chute to equal 125% of the bid plus
the streetlight installation cost, the cost for all required signs and
their installation, and the Town of Grand Chute engineering and
legal costs. Upon deposit in escrow by the developer of all of the
required costs, the Town Board may move to award said bid.
(4) The Town of Grand Chute shall construct the road in stages upon
completion of Subsection B(1) to (3), with the final paving to be
installed when 70% of available abutting property in the
§ 468-9 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 468-9
1:404
subdivision is developed or within two years, whichever comes
first, but in no case until a minimum of 20% of the abutting land is
developed unless approved the Town Board.
(5) Following construction of the roadway subgrade, aggregate base
course, road drainageways or curb and gutter and storm sewer,
municipal utilities and lower layer asphaltic pavement, the actual
construction costs shall be paid from the cash escrow. A financial
security, acceptable to the Town's Attorney, equal to 20% of the
cash escrow furnished by the developer shall be held for a period of
two years after the required improvements for the applicable phase
have been completed and the road accepted by the Town Board.
This financial security is to guarantee all required improvements
against defects in workmanship and materials. If any defects
appear during the period of the guarantee, the developer shall
install replacements or perform acceptable repairs. In the event
that the developer fails to install the required replacements or
perform the repairs within 21 days of written notification by the
Town, the Town may do so and deduct the cost from the security
deposit, unless the Town Administrator has granted an extension in
writing.
(6) The public improvements and right-of-way dedication shall not be
accepted by the Town without a financial security deposit equal to
20% of the cash escrow amount being held by the Town as a
guarantee against defects in workmanship and materials.
(7) Actual costs of final paving shall be assessed to abutting property
owners by waiver of special assessment proceedings, and all
subdividers of final plats or persons offering a certified survey map
for approval shall be required to enter into a subdivision
improvement agreement relating to final paving and waiver of
special assessment proceedings, a specimen copy of which is on file
in the Town Clerk's office.
(8) Final paving shall be done in accordance with the provisions of
Subsection B(4), and the entire actual construction cost shall be
placed as a special assessment on the tax roll in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter 57, Article II of this Code, except that
§§ 57-8 through 57-11 shall be inapplicable thereto. In addition, the
incorporation herein by reference of § 57-16, Method of payment,
the Town of Grand Chute Policy on Special Assessments, is solely
for the purpose of granting to the subdivider/property owners the
right to pay under annual installments and at the interest rate as
set forth specifically under the Town's special assessment
ordinances and policies.
(9) The street shall be considered an official Town of Grand Chute
street following completion of Subsection B(1) to (4), through the
construction of the lower layer of asphalt pavement, and the public
improvements being accepted by resolution of the Town Board.
§ 468-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 468-9
1:405
Upon acceptance by the Town Board, the Town will perform and
pay for all routine maintenance of the street from that time.
Acceptance of the street by the Town Board does not release the
developer from the responsibility to replace or repair defects in
workmanship or materials that may appear during the period of the
guarantee.
C. Construction of new Town public roads and streets under a private
construction contract.
(1) Prior to the private construction of any Town road or street in the
Town of Grand Chute (hereinafter referred to as "Town"), the
developer/owner (hereinafter referred to as "developer") shall
enter into a roadway development agreement (hereinafter referred
to as "agreement") with the Town. The agreement shall be
established by the Town of Grand Chute Board of Supervisors, by
resolution, and the content and form of the agreement may be
modified on a case-by-case basis at the sole discretion of the Town
of Grand Chute Board of Supervisors. The roadway development
agreement shall be approved by the Town prior to the
commencement of construction of the street or road. The
agreement shall include but shall not be limited to the following:
(a) The developer shall provide a financial guarantee to the Town
for the street construction that the developer intends to
complete pursuant to the roadway development agreement.
The financial guarantee shall be approved by the Town prior to
the commencement of construction of any portion of the street
or road. The financial guarantee to the Town shall be provided
in any of the following forms:
[1] Payment and performance bond.
[2] Irrevocable letter of credit.
[3] Escrowed funds.
(b) The financial guarantee described above shall be in an amount
equal to 125% of the entire construction costs of the road,
streetlighting, road signs as determined by the developer and
approved by the Town Engineer and any engineering or legal
costs incurred by the Town.
(c) Twenty percent of the financial guarantee furnished by the
developer shall be held for a period of two years after the
required improvements for the applicable phase have been
completed and the road accepted by the Town Board to
guarantee all required improvements against defects in
workmanship and materials. If any defects appear during the
period of the guarantee, the developer shall install
replacements or perform acceptable repairs. In the event that
the developer fails to install the required replacements or
§ 468-9 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 468-9
1:406
perform the repairs within 21 days of written notification by
the Town, the Town may do so and deduct the cost thereof
from the financial guarantee, unless the Town Administrator
has granted an extension in writing.
(d) The agreement shall include detailed construction plans and
specifications for the proposed public improvements. The
construction plans shall meet the Town requirements
contained in the General Specifications, Town of Grand Chute,
that are in effect at the time of application. The plans shall
include all drainage plans with roadway grades.
(2) The developer shall pay for all fees for submittal of the plans as
described herein as set forth in the Town Fee Schedule on file with
the Town.
(a) The developer shall pay the entire cost of the plan review fees
by the Town Engineer for review of the plans as described
herein. Specifically, the developer shall pay the Town costs for
the plan review and review of the following: conceptual plan,
preliminary plat, final plat, drainage, street plans and all other
plans required by the Town Board.
(b) The developer shall pay the total project costs. Total project
costs shall consist of construction costs up to the lower layer
asphaltic paving, engineering and legal fees applicable to the
project and costs for all required roadway signage and
streetlights. The developer shall pay the Town's Engineer
costs, We Energy costs and any other utility costs related to the
construction of the roadway, as required, which said payments
shall be made directly to the appropriate party. Copies
verifying direct payment of construction costs shall be
provided to the Town. Any and all costs incurred by the Town
for the roadway construction, including engineering,
construction inspection, materials testing and legal fees, shall
be billed by the Town to the developer.
(c) Upon completion of specific items listed as required
improvements, submittal of proof to the Town Engineer of
payment to contractors and acceptance of those improvements
by the Town Board, the Town Engineer will release no more
than 80% of the security furnished for the respective
improvements completed. No more than one reduction in the
amount of security shall be granted on a monthly basis. Upon
acceptance of the road by the Town Board, no less than 20% of
the original financial guarantee amount shall be held by the
Town for the purposes stated in Subsection C(1)(c) of this
section.
(3) The private construction of Town roads as described herein shall
comply with all ordinance requirements and resolution
§ 468-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 468-9
1:407
requirements of the Town, including conceptual plan, preliminary
plat approval and final plat approval.
(4) The road shall be constructed as described herein; however, the
final paving shall be installed when 70% of available abutting
property in the subdivision is developed or within two years,
whichever comes first, but in no case until a minimum of 20% of the
abutting land is developed, unless otherwise approved by the Town
Board. Specifically, in the event a minimum of 20% of the abutting
land is not developed and the two-year time frame has lapsed as
described above, the Town Board, at the Town Board's discretion,
may require final paving of the road in conformity with this section.
The developer shall then be required to construct the road in
conformity with all Town ordinances and resolutions as described
herein. However, the roadway development agreement may
provide for an earlier final paving than the time frames described
above. However, the roadway development agreement shall also
include a waiver that the developer and all owners shall accept full
liability for premature failure of the bituminous paving installation.
Premature failure is defined as displacement or breakup of
bituminous pavement within two years of acceptance of roadway
(through the lower layer of asphaltic pavement) by the Town Board.
(5) If the actual construction costs exceed the financial guarantee of
125% to the Town (as described above), the difference shall be
made up in either of the following ways:
(a) On or before 30 days from the date of notice from the Town to
the developer of a shortfall, the developer shall provide an
increase of financial guarantee to cover the increased costs; or
(b) In the event that the developer does not provide the increased
financial guarantee described above, then the increased cost
amount shall be placed on the tax roll as a special assessment,
which said assessment shall be split equally against all lots
within the affected subdivisions.
(6) At the time of the signing of the roadway development agreement,
the developer and all owners of all real estate properties in the
development shall sign a subdivision improvement agreement
relating to final paving and waiver of a special assessment hearing.
A specimen copy of this subdivision improvement agreement is on
file with the Town Clerk's office. The subdivision improvement
agreement shall include, among other items, that the actual costs
of final paving shall be assessed to abutting property owners by
waiver of assessment proceedings. All subdividers of final plats or
persons offering a certified survey map for approval shall be
required to enter into a subdivision improvement agreement
relating to final paving and waiver of special assessment
proceedings.
§ 468-9 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 468-9
1:408
§ 468-10. Utility permits. [Amended 12-19-2006]
(7) In the event that during the roadway construction process the
Town Engineer determines there is inadequate construction or
construction not in conformity with the submitted plans or not in
conformity with the Town's standards and general specifications,
then the Town Engineer shall provide written notice to the
developer. Upon receipt of the written notice, the developer shall
cease all future construction of the road until such time as the
deficiencies are satisfied and corrected as determined by the Town
Engineer. In that event, the developer shall have 15 days to correct
all deficiencies as described herein. In the event that the fifteenday
time frame is not met, then the Town, at the Town's discretion,
shall have the authority to make arrangements to have the
deficiencies corrected, have the roadway properly constructed, and
have the financial guarantees applied to the construction costs.
(8) At such time the developer signs the roadway development
agreement, subdivision improvement agreement, detention/
retention pond maintenance agreement and applicable
streetlighting plan agreement, and at such time the developer
provides satisfactory financial guarantee to the Town as described
above and demonstrates that the property is free from all liens and
encumbrances, and at such time that all public improvements are
substantially complete as approved by the Town Engineer, then the
Town shall execute the final plat for recording.
(9) Final paving shall be done in accordance with the provisions of
Subsection C(4), and the entire actual construction cost shall be
placed as a special assessment on the tax roll in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter 57, Article II of this Code, except that
§§ 57-8 through 57-11 shall be inapplicable thereto. In addition, the
incorporation herein by reference of § 57-16, Method of payment,
the Town of Grand Chute Policy on Special Assessments, is solely
for the purpose of granting to the subdivider/property owners the
right to pay under annual installments and at the interest rate as
set forth specifically under the Town's special assessment
ordinances and policies.
(10) Upon completion of all Town Engineer inspections as described
herein, the Town Engineer shall write a letter recommending
acceptance as a Town road to the Town Board.
A. Any utility, including any public or private utility of any kind or nature,
desiring to construct utility improvements within Town Road right-ofway
shall be required to comply with the following terms and provisions
and shall be further required to pay charges for utility permits as
adopted by the Town Board from time to time.
§ 468-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 468-10
1:409
Chapter 475
(1) Any utility company, public or private (and not a utility company's
contractor), shall be responsible for obtaining the permit and
payment of the permit fee as set forth herein.
(2) Any utility company desiring to construct or install a utility
improvement within Town of Grand Chute road right-of-way shall
be required to notify the Town of Grand Chute Street
Superintendent three days prior to beginning any utility work on
Town road right-of-way, in addition to the requirement to notify the
Town of Grand Chute Street Superintendent upon completion of the
utility construction so that the Town of Grand Chute may complete
a field inspection. Failure to comply with the terms of the permit,
including failure to comply with procuring the permit, will
jeopardize obtaining future permits from the Town of Grand
Chute.134
(3) Upon the permit, each utility must designate an individual within
the utility department or company that will be responsible for the
administration and supervision of each permit as obtained,
including the individual's name and telephone number.
(4) Any contractor employed by a utility company to complete the
work/construction, referenced in the permit obtained by the utility
company itself, shall be required to obtain a construction permit
from the Town of Grand Chute prior to performing any utility work
in Town road right-of-way.
(5) The fees for utility permits shall be adopted by resolution of the
Grand Chute Town Board and may be updated by resolution as
needed.
(6) No permit will be issued until all fees have been paid in full with the
permit application. If work on the right-of-way is started prior to
the applicant receiving the approved permit, permit fees will be
doubled.
B. Any person/firm found to have violated this section shall be liable by
way of civil action and civil forfeiture for all permit fees herein stated,
including Town of Grand Chute reasonable attorney fees for collection
of the same.
C. Any person found to have violated this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, forfeit an amount as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and
Bond Schedules for each violation, together with the cost of
prosecution.135
134. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
135. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 468-10 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 468-10
1:410
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Plan Commission — See Ch. 16.
Building construction — See Ch. 220.
Comprehensive Plan — See Ch. 246.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 275.
Impact fees — See Ch. 330.
Mobile homes and mobile home parks — See
Ch. 382.
Sewers — See Ch. 440.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 463.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 468.
Trees and shrubs — See Ch. 497.
Water — See Ch. 523.
Zoning — See Ch. 535.
§ 468-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 468-10
1:411

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 475-1. Statutory authority.
These regulations are adopted under the authority granted by § 236.45,
Wis. Stats.
§ 475-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Subdivision Control
Ordinance for the Town of Grand Chute."
§ 475-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to supplement the provisions of Ch. 236, Wis.
Stats., and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare within
the Town of Grand Chute; to lessen congestion in the streets and highways;
to further the orderly layout and use of land; to secure safety from fire,
panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent
the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to
facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water, sewerage, schools,
parks, playgrounds and other public requirements; and to facilitate the
further resubdivision of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land. The
provisions of this chapter are made with reasonable consideration, among
other things, of the character of the Town with a view of conserving the
value of the buildings placed upon the land, providing the best possible
environment for human habitation and encouraging the most appropriate
use of land throughout the Town.
§ 475-4. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed in favor of the
Town and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power
granted by the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 475-5. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
It is not the intent of this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annual, impair or
interfere with existing rules and regulations governing the subdivision of
land; provided, however, that where this chapter is more restrictive, the
provisions of this chapter shall govern.
§ 475-6. Jurisdiction.
A. The jurisdiction of this chapter shall include all lands and waters within
the Town of Grand Chute.
B. Exceptions. In no instance shall the provisions of this chapter apply to:
(1) Transfer of interest in land by will or pursuant to court order.
§ 475-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-6
1:413
§ 475-7. Compliance required.
No person, firm or corporation shall divide, monument or describe any land
located within the jurisdictional limits of these regulations which results in
a subdivision, other division, or a replat as defined herein, no such division,
other division, or replat shall be entitled to record, and no streets shall
be laid out or improvements made to land without compliance with all
requirements of this chapter and:
§ 475-8. Condominium plats.
The recording of a condominium plat or amended condominium plat shall
constitute a division, monumenting or description of lands subject to
regulation and approval by the Town Board and shall be deemed as a
subdivision, other division or amended plat or replat. No improvement to
said lands shall be made without a building permit obtained in compliance
with Chapter 220, Building Construction, of this Code. No common area
streets, easements or public dedications access shall be laid out or
improvements made to land without compliance with all requirements of
this chapter and:
(2) Leases for a term not to exceed 10 years, mortgages, or easements.
(3) The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of
adjoining property if additional lots are not thereby created and the
lots resulting are not reduced below the minimum size required by
this chapter or other applicable laws or ordinances.
(4) Cemetery plats per § 157.07, Wis. Stats.
(5) Assessor's plats per § 70.27, Wis. Stats.
A. Provisions of Ch. 236, Wis. Stats.
B. Rules of the Wisconsin State Department of Safety and Professional
Services if the land to be subdivided is not served by a public sewer and
provisions for such service have not been made.
C. Rules of the State Department of Transportation if the land owned or
controlled by the subdivider abuts on a state trunk highway or
connecting street.
D. A duly approved Comprehensive Plan or any component thereof,
including Chapter 535, Zoning, of this Code, the Official Map, and all
other applicable ordinances of the Town.
E. Applicable local and county ordinances.
A. All restrictive covenants, conditions and regulations required by the
Town at the time of approval of the condominium plat.
§ 475-6 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 475-8
1:414
§ 475-9. Land suitability.
B. Rules of the Wisconsin State Department of Safety and Professional
Services if the land to be subdivided is not served by a public sewer and
provisions for such service have not been made.
C. Rules of the State Department of Transportation if the land owned or
controlled by the subdivider abuts on a state trunk highway or
connecting street.
D. A duly approved Comprehensive Plan or any component thereof,
including Chapter 535, Zoning, of this Code, the Official Map, and all
other applicable ordinances of the Town.
E. Applicable local and county ordinances.
A. No land shall be subdivided which is held unsuitable for use by the Plan
Commission for reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, adverse soil or
rock formation, unfavorable topography, inadequate water supply or
sewage disposal capabilities, or any feature likely to be harmful to the
health, safety, or welfare of the future users of the proposed subdivision
or of the community. The Plan Commission, in applying the provisions of
this section, shall recite the particular facts upon which it bases its
conclusions that the land is not suitable for the proposed use and afford
the subdivider an opportunity to present evidence regarding such
unsuitability if he so desires. Thereafter the Plan Commission may
affirm, modify, or withdraw its determination of unsuitability.
B. Where the subdivision of a tract of land contains a portion of land
unsuitable for development because of poor drainage, floodable
conditions, poor soil conditions, adverse rock formation, unfavorable
topography, inadequate water supply or sewage disposal capabilities, or
for any other reason, such areas shall not be divided into buildable sites
and shall be handled as follows:
(1) Poor drainage. Land subject to ponding, poor permeability or poor
drainage, or for other causes as determined by the Plan
Commission or its designated agent, and if said land is not zoned as
a conservancy or wetland-floodplain district on an applicable
zoning district map in which buildings are prohibited, shall be
subject to the following requirements:
(a) If said land is designated as park, parkway, other open space,
or other public use on an official plan of the Town, the
developer may dedicate said land to the Town or county but in
any case must reserve said land for not less than two years for
acquisition by the Town or county.
(b) If said land is not designated as a park, parkway, or other
public use on an official plan, then the developer shall cause
said land to be carried in a private easement in the individual
§ 475-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-9
1:415
deeds affected hereby, and no permit shall be issued for a
building therein.
(c) In lieu of the requirements set forth in Subsection B(1)(a)
above, the developer may, at his expense, prepare a
development proposal for the problem area. It shall be
submitted for the Plan Commission's approval and shall be
accompanied by a site plan and adequate engineering data to
ensure that the public health, safety and welfare will not be
violated if approved and provide a performance guarantee to
the Town to insure that such will be done at a specified time if
approved.
(2) Floodable conditions/drainageways.
(a) If floodplains have been determined and are delineated on an
applicable zoning district map or as determined by the Plan
Commission from sources available to it, the plat shall be
designated accordingly so that all building sites have sufficient
area for the efficient operation of a private disposal system and
so that the lowest floor level of a building shall be two feet
above the normal high-water line.
(b) In designing plats, drainage easements shall be shown on the
final plat where conditions warrant and as determined by the
Plan Commission or as determined by sources available to it,
and building permits shall not be issued therein.
(3) Adverse soil and rock formation:
(a) Soil suitability rating for a proposed subdivision shall be
determined by the Plan Commission from sources available to
it. In order to determine the precise location of soil boundaries,
on-site investigation by soil scientists may be necessary at the
expense of the developer. In areas where no public sewer is
available, this investigation is mandatory and shall be made by
a certified soil tester at the expense of the developer and
according to procedures established by the State Department
of Safety and Professional Services. The minimum lot size
determined by this soil investigation shall supersede the
minimum lot size allowed by Town zoning.
(b) Where soil interpretations determine that a tract of land is
unsuitable for development, the developer may submit a
proposal indicating how the soil problem can be overcome. The
proposal shall include a site plan and adequate engineering
data for approval by the Plan Commission. If this proposal is
approved, the developer shall provide a performance
guarantee to the Town, as required by § 475-15E.
§ 475-9 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 475-10
1:416
§ 475-10. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of these regulations, the following terms are defined. Words
used in the present tense include the future, the singular number includes
the plural number, and the plural number includes the singular number. The
word "shall" is mandatory.
ALLEY — A special public way affording only secondary access to abutting
properties.
ARTERIAL STREET — A street used, or intended to be used, primarily for
fast or heavy through traffic. Arterial streets shall include freeways and
expressways as well as standard arterial streets, highways and parkways.
BLOCK — A parcel of land bounded on at least one side by a street and on
the other sides by a natural or man-made barrier.
BOARD — Town Board of Supervisors of the Town of Grand Chute.
BUILDING SITE — A parcel of land occupied, or intended to be occupied,
by a structure as permitted under applicable zoning regulations.
CERTIFIED SURVEY MAP — A map of a land split prepared in accordance
with this chapter and Ch. 236, Wis. Stats. See "minor subdivision."
CLERK — Clerk of the Town of Grand Chute.
COLLECTOR STREET — A street used, or intended to be used, to carry
traffic from minor streets to the major system of arterial streets, including
the principal entrance streets to residential developments.
COMMUNITY — A town, municipality, or a group of adjacent towns and/or
municipalities having common social, economic or physical interests.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A master plan adopted by the Town Plan
Commission and certified by the Town Board pursuant to § 62.23, Wis.
Stats., including proposals for future land use, transportation, urban
redevelopment and public facilities. Devices for the implementation of these
plans, such as zoning, official map, land division, and building line
ordinances and capital improvement programs, shall also be considered a
part of the Comprehensive Plan.136
COUNTY — Outagamie County.
CUL-DE-SAC STREET — A minor street closed at one end with a turnaround
provided for vehicles.
EXTRATERRITORIAL PLAT APPROVAL JURISDICTION — The
unincorporated area within 1 1/2 miles of a fourth-class city or a village and
within three miles of all other cities.
FRONTAGE STREET — A minor street auxiliary to and located on the side
of an arterial street for control of access and for service to the abutting
development.
136. Editor's Note: See Ch. 246, Comprehensive Plan.
§ 475-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-10
1:417
MINOR STREET — A street used, or intended to be used, primarily for
access to abutting properties.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — The division of land by the owner or subdivider
resulting in the creating of four parcels or building sites, any one of which
is 10 acres in size or less, or the division of a block, lot or outlot within a
recorded subdivision plat into not more than four parcels or building sites
without changing the exterior boundaries of said block, lot or outlot, or
where a road is created. See "certified survey map."
OFFICIAL MAP — That map adopted pursuant to § 62.23, Wis. Stats.,
which shows existing and proposed streets, highways, parkways, parks and
playgrounds, and drainageways.
OUTLOT — A parcel of land, not intended for immediate development, so
designated on the plat, replat or certified survey map.
PLAN COMMISSION — Town of Grand Chute Plan Commission.
PLAT — A map of a subdivision complete with all certificates and
engineering data per Ch. 236, Wis. Stats.
PUBLIC WAY — The changing of the boundaries of a recorded subdivision
plat or part thereof.
SUBDIVIDER — Any person, firm, corporation, any agent thereof, assigns
or the landowner at the time the subdivision plat is recorded dividing or
proposing to divide land resulting in a subdivision, minor subdivision or
replat, as defined herein.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, parcel or tract of land by the owners
thereof, or their agents, for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building
development where the act of division creates five or more parcels or
building sites of 10 acres each or less in area or where the act of division
creates five or more parcels or building sites of 10 acres each or less in area
by successive division within a period of five years.
TOWN — Town of Grand Chute.
TOWN BOARD — Town Board of Supervisors of the Town of Grand Chute.
TOWN CLERK — Town Clerk of the Town of Grand Chute.
§ 475-11. Dedications and reservations. [Amended 6-18-2002]
A. Wherever a tract of land to be subdivided embraces all or any part of an
arterial street, collector street or other street, drainageway or other
public way which has been designated in the Comprehensive Plan or on
the Official Map of the Town, or so designated on an official map of a
continuous municipality which exercises extraterritorial jurisdiction,
said public way shall be made a part of the plat and dedicated or
reserved or treated by the developer as determined by the Plan
Commission in the locations and dimensions indicated on such plat and
as set forth in this chapter.
§ 475-10 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 475-11
1:418
§ 475-12. Filing fee; park and open space fees.
B. A collector street shall be dedicated with at least 80 feet of right-of-way.
A local street shall be dedicated with at least 66 feet of right-of-way.
C. Wherever a proposed playground, park, school site or other public land,
other than streets or drainageways, designated in a Comprehensive
Plan or on the Official Map of the Town or so designated on the official
map of a contiguous municipality which exercises extraterritorial
jurisdiction is embraced, all or in part, in a tract of land to be
subdivided, these proposed public lands shall be so designed as to be
made an integral part of the plat and may be dedicated, but in any case
shall be reserved, for acquisition at undeveloped land costs by the
agency having jurisdiction for a period not to exceed two years unless
extended by mutual agreement. The Town reserves the right to select
the specific acreage to be used for park, open space, trails or other
public recreational improvements in any development.
D. Wherever a subdivision abuts a public use area such as a park, lake,
street, or any similar type of public recreational area, the subdivider, at
the option of the Plan Commission, shall provide an access
thoroughfare at least 100 feet wide connecting such public area with a
public street so that there shall be adequate public access to the public
use area as determined by the Commission.
E. The dedication of land for public purposes, such as parks, rights-of-way,
school sites, and easements, as so indicated on the final plat becomes
effective at the time of recording of the final plat.
F. On sites reserved for eventual public acquisition, no building
development is permitted during the time of reservation. Land so
reserved shall be shown on the plat of a subdivision or on a certified
survey map.
A. Filing fee. A filing fee shall be required when a preliminary plat and a
final plat are submitted for Town approval. Fee shall be set by the Town
Board.
B. Park and open space fees.137 In order that adequate land shall be
dedicated, reserved and preserved for development of public parks,
recreation and open space and to provide for proper location of such
sites as the Town develops, the following provisions shall be
established: [Amended 4-21-1992; 6-21-2005]
(1) A park fee shall be paid for development of all open space. Fees
shall be established from time to time by the Community
Development Department subject to approval by resolution of the
Town Board. The park fee shall be paid at the time of application for
a building permit. Said fees shall apply to all buildable residential
137. Editor's Note: This section appeared in the 1997 Code as § 20.07, Park fee(s) - open space.
See also Ch. 330, Impact Fees.
§ 475-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-12
1:419
§ 475-13. Variances and amendments.
§ 475-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person who builds upon, divides, conveys, records or monuments in
violation of or fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, forfeit an amount as prescribed in the Uniform
Forfeiture and Bond Schedules plus the costs of prosecution for each
violation and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be
imprisoned in the county jail until payment thereof, but not exceeding 30
days. Each violation and each day a violation exists or continues shall
constitute a separate offense. In addition, the remedies authorized by
§§ 236.30, 236.31 and 235.32, Wis. Stats., shall be available to the Town.
lots created after the effective date of this chapter, whether by
certified survey map, subdivision plat, or warranty deed.
(2) In lieu of the payment of park fees, the developer of a subdivision
may provide and dedicate to the public, to be held by the Town of
Grand Chute, land for park and recreation needs of the Town. The
Plan Commission shall ascertain during the site review process
and/or plat review process that the proposed sites are suitable for
the proposed use. The size and location of all dedications shall be
subject to unanimous approval by the Grand Chute Town Board.
A. Where the Plan Commission finds that extraordinary hardships may
result from strict compliance with these regulations, due to physical
features of the site or its location, it may vary the regulations so that
substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured,
provided that such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the
intent and purpose of these regulations and any development plans of
any other agency.
B. In granting variances and modifications, the Plan Commission may
require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the
objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified.
C. The Town Board, upon recommendation of the Plan Commission, may
amend, supplement or repeal any of these regulations after public
notice and hearing.
§ 475-12 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 475-14
1:420
ARTICLE II
Procedures
§ 475-15. Preliminary and final plats.
When it is proposed to divide a land into five or more parcels or building
sites, any one of which is 10 acres or less in size, or where the act of division
creates five or more parcels or building sites of 10 acres each or less in
area by successive division within a period of five years, the subdivider shall
subdivide in accordance with the following procedures:
A. Before presentation to the Plan Commission, the subdivider shall have
an initial consultation with the staff of the Community Development
Department, Public Works Department and other pertinent
departments in order to obtain their advice and assistance and so that
the subdivider is familiar with the purpose and objectives of these
regulations, the Comprehensive Plan, Comprehensive Plan
components, and duly adopted plan implementation devices of the Town
and to otherwise assist the subdivider in planning his development. In
so doing, both the subdivider and the Town departments may reach
mutual conclusions regarding the general progress and objectives of
the proposed development and its possible effects on the neighborhood
and community. The subdivider will gain a better understanding of the
subsequent required procedures and the following general factors:138
(1) The suitability of the site for development.
(2) The accessibility of the site.
(3) The availability of public facilities (sewer, schools, parks, water,
etc.) and public services (police, fire, etc.).
(4) Soil conditions and drainage patterns.
(5) The effect on the proposed development on any contemplated
improvements.
(6) Zoning.
B. Submittal of concept plan. The subdivider must submit a concept plan
to the Town Clerk at least 15 days before the Plan Commission meeting.
It must be in sufficient detail to determine the nature of the above
conditions and comply with the plat requirements checklist, § 475-19.
The concept plan will be reviewed as it relates to:139
(1) Topography.
138. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
139. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 475-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-15
1:421
(2) The improvements, design, dedications or reservations required by
these regulations.
(3) Continuity to existing development within 300 feet of all
boundaries.
(4) Regulations as set down by Ch. 236, Wis. Stats.
(5) Regulations established by the Wisconsin Administrative Code as
regulated by the State Department of Safety and Professional
Services for on-site septic systems.
(6) Regulations established by the Wisconsin Administrative Code as it
relates to highway regulations.
C. Preliminary plat review within the Town.
(1) Before submitting a final plat for approval, the subdivider shall
prepare a preliminary plat in accordance with this chapter
complying with the plat requirements checklist, § 475-19, and Ch.
236, Wis. Stats. The subdivider shall file 16 copies of the plat, a
draft of protective covenants whereby the subdivider intends to
regulate land use in the proposed subdivision and a letter of
application with the Town Clerk at least 15 days prior to the
meeting of the Plan Commission at which action is desired. The
letter of application must indicate that copies of the plat are on file
with the utility companies having jurisdiction over the subject area
so that required easements can be determined.
(2) The subdivider shall also submit the original preliminary plat to the
State Department of Administration per § 236.12(2)(a), Wis. Stats.,
along with sufficient copies of the plat for retransmission by the
Department of Administration to the Department of Safety and
Professional Services and Department of Transportation in
accordance with § 236.12(6), Wis. Stats.140
(3) The Town Clerk shall transmit copies of the preliminary plat to the
Town Park Commission, Grand Chute Sanitary District, Town
Engineer, Town Building Inspector, Town Assessor, Town Director
of Public Works and an adequate number of copies to the Town Plan
Commission for review. The County Planning Agency, the State
Department of Administration, the State Department of
Transportation and the State Department of Safety and
Professional Services shall be hereinafter referred to as "objecting
agencies." The Town Board is hereby designated as approving
authority with the Town Plan Commission designated advisory for
all plats.141
140. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
141. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 475-15 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 475-15
1:422
(4) Each objecting agency shall notify the subdivider and all other
approving and objecting agencies of any objections. If there are no
objections, the objecting agency shall so certify on the face of a
copy of the plat and shall return that copy to the Town Plan
Commission. If an objecting agency fails to act within 20 days of the
date of receiving its copies of the preliminary plat, or 30 days in the
case of the Department of Administration, it shall be deemed to
have no objection to the plat.142
(5) The Town Plan Commission, within 30 days of the date of filing of
preliminary plat with the Town Clerk, shall review the preliminary
plat for conformance with this chapter and all ordinances, rules,
regulations, Comprehensive Plans and Comprehensive Plan
components which affect it and refer the preliminary plat with its
recommendation to the Town Board. The Town Board shall
approve, approve conditionally, or reject such plat within 60 days of
its submission to the Town Board. One copy of the plat shall
thereupon be returned to the subdivider with the date and action
endorsed thereon, and, if approved conditionally or rejected, a
letter setting forth the conditions of approval or the reasons for
rejection shall accompany the plat. One copy each of the plat and
letter shall be placed in the Plan Commission's permanent file.143
(6) Effect of conditional or preliminary approval. Approval or
conditional approval of the preliminary plat by the Town Board
shall be deemed an expression of approval or conditional approval
of the layout submitted as a guide to the preparation of the final
plat to be prepared and submitted by the subdivider under
Subsection D which final plat will be subject to further
consideration by the Plan Commission and Town Board at the time
of its submission. Approval of the preliminary plat does not
authorize the subdivider to proceed with the installation of site
improvements nor does it authorize the sale of lots.144
(7) Revocation of preliminary plat approval. The approval of the
preliminary plat or any time extension thereof may be revoked
upon written notice where the Plan Commission and Town Board
find that a material change in conditions has occurred affecting the
proposed subdivision, including new information regarding the
physical conditions of the site or proposed public works, which
would adversely affect to a substantial degree public health, safety
or welfare.145
142. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
143. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
144. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
145. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 475-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-15
1:423
D. Final plat review within the Town.
(1) The subdivider shall prepare a final plat and a letter of application
in accordance with this chapter complying with the plat
requirement checklist, § 475-19, and Ch. 236, Wis. Stats., and shall
file 16 copies of the plat and the application with the Town Clerk at
least 15 days prior to the meeting of the Plan Commission at which
action is desired. The subdivider shall also submit the original final
plat to the State Department of Administration per § 236.12(2)(a),
Wis. Stats., along with sufficient copies of the plat for
retransmission by the Department of Administration to the
Department of Safety and Professional Services and Department of
Transportation in accordance with § 236.12(6), Wis. Stats.146
(2) The Town Clerk shall transmit copies of the final plat to the Town
Park Commission, Grand Chute Sanitary District, Town Engineer,
Town Building Inspector, Town Assessor, Town Director of Public
Works, and adequate copies to the Town Plan Commission for
review.147
(3) Partial platting. The final plat, may, if permitted by the Plan
Commission and Town Board, constitute only that portion of the
approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to
develop at that time.148
(4) Final plat approval within the Town. Each objecting agency shall
notify the subdivider and all other approving and objecting
agencies of any objections. If there are no objections, the objecting
agency shall so certify on the face of a copy of the plat and shall
return that copy to the Town Plan Commission. If an objecting
agency fails to act within 20 days of the date of receiving its copies
of the preliminary plat, or 30 days in the case of the Department of
Administration, it shall be deemed to have no objection to the
plat.149
(5) Submission. If the final plat is not submitted within 24 months of
the last required approval of the preliminary plat, the Town Board
may refuse to approve the final plat. [Amended 12-20-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-30]
(6) The Town Plan Commission shall, within 30 days of the date of filing
of the final plat with the Town Clerk, refer the final plat with its
146. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
147. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
148. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
149. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 475-15 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 475-15
1:424
recommendation to the Town Board. [Amended 12-20-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-30]
(7) The Town Board shall, within 60 days of the date of filing the
original final plat with the Clerk, approve or reject such plat unless
the time is extended by agreement with the subdivider. If the plat is
rejected, the reasons shall be stated in the minutes of the meeting
and a written statement of the reasons forwarded to the subdivider.
(8) Failure of the Town Board to act within 60 days, the time having not
been extended and no unsatisfied objections having been filed, the
plat shall be deemed approved.
E. Subdivision performance guarantees. Each subdivider within the Town
shall be required and shall be responsible within each subdivision to
construct, install, and complete the subdivision improvements
contained in this section, and such installation shall be in accordance
with Chapter 468 of this Code setting forth new Town road
requirements and the payment for improvements. All improvements are
required to be done to the Town's standards and specifications.
(1) Subdivision streets shall be constructed and installed to Town Road
Specifications.
(2) Sanitary sewer and lift station, if necessary, shall be constructed to
the specifications of the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No.
2 and water to the specifications of the Town of Grand Chute
Sanitary District No. 1.
(3) Curb and gutter shall be constructed and installed to Town
specifications. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
(4) Storm sewers and lift stations shall be constructed if determined
necessary by the Town Board at time of final plat approval.
(5) Dedicated clear water drainage easements shall be constructed as
determined necessary by the Town Board at the time of approval of
the subdivision final plat or at such subsequent time as the
subdivision experiences clear water drainage problems. In the
latter event, the Town may assess the cost of acquisition,
construction and maintenance of clear water drainage easements
to benefitted subdivision lots.
(6) Streetlighting. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30;
2-5-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
(a) Streetlighting, including standard wooden pole/cobra head
streetlights, enhanced urban streetlights or commercial
streetlights, shall be constructed as determined appropriate by
the Town Plan Commission and approved by the Town Board at
the time of final plat approval.
§ 475-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-15
1:425
(b) The Town shall review the streetlighting based on the current
streetlighting policy and existing streetlights in the
neighborhood.
(7) Other improvements.
(a) Plantings of decorative trees and/or other plantings and/or
landscaping shall be installed as determined appropriate by
the Town Plan Commission and approved by the Town Board at
time of final plat approval.
(b) Street trees shall be planted at least one tree per lot frontage
on a public street so as not to interfere with utilities, corner
visibility or lighting. The subdivider shall identify the tree
species and location on a landscaping plan. [Amended
12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
(c) By submitting a subdivision final plat for approval to the Town
Board, the subdivider does hereby agree that all of the
municipal improvements shall be constructed and completed
by the subdivider. All such municipal improvements shall be
completed by the subdivider to the specifications of the Town
of Grand Chute. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-30]
(d) The Town and the Town Building Inspector are authorized to
withhold the issuance of all building permits within the
subdivision until all municipal improvements are substantially
complete as determined by the Town Engineer. [Amended
12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
(e) By recording the final plat, the subdivider agrees for himself
and for his assigns that any charges necessitated and incurred
by the Town in fulfillment of any of the subdivider covenants
and responsibilities above shall be charged to all benefiting
property owners as special assessments.
(f) Each subdivider submitting a final plat for approval to the
Town Board shall be required to place on the final plat
document, prior to recording, a restriction as follows:
[Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30; 2-5-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-02]
§ 475-15 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 475-15
1:426
"This final plat is subject to all of the requirements of
§ 475-15E of the Code of the Town of Grand Chute. The
subdivider, for himself and his assigns, shall be responsible for
all municipal improvements, including asphalt surface streets,
graveled road shoulders or curb and gutter, sewer and water,
sewer lift stations, storm sewers, dedicated clear water
drainage easements, and streetlighting. Pursuant to
§ 475-15E of the Code of the Town of Grand Chute, the Town
of Grand Chute reserves the right to withhold building permits
for this subdivision if the above-stated municipal
improvements have not been completed by the subdivider
according to the terms and conditions of § 475-15E. Utility
connection fees (as listed on the Town Fee Schedule) for
sewer, water and storm services shall be payable by each lot
within the platted subdivision to the Town of Grand Chute
Sanitary Districts. Furthermore, a special streetlighting
charge, in accordance with the procedures listed under
§ 57-21, Special charges for current services, shall be
assessed annually to property owners of each buildable lot
within the subdivision for the energy and facility maintenance
costs of streetlighting within the Town. Any costs due to
streetlighting in excess of the standards within the
streetlighting policy, as requested by the subdivider or
property owners, shall be assessed directly to the abutting
property owners."
(g) The Town Board shall require a subdivider to file with the Town
Clerk a performance guarantee prior to final plat approval to
ensure installation and construction of the municipal
improvements set forth above, to the standards and
specifications required of the Town of Grand Chute. The
performance guarantees are as follows: [Amended
12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
[1] Performance bond, certified check, or other satisfactory
security, payable to the Town.
[2] The performance guarantee shall be 125% of the amount
required to complete all municipal improvements.
[3] If the performance guarantee is cash, it shall be held in an
escrow fund by the Town.
(h) When the subdivider has filed a performance guarantee, and
when any required improvements have been completed and
approved, a portion of the security commensurate with the cost
of these improvements may be released and returned by the
Town Board. Requests for release of a portion of the
performance guarantee shall not occur more than once per
month, and no greater than 80% of the original amount shall be
released prior to acceptance of the municipal improvements.
§ 475-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-15
1:427
§ 475-16. Replat.
§ 475-17. Certified survey map.
In the event that a subdivider fails to install all required
municipal improvements in accordance with the recorded final
plat and this chapter, then either the security is forfeited to
the Town to be used for completion of improvements or the
Town of Grand Chute has the right to invoke the performance
bond terms and conditions. If the performance guarantee is
insufficient to complete all municipal improvements without
cost to the Town, the Town of Grand Chute retains the right
to pursue the subdivider/owner and/or performance bond
company for that amount of additional moneys the Town has
been required to expend to complete the subdivider's
obligations and responsibilities under this chapter. [Amended
12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
F. Recording the final plat. After the final plat has been approved by the
Town Board and required improvements either installed or a
performance guarantee insuring their installation is filed, the Town
Clerk shall cause the certificate inscribed upon the plat attesting to
such approval to be duly executed and the plat returned to the
subdivider for recording with the County Register of Deeds. The
Register of Deeds cannot record the plat unless it is offered within six
months from the date of last approval. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-30]
G. Copies. The subdivider shall file 10 copies of the recorded final plat with
the Town Clerk for distribution to the Town Park Commission; Grand
Chute Sanitary District, the Town Plan Commission, the Town Engineer,
Building Inspector, Assessor and Town Road Superintendent. The
subdivider shall also distribute copies to utilities, to the East Central
Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission (ECWRPC) and other
affected agencies for their files, with a copy of the transmittal to the
Town Clerk.
A. When it is proposed to replat a recorded subdivision or part thereof, so
as to change the boundaries of a recorded subdivision or part thereof,
the subdivider shall follow §§ 236.36 and 236.40 through 236.44, Wis.
Stats. The subdivider shall then proceed as specified in § 475-15 of this
chapter.
B. When necessary, the Town Clerk shall schedule a public hearing before
the Plan Commission when a preliminary plat of a replat of lands within
the Town is filed and shall cause notices of the proposed replat and
public hearing to be mailed to the owners of all properties within the
limits of the exterior boundaries of the proposed replat and to the
owners of all properties within 200 feet of the exterior boundaries of
the proposed replat.
§ 475-15 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 475-17
1:428
A. A certified survey map (CSM) shall be required for all newly created
parcels of land where the act of division will create a lot, parcel or tract
of 10 acres in area or less, except where the newly created parcel is
entirely within a recorded subdivision or where the newly created
parcel is within a previously recorded CSM. A CSM shall also be
required for all public dedications. No land included in any street,
highway or railroad right-of-way shall be included in computing lot
area.
B. If any lots to be divided are not served by public sanitary sewer,
percolation tests shall be submitted to the Town Clerk for approval by
the Town Building Inspector according to the procedure and standards
established under the rules of the State Department of Safety and
Professional Services applicable to subdivision. Failure of the Town
Building Inspector to act within 20 days shall constitute approval by the
office.
C. The Town Clerk shall transmit a copy of the map to all affected Town
boards, commissions or departments for their review and
recommendations concerning matters within their jurisdiction. Their
recommendations shall be transmitted to the Town Plan Commission
within 10 days from the date the map is filed. The map shall be
reviewed by the Plan Commission for conformance with this chapter
and all ordinances, rules, regulations, and Comprehensive Plans which
affect it. The Plan Commission shall, within 30 days from the date of
filing of the map, recommend approval, conditional approval or
rejection of the map and shall transmit the map along with its
recommendations to the Board.
D. The Board shall approve, approve conditionally, or reject such map
within 90 days from the date of filing of the map unless the time is
extended by agreement with the subdivider. If the map is rejected, the
reason shall be stated in the minutes of the meeting and a written
statement forwarded to the subdivider. If the map is approved, the
Town Board shall cause the Town Clerk to so certify on the face of the
original map and return the map to the subdivider.150
E. A performance guarantee shall be required for any proposed
improvements and shall be as prescribed in § 475-15E above. The
performance guarantee shall be 125% of the amount required to
complete all proposed improvements.151
F. Recording. The certified survey map shall be recorded with the County
Register of Deeds. When a certified survey map has been so recorded,
the parcels of land in the map shall be described by reference to the
number of the survey, the volume and page where recorded, and the
name of the county. Any land or improvements offered for dedication
150. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
151. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 475-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-17
1:429
§ 475-18. Assessor's plat.
An Assessor's plat made under § 70.27, Wis. Stats., may be ordered by the
Town Board at the expense of the subdivider when a subdivision is created
by successive divisions without complying with this chapter.
§ 475-19. Plat requirement checklist.
and noted on the certified survey map shall be deeded at the time of
recording, unless otherwise arranged.
G. Copies. The subdivider shall file 10 copies of the recorded certified
survey map with the Town Clerk for distribution to the Town Engineer,
the Building Inspector, Assessor, utilities and other affected Town
departments for their files. The subdivider shall also file copies with the
East Central Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission (ECWRPC), with
copies of the transmittal sent to the Town Clerk.
A. Concept plan.152
(1) Title, scale, North arrow and date must be shown.
(2) The scale should not be less than 200 feet to the inch and should be
on a topographical survey map. It may be a freehand sketch on a
print of such a map and must show:
(a) Subdivision boundaries and proposed use.
(b) General street and lot layout, including streets, utilities and
other features adjacent and within 300 feet of the proposed
subdivision.
(c) Approximate location of trees and other prominent physical
features.
(3) Must show a location map. It may be freehand in the same
orientation as the concept plan and must show:
(a) Municipal boundaries.
(b) Subdivision location and boundaries.
(c) Location of existing facilities which serve or influence the
subdivision, e.g., schools, parks, main traffic arteries, shopping
centers, utilities, etc.
(4) Must show total acreage of subdivision and number of lots
proposed and the typical width and depth of lots.
(5) Name, phone number and address of subdivider or his agent.
152. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 475-17 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 475-19
1:430
(6) Approximate square footage of each lot.
B. Preliminary plat.
(1) It shall be clearly marked "preliminary plat" and shall be in
sufficient detail to determine whether the final plat will meet all
requirements of this chapter.
(2) Title, scale, North arrow and date must be shown.
(3) The scale shall not be less than 100 feet to the inch and shall be
drawn on a topographical survey map having contour intervals of
no more than two feet between intervals.
(4) Must show the location and dimensions of:
(a) Existing, planned and proposed streets, public facilities or
land, easements, existing buildings, watercourses, drainage
ditches and other such features.
(b) Facilities or land offered for dedication or reserved for public
or other use as indicated.
(c) Contour lines/elevation points.
(d) Owners of adjoining land.
(e) Blocks and lots in consecutive order.
(5) It must have a neighborhood location map showing subdivision
location and surrounding roads, etc., in the same orientation as the
preliminary plat.
(6) It must have a feasibility report on sewage and water facilities.
(7) Must show zoning classification, land use and minimum lot sizes
within and adjacent to the subdivision.
(8) Must be a drawing of all present and proposed street grades and
facilities for sanitary sewer, water and stormwater drainage.
(9) There must be a draft of all types of restrictions placed on the land
which will become covenants in the deeds for lots shown on the
final plat when submitted. These covenants should encourage a
variety of dwelling types and developments suitable to the site.
(10) Must show total acreage of subdivision, number of lots proposed,
the typical width, depth and approximate square footage of lots,
and total street length.
(11) Name, telephone number and address of the subdivider or his
agent.
C. Final plat.
§ 475-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-19
1:431
(1) It shall show the corrected and finalized data from the preliminary
plat.
(2) A final plat shall comply with the provisions of Ch. 236, Wis. Stats.,
and the following more restrictive requirements:
(a) Subdivision performance guarantee as per § 475-15E.
§ 475-19 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 475-19
1:432
ARTICLE III
Design Standards
§ 475-20. Location of site.
§ 475-21. Design of site.
A. General plan. The location and design of all divisions of land must
conform to any applicable Comprehensive Plan.
B. Zoning. The use of land in all divisions of land must conform to any
applicable municipal, Town or county zoning ordinances; however,
larger lots and setbacks may be required where conditions warrant.
C. Objectionable areas. Land subject to hazards of life, health, or property
as may arise from fire, floods, disease, noise, or falling aircraft or
considered to be uninhabitable for other reasons may not be subdivided
for building purposes unless the hazard has been eliminated or the
plans show adequate safeguards correcting the hazards have been
approved by the Town.
D. Nearby development. All divisions of land shall be coordinated with
existing nearby development or neighborhoods so that the area as a
whole shall be developed harmoniously.
A. Natural features.
(1) Preservation. In all divisions of land, care shall be taken to preserve
all natural and historic features which will add attractiveness and
value to the remainder of the land being divided (i.e., trees,
watercourses, views, and historic structures).
(2) Hillside development. Where a division of land is on a site that has
a slope of more than 12%, the Plan Commission may require larger
lot sizes than are zoned and may reduce setback requirements
upon proper appeal.
(3) Water frontage and surface drainage.
(a) The damming, filling or relocating or otherwise interfering
with the natural flow of surface water along any surface water
drainage channel or natural watercourse shall not be
permitted except with approval of the Plan Commission or any
other affected agency. Building setback lines shall be
established no less than 75 feet from the high-water line of any
stream, lake or water body to prevent construction of any
structure other than a dam, bridge, boathouse, retaining wall,
bulkhead or revetments in the setback area.
(b) See Outagamie County Shoreland Ordinance requirements for
lot size, setbacks, well location, location of on-site absorption
systems, etc.
§ 475-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-21
1:433
(4) Planting screens. The Town shall require planting or buffering
easements, extra lot depth or width alongside heavily traveled
highways where lots are backed into the roadway; along zoning
district lines; as buffer strips separating residential zoning districts
from commercial or industrial land uses; as buffer zones along
railroad rights-of-way; or for any such use as may be deemed
appropriate and consistent with the total development of the
community.
B. Street arrangement.
(1) Location principles. The streets shall be properly located and
designed with regard to:
(a) Existing and planned streets.
(b) Topographic conditions.
(c) Public convenience and safety, including facilitating fire
protection and pedestrian traffic.
(d) The proposed uses of land to be served by the streets.
(e) Anticipated traffic volumes.
(f) Further subdivision possibilities with suitable access to
abutting properties.
(g) Any other principles as may be deemed significant to protect
the public interest by the Town.
(2) Coordination of existing street pattern. The arrangement,
character, extent, width, grade, location and engineering
specifications of all streets shall conform to the standards of this
chapter, adopted municipal or county plans and any official
highway maps. If there is Comprehensive Plan or Official Map, the
arrangement of streets in a division of land shall provide for the
continuation or appropriate projection of existing streets into
surrounding areas, subject to topographic conditions, public
convenience, safety, and proposed uses of land to be served. Where
a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way, the
Commission may require a street approximately parallel with and
on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for the
appropriate use of the intervening land. Such distances shall also
be determined with regard for the requirements of approach
grades and future grade separations.
(3) Subdivision abutting arterials.
(a) Where a proposed subdivision abuts or contains an existing or
proposed street right-of-way as designed on the Official Map of
the Town, or as may be determined by the Commission,
adequate protection of existing or proposed development,
§ 475-21 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 475-21
1:434
limitation of access and separation of through and local traffic
shall be handled as follows:
[1] Reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a
nonaccess reservation along the rear property line;
[2] By frontage streets; or
[3] By having development front on a perpendicular street to
the primary right-of-way.
(b) When lots within the proposed subdivision back upon the rightof-
way of an existing or proposed limited access highway or a
railroad, a planting easement at least 15 feet in width shall be
provided adjacent to normal lot depth. This easement shall be a
part of the platted lots but shall have the following restriction
lettered on the face of the plat: "This strip reserved for the
planting of trees and shrubs, the building of structures hereon
prohibited."
(c) Streets parallel to a limited access highway or railroad right-ofway,
when intersecting a major street and highway, said
intersection shall be located a minimum distance of 250 feet
from said limited access highway or railroad right-of-way. Such
minimum distance shall be determined with due consideration
of the minimum distance required for the future separation of
grades by means of appropriate approach gradients.
(4) Street design.
(a) Arterial street. An arterial street provides for movement of
through traffic from one area of the community to another.
(b) Collector street. A collector street carries traffic between
minor streets and arterial streets and also provides access to
abutting properties.
(c) Minor street. A minor street primarily provides access to
abutting properties. It does not serve through traffic and does
not intersect with arterial streets.
(d) Cul-de-sac. Culs-de-sac designed as permanent installations
should not be longer than 1,000 feet, except where
topographical and site conditions warrant an extension, and
will be subject to the approval of the Commission. The closed
end shall have a turnaround with an outside roadway diameter
of at least 96 feet and a street property line diameter of 120
feet for a residential area and a diameter of 135 feet with an
outside roadway diameter of 105 feet in a commercial area.
(Refer to the 2009 International Fire Code and evaluate with
the Community Development Department.)153
§ 475-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-21
1:435
(e) Alley. Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial
districts, except that the Commission may waive this
requirement where other definite and assured provision is
made for service access, such as off-street loading and parking,
adequate for the uses proposed. Alleys shall be prohibited in
residential areas unless necessary because of topography or
other exceptional circumstances. The width of the alleys shall
not be less than 30 feet. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided
where possible, but if unavoidable shall be provided with
adequate turnaround facilities at the dead end, as determined
by the Commission.
(f) Half streets. Half streets shall not be permitted except:
[1] To complete a street, the other half of which is already
dedicated and accepted; or
[2] To conform to the major thoroughfare plan or an Official
Map.
(g) Reserve strips. Reserve strips controlling access to streets
shall be prohibited except where the control is definitely
placed with the Town under conditions approved by the Plan
Commission.
(5) Intersections.
(a) Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect at right angles.
(b) Intersection approach areas should not exceed a grade of 2%
on all approaching streets for a distance of 50 feet from the
intersecting points of the right-of-way lines.
(c) The minimum turning radius at an intersection shall not be less
than 25 feet.
(d) Proper sight line easements, referred to as vision triangle
areas, shall be maintained at all street intersections; measured
along the intersecting right-of-way lines, there shall be a clear
sight triangle easement with two sides as follows: state and
federal highways, as defined by the WDOT Facilities
Development Manual; arterial streets, 60 feet; collector
streets, 60 feet; and minor streets, 25 feet. No visual
obstructions, such as but not limited to structures, parking,
fencing or vegetation, shall be permitted in any district
between the heights of 2 1/2 feet and 10 feet above the mean
edge of pavement grade within the limits of this area. See the
illustration. [Amended 3-5-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
153. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 475-21 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 475-21
1:436
(e) The distance between intersections of minor or collector
streets with arterials should not be less than 800 feet, and they
shall be in alignment with existing and planned streets
entering the arterial from the opposite side, unless approved
by the Town Board. In no case shall intersection center lines be
offset less than 125 feet.
(6) Street grades.
(a) Streets shall have a minimum center-line grade of 0.5% and
shall not exceed grades specified as follows; these figures can
be adjusted where deemed necessary by the Town:
[1] Arterial and collector streets: 6% maximum.
[2] Minor street: 10% maximum.
(b) All changes in street grades shall be connected by vertical
curves of minimum length equivalent in feet to 15 times the
algebraic difference in the rates of grade for major streets and
1/2 this minimum for all other streets.
(7) Width. All street rights-of-way shall be the width specified by local
ordinance. Where no local or county ordinance applies, the
provisions of § 236.15(2), Wis. Stats., shall apply and the
Commission shall impose minimum standards as established by
§ 82.50, Wis. Stats., for improvements on Town roads.
(8) Curves. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced
between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets and a fiftyfoot
tangent on minor streets. The minimum radii or curvature on
the center line shall be 300 feet minimum radius for arterial
streets, 200 feet minimum radius for collector streets, and 100 feet
minimum radius for minor streets.
C. Easements. Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines
shall be designed for utilities where necessary and shall be at least 15
feet wide. Electric and telephone lines shall be planned along rear lot
lines wherever possible. The Plan Commission shall determine the
feasibility of burying utility lines. Where a subdivision is traversed by a
watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, there shall be provided
a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way not less than 30 feet in
§ 475-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-21
1:437
width, conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourses.
Parallel streets or parkways may be required in connection therewith.
D. Storm drainage. Storm sewers, culverts and related facilities shall be
designed to permit the unimpeded flow of natural watercourses, ensure
the drainage of all low points along the line of streets, and provide
positive drainage away from on-site sewage disposal facilities. Storm
drainage facilities must be designed not only to handle the anticipated
peak discharge from the property being subdivided but also the
anticipated increase in runoff that will occur when all the property at a
higher elevation in the same drainage basin is fully developed. Where
adequate existing storm sewers are readily accessible, the subdivider
shall connect his stormwater facilities to these existing sewers. In the
design of storm drainage facilities, special consideration shall be given
to preventing excess runoff onto adjacent property. Where a storm
drainage outlet will abut another property, sufficient and adequate
engineering safeguards shall be designed in the plat to prevent damage
to adjoining property. Sloped drainage channels must be protected
against erosion.
(1) Stormwater retention.
(a) Purposes. The intent of this section is to protect property and
structures from damage caused by increased surface water
runoff due to commercial, industrial and residential
development.
(b) Standards. Surface water runoff after development shall not
exceed the peak rate/volume of flow at predevelopment
conditions. The twenty-five-year frequency storm shall be the
basis to determine both preconstruction and post-construction
surface water runoff.
(c) Plan. A stormwater retention plan shall be submitted with the
preliminary plat. The plan shall be designed, stamped and
signed by a registered professional engineer. The plan shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
[1] Soil types, infiltration characteristics of the soil, amount of
available detention area, type of vegetative cover, amount
of impervious cover and time response to runoff.
[2] The plan shall be compatible with natural drainageways
and existing man-made drainageways and easements.
[3] The plan shall identify bridges, regional drainage patterns,
water boundaries, pipes, culverts, catch basins,
waterways, ditches, and detention and retention basins
and indicate respective size, dimensions and grades of
each.
§ 475-21 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 475-21
1:438
[4] All drainageways and associated structures shall lie within
maintenance easements and such easements shall be
shown on the final plat.
[5] The direction of surface water flow shall be shown by
arrows.
[6] The plan shall be designed in accordance with the United
States Department of Agriculture Technical Release No.
55, Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds.
[7] The plan shall be accompanied by calculations showing
preconstruction and post-construction surface water
runoff.
[8] A statement shall be included indicating how runoff
resulting from construction will affect downstream areas
and adjacent property owners.
[9] The statement shall indicate methods that will be used to
protect downstream areas and adjacent property owners
from damage caused by increased surface water runoff.
[10] A covenant shall be recorded with the final plat or shall be
placed on the final plat. The covenant shall state that:
[a] Maintenance of all drainageways and associated
structures within the subdivision or serving the
subdivision is the sole responsibility of the property
owners of the subdivision, unless noted on the plan.
[b] Upon failure of the property owners to perform
maintenance of the drainageways and associated
structures; the Township retains the right to perform
maintenance and/or repairs. The payment of said
maintenance and/or repairs shall be equally assessed
among the property owners of the subdivision with a
drainage covenant.
(2) Surface water drainage restrictions. No drainageway contained
within a drainage easement shall be disturbed, except as provided
in Subsection A(3), in accordance with the following:
(a) No artificial obstruction may be constructed, planted or
maintained within any man-made or natural drainageway so
that such obstruction impedes the natural flow of water and/or
diminishes the natural esthetic quality of the drainageway.
(b) Lot boundaries shall be made to coincide with new and/or
preexisting man-made and natural drainageways to avoid the
creation of lots that can be built upon by altering such
drainageways.
§ 475-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-21
1:439
(c) Exceptions. Surface water shall not be regarded as unduly
retained or diverted if:
[1] The retention or diversion results from a technique,
practice or device deliberately installed as part of an
approved sedimentation or stormwater runoff control plan.
[2] The retention or diversion is not substantially different in
location or degree than that experienced by the
development site in its predevelopment stage, unless such
a retention presents a danger to health or safety.
[3] The retention or diversion results from the actions of
natural obstructions, whereby maintenance shall be
performed by the property owners as described in
Subsection D(1)(c)[10].
[4] The retention or diversion has been allowed or required by
the Plan Commission or the Town Board and noted on the
approved drainage plan.154
E. Sanitary sewers. In areas that have a sanitary sewer system on or near
the proposed subdivision, the Town Sanitary District shall determine
the feasibility of service and the requirements to be followed by the
subdivider. In areas that are not to be served by a sewer system, on-site
subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be permitted only where soil
tests and feasibility reports are satisfactory as regulated by the
Wisconsin Statutes.
F. Water facilities. Where there is an existing public water supply system
on or near the subdivision, the Town Sanitary District shall determine
the feasibility of connection to this system. Where there is a community
water supply system, connection must be approved by the engineer of
the water utility company holding the franchise covering the land to be
subdivided and by the Wisconsin State Department of Safety and
Professional Services. Where there is no existing public water supply
and no community water supply, individual water supply systems will be
permitted in accordance with minimum standards approved by the
Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services and
Department of Natural Resources. See Ch. NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.155
G. Blocks. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined by
provisions for building sites suitable to meet the needs of the type of
use contemplated; Zoning Ordinance requirements pertaining to lot
size and dimensions; need for convenient access, circulation, control
and safety of street traffic; and limitations and opportunities of
topography. Block lengths shall normally not exceed 1,800 feet or be
154. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
155. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 475-21 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 475-21
1:440
less than 1,000 feet in length. Pedestrian easements or dedications
not less than 10 feet wide shall be required where deemed necessary
to provide access to playgrounds, schools, shopping centers, or other
community facilities.
H. Lots and building location. The lot size, width, depth, shape, orientation
and minimum building lines shall be appropriate for the location of the
subdivision and for the type of development and use proposed. Lot
dimensions shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 535, Zoning,
or as may be determined by soil capability ratings and by the County
Shoreland Ordinance. Corner lots shall have increased width to permit
adequate setback from both streets. Every lot in a subdivision shall abut
on a public street for at least 33 feet. Side lot lines shall be substantially
at right angles to the street lines. Double frontage shall be avoided
except where essential to provide separation of residential development
from traffic arteries or to overcome particular topographic and
orientation disadvantages.
(1) Access. Every lot shall front or abut on a public street and have
direct vehicular access to that public street for a distance of at least
33 feet. Direct vehicular access does not include the use of
easements.
(2) Depth. Lots shall be designed with a suitable proportion between
width and depth. Neither long, narrow or wide, shallow lots are
normally desirable. The use of "flag" lots (as illustrated below) shall
be prohibited, except to overcome specific topographic or
environmental restrictions. Depth shall not exceed 2.5 times the
width nor shall it be less than 120 feet. Flag lot examples:
I. Filling. Where any land is to be filled more than six inches above an
adjacent property, a grading plan must be approved by the Plan
Commission.
J. Street names. No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be
confused with the name of an existing street within the same
§ 475-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-21
1:441
§ 475-22. New roads.
Requirements for new roads and subdivision improvements contained in
Chapter 468, Streets and Sidewalks, also apply where applicable to
requirements under this chapter.
community. Streets that are extensions, or obviously are in alignment
with existing named streets, must bear the names of those streets.
Street names must be approved by the Town and county.
K. Commercial and industrial areas. The land division shall be designed
with consideration of site conditions to permit the best possible layout
to serve the public; to permit good traffic circulation and the parking of
cars; to make delivery and pickup efficient; to design individual units so
that they blend with the whole; to provide for the most efficient
arrangement of space for present use and future expansion; and to
provide adequate and safe space for worker and customer access and
parking. A development plan of this nature shall be accompanied by a
plan indicating general landscape treatment intended.
§ 475-21 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 475-22
1:442
ARTICLE IV
Required Improvements
§ 475-23. Survey monuments.
The subdivider shall install survey monuments placed in accordance with
the requirements of § 236.15, Wis. Stats., witnessed with a T-type post at
least five feet long, or four inches by four inches by six feet long, chromated
copper arsenate (CCA) ground contact treated timbers and as may be
required by the Town Engineer.
§ 475-24. Grading.
After the installation of temporary block corner monuments by the
subdivider and establishment of street grades, the subdivider shall grade
the full width of the right-of-way of all streets proposed to be dedicated in
accordance with plans and standard specifications approved by the Town
Board. The subdivider shall grade the roadbeds in the street right-of-way to
subgrade.
§ 475-25. Surfacing.
A. All roadways and streets to be accepted by the Town Board must be
finish grade with gravel fill to the specifications of the Town Board.
B. At a minimum, the roadway or street shall be hard surfaced with
asphalt according to the specifications given by the Town Board. A copy
of such minimum specifications is on file with the Town Clerk.
C. After the street has been brought to the hard surface specifications of
the Town, at the cost of the person dedicating the street or the
subdivider, as the case may be, then the Town will take over and
maintain the same. Repairs required to the hard surface as a result of
defects in the hard surface construction or in the construction below
the hard surface shall be the responsibility of the person dedicating or
the subdivider for a period of one year after acceptance of the street by
the Town, and a performance guarantee shall be required to insure the
payment for such repairs.
D. Where a street is installed and the person dedicating the street or the
subdivider desires to delay the installation of the hard surface of the
street, then the person dedicating the street or the subdivider shall
furnish to the Town a satisfactory guarantee to cover the full
installation of the hard surface street, subject to § 475-15E of this
chapter.
§ 475-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-26
1:443
§ 475-26. Curb and gutter.156
Curb and gutter are generally required for local streets. When required or
proposed, the subdivider shall construct concrete curbs and gutters and
storm sewer facilities in accordance with minimum design specifications
as approved by the Town Board. Wherever possible, provisions shall be
made at the time of construction for driveway access curb cuts. The cost of
installation of all inside curbs and gutters for boulevard pavements shall be
borne by the subdivider.
§ 475-27. Rural street sections.
When permanent rural street sections have been approved by the Town
Board, the subdivider shall finish grade all shoulders and road ditches,
install all necessary culverts at intersections and, if required, surface ditch
inverts to prevent erosion and sedimentation in accordance with plans and
standard specifications approved by the Town Board.
§ 475-28. Sidewalks.
The Town may require sidewalks where it deems necessary in accordance
with plans and standard specifications approved by the Town Board.
§ 475-29. Sewage disposal.
A. The subdivider shall construct sanitary sewers in such a manner as to
make adequate sanitary sewerage service available to each lot within
the subdivision. If public sewer facilities are not available, the
subdivider shall make provision for adequate private sewage disposal
systems as specified by the Town, state and county. The Plan
Commission may require the installation of sewer laterals to the street
lot line. If, at the time of final platting, sanitary sewer facilities are not
available to the plat but will become available within a period of five
years from the date of plat recording, the subdivider shall install or
cause to be installed sanitary sewers and sewer laterals to the street lot
line in accordance with this section and shall cap all laterals as may be
specified by the Town Engineer. The size, type and installation of all
sanitary sewers proposed to be constructed shall be in accordance with
plans and standard specifications approved by the Town Board.
B. The subdivider shall assume the cost of installing all sanitary sewers
eight inches in diameter or less in size. If greater than eight-inch
diameter sewers are required to handle the contemplated sewage
flows, the cost of such larger sewers shall be prorated in proportion to
the ratio which the total area of the proposed plat is to the total
drainage area to be served by such larger sewer and the excess cost
either borne by the Town or assessed against the total tributary
drainage area.
156. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 475-26 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 475-30
1:444
§ 475-30. Stormwater drainage facilities. [Amended 6-16-2004]
§ 475-31. Public water supply facilities.
§ 475-32. Other utilities.
A. The subdivider shall construct stormwater drainage facilities, which
may include curbs and gutters, catch basins and inlets, culverts, storm
sewers, road ditches and open channels, as may be required. All such
facilities are to be of adequate size and grade to hydraulically
accommodate maximum potential volumes of flow, the type of facility
required, the design criteria and the sizes and grades to be determined
by the Town Engineer. Storm drainage facilities shall be so designed as
to present no hazard to life or property, and the size, type, and
installation of all stormwater drains and sewers proposed to be
constructed shall be in accordance with the plans and standard
specifications approved by the Town Engineer.
B. If greater than twenty-four-inch diameter storm sewers are required to
handle the contemplated flows, the cost of such larger sewers shall be
prorated in proportion to the ratio which the total area of the proposed
plat is to the total drainage area to be served by such larger sewer and
the excess cost either borne by the Town or assessed against the total
tributary drainage area.
C. Storm sewers shall be required for all segments of a subdivision plat.
Mini storm sewers may be approved depending on the topography,
neighboring lands, and drainage patterns.
D. All sump pumps shall be connected to a storm sewer when available or
can be made available in accordance with § 220-31D(3). All discharges
of sump pumps to finished grade for reasons of nonconnection,
nonavailability of storm sewer or disconnection of a previously
connected system must meet all of the provisions of § 220-31D(3).
[Added 7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 07-2017]
A. The subdivider shall construct water mains in such a manner as to make
adequate water service available to each lot within the subdivision. If
municipal water service is not available, the subdivider shall make
provision for adequate private water systems as specified by the Town,
state and county. The Plan Commission may require the installation of
water laterals to the street lot line. The size, type, and installation of all
public water mains proposed to be constructed shall be in accordance
with plans and standard specifications approved by the Town Engineer.
B. The subdivider shall assume the cost of installing all water mains eight
inches in diameter or less in size. If greater than eight-inch diameter
water mains are required, the excess cost of such mains over and above
the cost of a eight-inch main shall be borne by Sanitary District No. 1.
[Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
§ 475-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-32
1:445
§ 475-33. Streetlights. [Amended 2-5-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
A. The subdivider shall cause gas, electrical power and telephone facilities
to be installed in such a manner as to make adequate service available
to each lot in the subdivision. No such electrical or telephone service
shall be located on overhead poles along the front lot lines unless
otherwise allowed due to exceptional topography or other physical
barrier. The subdivider shall consult with the various utility companies
to determine the feasibility of burying utility lines.
B. Plans indicating the proposed location of all gas, electrical power and
telephone distribution and transmission lines required to service the
plat shall be approved by the particular utility having jurisdiction.
A. Before the subdivision may be approved or before any street is
accepted in any subdivision, all utilities, including streetlighting as
prescribed by the Town, shall be installed. Streetlighting will be
required to be installed in accordance with the current streetlighting
policy, and the cables shall be buried or shall be overhead installation to
suit the other utilities in the subdivision. The subdivider shall be
responsible for the initial installation of all streetlighting, as required
herein, which payment shall be made in full and satisfied with the
power company prior to the acceptance of the subdivision.
B. Upon acceptance of the subdivision, all electrical and facility costs
thereafter for streetlights installed as part of the subdivision shall be
paid by an annual special streetlighting charge on all buildable lots in
accordance with the procedures listed under § 57-21, Special charges
for current services.
C. The Town of Grand Chute may exempt streets in subdivisions from the
requirements of the streetlighting but must do so in writing before the
acceptance of the street or subdivision. In the event that it is
substantially inconvenienced or the subdivider is unable to perform the
streetlighting at the time of the acceptance of the subdivision, a
performance guarantee may be approved by the Town in an amount
sufficient to complete the improvement as required and shall specify a
satisfactory date for completion of the improvements or a forfeiture of
the bond.
D. The standards or amount of required streetlighting shall be in
accordance with the current streetlighting policy and shall not be
regulated by any applicable standards of the power company with
regard to its recommendations as to required lighting.
E. Streetlight types required on any town street may include standard
wood pole/cobra head streetlights, enhanced urban streetlights or
commercial streetlights in accordance with the current streetlighting
policy and determined appropriate in the discretion of the Town Plan
Commission and approved by the Town Board.
§ 475-32 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 475-34
1:446
§ 475-34. Street name signs.
The subdivider shall install at the intersection of all streets proposed to be
dedicated a street name sign of a design specified by the Town.
§ 475-35. Subdivision plantings and landscaping.
Each subdivider shall plant such decorative trees and/or other plantings of
a species acceptable to and in accordance with plans or specifications set by
the Town Park Commission and/or Town Board or as imposed by the Town
Plan Commission subject to Town Board approval.
§ 475-36. Lot grading.
The Plan Commission shall require that a grading plan be submitted prior
to the approval of a preliminary plat.
§ 475-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-36
1:447

ARTICLE V
Construction
§ 475-37. Commencement of construction or installation of
improvements.
No construction or installation of improvements shall commence in a
proposed subdivision until the final plat has been approved and the Town
Board has given written authorization and the performance guarantee has
been accepted by the Town.
§ 475-38. Building permits. [Amended 7-15-2003]
No building permits shall be issued for erection of a structure on any lot
of record until all the requirements of Chapter 220, § 220-28E and F have
been met.
§ 475-39. Plans and specifications.
The following plans and accompanying construction specifications shall
be required by the Town Board before authorization of construction or
installation of improvements:
§ 475-40. Inspection.
The subdivider, prior to commencing any work within the subdivision, shall
make arrangements with the Town Engineer to provide for adequate
inspection at the subdivider's expense. The Town Engineer shall inspect and
approve all completed work prior to release of the performance guarantee.
§ 475-41. Responsibility for establishment of grades.
A. Street plans and profiles showing existing and proposed grades, soil
conditions, elevations and cross sections of required improvements.
B. Sanitary sewer plans and profiles showing the locations, grades, sizes,
elevations and materials of required facilities.
C. Storm sewer plans and profiles showing the location, grades, sizes,
cross sections, elevations and materials of required facilities.
D. Water main plans and profiles showing the locations, sizes, elevations
and materials of required facilities.
E. Planting plans showing the locations, age and species of any required
street trees.
F. Surface water drainage plan.
G. Additional special plans or information as required.
A. Before the final subdivision plat may be approved, and before any street
is accepted within any subdivision, the subdivider or engineer for said
§ 475-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-41
1:449
§ 475-42. Highway noise abatement.
subdivider shall see that on all final plats submitted for approval to the
Town Board there is established all final road grades, driveway culvert
grades, open ditch drainage grades and sidewalk grades (if applicable).
Such grades (culvert grades and ditch grades) shall be established
by proper engineering symbols upon the final surface water drainage
plan at the side yard lines. The subdivider and the engineer for the
subdivider shall be responsible for setting and staking all such grades.
B. If the subdivider, or the engineer for the subdivider, or the then
property (lot) owner has not fulfilled the obligations of this section and
the Town shall incur any costs for correcting improperly established
and/or staked grades, the subdivider, or the engineer for the subdivider,
or the property (lot) owner shall be responsible for reimbursing the
Town for all costs incurred to correct any such failure.
C. All of the duties and responsibilities hereunder of a subdivider and the
engineer for a subdivider are also applicable to any person requesting
Town Board approval of any certified survey map or plat of survey.
D. Either the subdivider or the engineer for the subdivider shall file with
the Town a statement of compliance with this section, as above
established; the subdivider or the then property (lot) owner shall be
required to adjust any culvert grades, at no expense to the Town, when
the Town issues final approval/building permit, which will then
establish the driveway and culvert grades.
A. Terminology. All terminology used in this section, not defined below,
shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body. As used in
this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL — The sound-pressure level in decibels
as measured on a sound-level meter using the A-weighting network.
The level so read is designated dB(A) or dBA.
COMMERCIAL AREA — As defined in Chapter 535, Zoning (CL, CR and
CP).
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection,
substantial repair, alteration, or similar actions, but excluding
demolition, for or of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities
or similar property.
DECIBEL (dB) — A unit for measuring the volume of a sound equal to
20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the
sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals
(20 micronewtons per square meter).
EQUIVALENT A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL (Leq) — The equivalent
steady-state sound level which in a stated period of time contains the
same acoustic energy as the time-varying sound level during the same
§ 475-41 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 475-42
1:450
period. For purposes of measuring or predicting noise levels, a receptor
is assumed to be at ear height, located five feet above ground surface.
"Leq(h)" means the hourly value of Leq.
HABITABLE ROOM — Any room meeting the requirements of the
Uniform Building Code or other applicable regulations which is
intended to be used for sleeping, living, cooking or dining purposes,
excluding such enclosed spaces as closets, pantries, bath or toilet
rooms, service rooms, connecting corridors, laundries, unfinished
attics, foyers, storage spaces, cellars, utility rooms and similar spaces.
INDUSTRIAL AREA — As defined in Ch. 535, Zoning (IND).
LOCAL PLANNING AGENCY (LPA) — The municipal agency or
department having lead responsibility for this section.
OUTDOOR LIVING AREA — Spaces that are associated with residential
land uses typically used for passive recreational activities or other
noise-sensitive uses. Such spaces include patio areas; barbecue areas;
residential play areas; outdoor patient recovery or resting areas
associated with hospitals, convalescent hospitals, or rest homes; and
outdoor school facilities routinely used for educational purposes which
may be adversely impacted by noise. Outdoor areas usually not
included in this definition are front yard areas, driveways, greenbelts,
maintenance areas, and storage areas associated with residential land
uses; exterior areas at hospitals that are not used for patient activities;
outdoor areas associated with places of worship and principally used
for short-term social gatherings; and outdoor areas associated with
school facilities that are not typically associated with educational uses
prone to adverse noise impacts (for example, school play yard areas).
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership, or corporation,
and includes any officer, employee, department, agency or
instrumentality of a state or any political subdivision of a state.
RESIDENTIAL AREA — As defined in Ch. 535, Zoning (RSF, RTF and
RMF).
SOUND — An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle
velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces
that cause compression and rarefaction of that medium. The
description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound,
including duration, intensity and frequency.
SOUND LEVEL — The weighted sound-pressure level obtained by the
use of a sound-level meter and frequency weighting network, such
as A, B, or C as specified in American National Standards Institute
specifications for sound-level meters (ANSI S1.4-197, or the latest
approved revision thereof). If the frequency weighting employed is not
indicated, the A-weighting shall apply.
SOUND-LEVEL METER — An instrument which includes a microphone,
amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter, and
weighting networks used to measure sound-pressure levels.
§ 475-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-42
1:451
B. General provisions.
(1) No owner of any land adjacent to an existing county, state or
federal highway or adjacent to a planned transportation corridor
shall commence or cause to be commenced construction of any
structure unless approved by the Plan Commission.
(2) Any application for approval required shall be submitted in writing
to the Plan Commission by the owner of the land on which the
structure is proposed to be constructed and shall contain the
following information:
(a) Identification of the land on which the construction is
proposed.
(b) The section under which approval is requested.
(c) Information and data supporting the claim that the appropriate
requirements will be met.
(d) Any other information which the Plan Commission may
reasonably require.
C. Construction restrictions for habitable and institutional structures.
(1) No new single-family residential structure shall be approved for
construction (excluding substantial repair or alteration) if any
exterior hourly traffic sound level Leq(h) anywhere within a
proposed outdoor living area is projected to be equal to or in excess
of 67 dBA upon completion of the structure or anytime thereafter.
(2) No new multifamily residence, dormitory, mobile home park,
transient lodging, school, hospital, nursing home or similar
structure, or substantial modification of such existing structure,
shall be approved for construction if any exterior hourly traffic
sound level Leq(h) anywhere within a proposed outdoor living area
on the site is projected to be equal to or in excess of 67 dBA upon
completion of the structure or modification or anytime thereafter.
(3) Construction otherwise prohibited shall be allowed if there are no
outdoor use areas on the site of the proposed structure projected to
be exposed to an hourly traffic sound level, Leq(h), equal to or in
excess of 67 dBA and provided that there is incorporated into the
design and construction of the structure such sound attenuation
measures as are necessary to reduce the maximum interior hourly
traffic induced sound level, Leq(h) in a habitable room to 52 dBA
upon completion of the structure or modification or anytime
thereafter.
(4) Prior to issuance of any building permit for any structure regulated
pursuant to Subsection B, the owner of the structure shall submit
to the Plan Commission and Building Inspector plans and
specifications identifying the sound attenuation measures to be
§ 475-42 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 475-42
1:452
incorporated into the design and construction of the structure to
meet the interior Leq(h) criteria.
(5) The Plan Commission and Building Inspector may conduct such
inspections and measurements as are necessary to ensure the
proper implementation of the sound attenuation measures
proposed pursuant to Subsection C(4) and to ascertain compliance
with this section.
D. Recreational area restrictions.
(1) No land shall be designated or approved for construction or use as
a public or private exterior recreational area, including but not
limited to children's playgrounds, outdoor theaters and
amphitheaters, picnic grounds, tennis courts and swimming pools,
if any exterior hourly traffic sound level, Leq(h), anywhere on the
site of the proposed recreational areas is projected to be equal to or
in the excess of 67 dBA upon completion of the construction or
designation of the site or anytime thereafter.
(2) This section shall not apply to the designation or approval of any
greenbelt or open space in any area in which the noise level
exceeds the level specified in Subsection D(1) regardless of
whether such greenbelt or open space is open to public use,
provided that no recreational improvement or facility is
constructed thereon.
(3) Designation or approval of exterior recreational area otherwise
prohibited under Subsection D(1) shall be allowed if the noise level
specified in that subsection can be achieved by appropriate means
of sound attenuation, such as berms, barriers, or buildings, at the
perimeter of or elsewhere on the site.
(4) No new interior recreational facility, including but not limited to
gymnasiums, ice or roller skating rinks, indoor swimming pools,
and tennis courts, shall be approved for construction if the hourly
traffic sound level, Leq(h), anywhere on the site is projected to be
equal to or in excess of 67 dBA upon completion of the structure or
anytime thereafter, unless there is incorporated into the design and
construction of the structure such sound attenuation measures as
are necessary to reduce the maximum hourly traffic induced sound
level, Leq(h), to 52 dBA
E. Site study requirement.
(1) If the Plan Commission has reason to believe that a full report is
necessary to determine whether a proposed project is prohibited,
such report shall be made by the applicant prior to approval of any
subdivision, zoning or building permit application. (If a full report
has not been presented and the applicant believes the project was
wrongfully prohibited, he may file a full report within 21 days of the
Plan Commission decision and request reconsideration). A full
§ 475-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-42
1:453
report shall contain the following information which the Plan
Commission may reasonably require:
(a) The existing maximum hourly traffic sound level, Leq(h), for a
representative sample of locations, measured in accordance
with guidelines presented in Sound Procedures for Measuring
Highway Noise: Final Report, August 1981, United States
Department of Transportation, Federal Highway
Administration, Arlington, VA, or modeled according to a
methodology consistent with the methodology in the FHWA
Highway Traffic Noise Prediction Model (Report No. FHWARD-
77-108);
(b) The projected future Leq(h) at the site resulting from future
traffic increases; and
(c) Where applicable, plans for sound attenuation measures on
site and/or of the structure proposed to be built and the
amount of sound attenuation anticipated as a result of these
measures.
(2) In determining whether an applicant should be required to submit
a full report pursuant to Subsection E(1), the Plan Commission
shall consider the Wisconsin Department of Transportation's
Administrative Code Chapter Trans 405 and the Federal Highway
Administration's Procedures for Abatement of Highway Traffic
Noise and Construction Noise, Title 23, Code of Federal
Regulations, Chapter I, Subchapter H, Part 772.
F. Zoning ordinance or comprehensive plan.
(1) No proposed zoning ordinance or comprehensive plan for land
adjacent to an existing county, state or federal highway or planned
transportation corridor shall be approved unless such plan includes
a sound analysis which:
(a) Identifies existing and projected traffic noise levels, dBA,
Leq(h) for 20 years in and around the area under
consideration; and
(b) Ensures usage of adequate measures to avoid violation of any
provision of this section.
(2) No zoning change application shall be approved unless the site
feasibility study submitted, as required by the Plan Commission,
contains an analysis which:
(a) Shows the impact of existing and projected traffic noise levels,
dBA, Leq(h) for 20 years on the intended use; and
(b) Ensures the use of adequate measures to avoid violation of any
provision of this section.
§ 475-42 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 475-42
1:454
G. Truth in selling or renting. No person shall sell or rent, or cause to be
sold or rented, any structure constructed after July 9, 1993, or property
to be used for human habitation where the structure or property as
defined in Subsection A is exposed to sound levels regularly equal to or
in excess of 67 dBA, Leq(h), without making full written disclosure to all
potential buyers or renters of the existence of such sound levels and of
the nature of the sources.
§ 475-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-42
1:455
Chapter 480
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 515.
§ 480-1. License required.
No person shall for hire transport passengers or offer taxicab or similar
transportation services to the public within the Town of Grand Chute nor
shall any person solicit passengers to be transported for hire within the
Town unless duly licensed to do so by the Town Board.
§ 480-2. Application for license.
Application for license to convey passengers for hire shall be made in
writing to the Town Clerk upon forms furnished by the Town Clerk giving
the address from which the business is conducted and shall be signed by the
owner of the vehicle. This application shall also state the number of vehicles
proposed to be covered by such license, and each license number for the
various vehicles shall be stated on the application.
§ 480-3. Hearing; grant or denial of license.
A. This chapter shall not apply to the following vehicles:
(1) Vehicles operated over a regular route or between fixed terminals.
(2) Vehicles operated solely as funeral cars.
(3) Vehicles operated pursuant to permit issued by the Public Service
Commission of Wisconsin.
(4) Buses, funeral cars, medical transport vehicles, or vehicles rented
to be driven by renters, commonly referred to as "rent-a-cars."157
B. Pursuant to § 349.24, taxicabs and limousines licensed in another
municipality are not required to procure a license from the Town of
Grand Chute.158
A. Upon the filing of the application, the Town Clerk shall notify the
applicant and all interested parties of the time and place set for a public
hearing before the Town Board. At such time, the Town Board shall
examine the public convenience and necessity of granting such license
157. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
158. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 475-42 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 480-3
1:456
§ 480-4. Renewal of license.159
All licenses now or hereafter issued by the Town Board may be renewed
from year to year upon the payment of the annual license fee and the
deposit of a certification or policy of insurance as required by this chapter;
provided, however, that if charges are filed with the Town Board against any
license holder, such license shall not be renewed or shall not be granted
until after a hearing is had and the Town Board makes determinations
regarding the public convenience and necessity regarding the license.
§ 480-5. License fee.
The application shall be accompanied by a license fee as prescribed in
the Town Fee Schedule. Before a license is granted by the Town Board,
the application shall be approved or disapproved after investigation by the
Police Department and its presiding officer.
§ 480-6. Identification of taxicabs.
Each taxicab licensed under this chapter shall have painted in a prominent
place on its exterior a number by which it may be easily identified. Said
number shall be placed on licensed taxicabs according to specifications and
under the direction of the Police Department.
§ 480-7. Insurance.160
No vehicle for the conveyance of passengers shall be operated or licensed
hereunder until the applicant for license deposits with the Town Clerk a
sufficient policy of insurance issued by an insurance company licensed to
do business in the State of Wisconsin which shall provide that the insurance
company shall be liable for damages in the minimum amount of $500,000,
representing a combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage
liability for any accident due to the negligent operation of such vehicle. The
policy or contract is to be approved as to legal form by the Town's Attorney
before it is filed and shall contain a provision that the same shall not be
canceled before the expiration of the term except upon 30 days' written
and shall determine whether the public convenience and necessity will
be served by the granting of the application.
B. Thereafter, the Town Board shall, upon the basis of its determination
gathered at said public hearing, grant or deny the license upon the
basis or determination of public convenience and necessity. The Town
Board may hold additional or further hearings as it may deem necessary
or advisable regarding the question of this determination.
159. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
160. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 480-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-7
1:457
notice to the Town Clerk and shall include the Town of Grand Chute as an
insured.
§ 480-8. Police inspection.
The Police Department may inspect taxicabs at any time for the purpose of
discovering defects that might make them unsafe for the transportation of
passengers, and when defects are found, said taxicabs shall not be operated
for the transportation of passengers until the same have been repaired
and until said repairs have been approved by the Police Department. Any
taxicabs added to the fleet after the application for a license shall be
inspected by the Police Department prior to operation.
§ 480-9. Posting fares.
The fares that are established by any licensee for the transportation of
passengers shall be printed in letters not less than 1/2 inch high and posted
in a conspicuous place in all cabs.
§ 480-10. Taxicab drivers.
A. A taxicab driver must be a person of at least 18 years of age and must
make written application to the Town Clerk for a taxicab driver's license
on forms furnished by the Town Clerk, giving the name, address and
age and whether or not he or she has been convicted of a felony, the
type of state driver's license that has been issued to him/her and also
stating the experience and the number of the state driver's license. The
application must be accompanied by the license fee as prescribed in the
Town Fee Schedule, and after the applicant has been granted a license,
he/she shall obtain a suitable badge or identification card from the
Town Clerk which must be displayed on the licensee's person whenever
he/she is driving or operating a taxicab. The cost of the driver's badge
or card is to be borne by the licensee.161
B. No driver's license shall be issued to any applicant who is the holder of
a state occupational driver's license.
C. The license of any applicant who makes a false statement in his/her
application shall be void and the license shall be surrendered to the
Chief of Police or any member of the Police Department upon demand.
D. Any taxicab driver licensed under this section who shall be found guilty
or shall plead guilty to violations of the Traffic Code of the Town of
Grand Chute162 three times within any one year shall have his/her
license automatically revoked.
161. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
162. Editor's Note: See Ch. 515, Vehicles and Traffic.
§ 480-7 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 480-11
1:458
§ 480-11. Off-street parking of licensed vehicles.
Before a license shall be issued under this chapter, the licensee must
provide adequate off-street parking for the vehicles to be licensed. Such offstreet
parking shall be stated in the application for the license.
§ 480-12. Violations and penalties.163
Chapter 492
TRACKS
§ 492-1. License required.
No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall be allowed to operate
or maintain or allow upon any premises in the Town of Grand Chute any
racetrack, stock car track, karting track or any track or concourse not a
public highway upon which any gasoline engine, electric engine or steam
engine propelled vehicle shall travel without first obtaining a license as
herein required. This chapter shall not apply to snowmobile events or tracks
regulated under Chapter 515, Vehicles and Traffic, of this Code. The license
period hereunder shall be semiannual and shall expire April 30 or October
30 following the date of issuance.
§ 492-2. Application for license.
Every application for a license shall be made upon a blank furnished by the
Town Clerk and verified and shall contain the name, place of residence, age,
and occupation of the applicant, the purposes for which a license is desired,
A. A first violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules,
together with the costs of prosecution, and on default of the payment of
any such fine and/or costs of prosecution such person shall be
committed to the county jail of Outagamie County until such fine and
costs are paid, but not to exceed 90 days.
B. Any person violating this chapter who shall previously have been
convicted of a violation of this chapter shall, upon proof and conviction
thereof, forfeit an amount as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and
Bond Schedules, together with the costs of prosecution, and on default
of the payment of any such fine and costs of prosecution, or either of
them, such convicted person shall be committed to and confined within
the county jail of Outagamie County, Wisconsin, until such fine and
costs of prosecution are paid, but not to exceed six months.
C. Each day of violation under this chapter shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
163. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 480-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 492-2
1:459
and the place where and the time when and the terms and conditions for
which he proposes to carry on the track or concourse to be licensed.
§ 492-3. Issuance of license; fee.
Upon the filing of the application as provided in the preceding section, the
Town Board shall, upon the approval of such application and the payment to
the Town Clerk or Town Treasurer of the license fee hereinafter provided,
issue to the applicant a license. The semiannual license fee hereunder
shall be as prescribed in the Town Fee Schedule. Said license issued shall
continue in force until April 30 or October 30 next succeeding the date of
issuance thereof unless sooner revoked as provided by law.
§ 492-4. Use of premises.
The licensed premises shall at all times be kept, maintained and used
in strict conformity with the provisions of any state law, county or Town
ordinance or bylaw and the rules and regulations of every public authority
pertaining thereto.
§ 492-5. Revocation of license.
Upon sufficient verified complaint stating the facts of such violation being
made in writing by any Town official or resident of the Town to the Town
Clerk that any licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or
of law, the Town Board shall, upon 10 days' notice, summon such licensee
to appear before it at the time specified in the summons, a copy of said
complaint being served therewith, to show cause why the license shall not
be revoked. The Board shall proceed to hear the matter, and if it finds that
the allegations of said complaint are correct, the license shall be revoked.
Whenever any license shall be revoked, no refund of any unearned portion
of the fee therefor shall be made and no license shall be granted to any
person, firm, partnership, or corporation whose license has been revoked
within a period of three years from the date of such revocation.
§ 492-6. Financial guarantee.
All licensees shall issue to the Town Board an annual surety or cash bond
of $1,000 to guarantee that the track premises shall be restored to its prior
natural condition (state), and in the case of established tracks, permanent
in nature, said bond shall be issued to guarantee that at the finish of
each track sport season, all race vehicles covered by this chapter shall
be removed from the licensed premises. This bond requirement shall be a
condition precedent to the issuance of a license under § 492-1 above.
§ 492-7. Violations and penalties.164
164. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 492-2 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 492-7
1:460
Chapter 497
TREES AND SHRUBS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 398.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 409.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 423.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 468.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 475.
§ 497-1. Definitions.
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this chapter, they shall
be construed to have the following meanings:
BOULEVARD OR TERRACE AREAS — The land between the normal location
of the street curbing, edge of the street and sidewalk. Where there is no
sidewalk, the area four feet from the curbline shall be deemed to be a
boulevard for the purpose of this chapter. "Boulevard" shall have the same
meaning as "terrace." Where there are only sidewalks, the area four feet
from the curb shall be deemed boulevard area under this chapter.
EVERGREEN TREE — Any woody plant normally having one stem or trunk
and bearing foliage in the form of needles and crowns which extends from
ground level throughout its entire height.
FORESTER — Person designated by the Town Board as authorized to carry
out provisions of this chapter.
MAJOR ALTERATION — Trimming a tree beyond necessary trimming to
comply with this chapter.
A. A first violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules,
together with the costs of prosecution, and on default of the payment of
any such fine and/or costs of prosecution such person shall be
committed to the county jail of Outagamie County until such fine and
costs are paid, but not to exceed 90 days.
B. Any person violating this chapter who shall previously have been
convicted of a violation of this chapter shall, upon proof and conviction
thereof, forfeit an amount as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and
Bond Schedules, together with the costs of prosecution, and on default
of the payment of any such fine and costs of prosecution, or either of
them, such convicted person shall be committed to and confined within
the county jail of Outagamie County, Wisconsin, until such fine and
costs of prosecution are paid, but not to exceed six months.
C. Each day of violation under this chapter shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
§ 492-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 497-1
1:461
PERSON — Person, firm, association or corporation.
PUBLIC AREAS — Includes all public parks and other lands owned,
controlled or leased by the Town except the terrace areas.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Any tree or shrub or part thereof which, by reason
of its condition, interferes with the use of any public area; is infected with
a plant disease; is infested with injurious insects or pests; is injurious to
public improvements; or endangers the life, health, safety or welfare of
persons or property.
PUBLIC TREES AND SHRUBS — All trees and shrubs located or to be
planted in or upon public areas.
SHRUB — Any woody vegetation or a woody plant having multiple stems
and bearing foliage from the ground up.[Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-30]
TOWN — Town of Grand Chute, Wisconsin.
TREE — Any woody plant normally having one stem or trunk bearing its
foliage or crown well above ground level to heights of 16 feet or more.
§ 497-2. Town Forester; right of entry. [Amended 12-20-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-30]
The Street Superintendent shall serve as Town Forester and shall carry
out the provisions of this chapter. The Town Forester or his/her authorized
representative may enter upon private premises at all reasonable times
for the purpose of examining any tree or shrub located upon or over such
premises and carrying out any of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 497-3. Interference with Forester.
No person shall interfere with the Town Forester or his/her authorized
representative while he is engaged in carrying out any work or activities
authorized by this chapter.
§ 497-4. Trimming.
A. Trees and shrubs standing in or upon any boulevard or public area or
upon any private premises adjacent to any public right-of-way or public
areas shall be kept trimmed so that the lowest branches projecting over
the public street or alley provide a clearance of not less than 14 feet.
Such trimming may only be done by Town employees or authorized
persons under contract with the Town. The Town Forester may waive
the provisions of this section for newly planted trees if he determines
that they do not interfere with public travel, obstruct the light of any
streetlight or endanger public safety.
B. The necessity of the pruning may be determined by the Town Forester.
C. Clearance from sidewalk to lower branches shall not be less than eight
feet above the level of the sidewalk. No tree shall be permitted to grow
§ 497-1 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 497-4
1:462
§ 497-5. Obstruction of intersections or traffic signs.
in such a manner as to obstruct the proper diffusion of light from any
public lamp.
A. Obstruction by trees, shrubs, fences, walls, signs or other structures.
(1) Prohibited obstructions within intersection vision triangle areas.
No person shall maintain trees, shrubs or other vegetation, fences,
walls, signs and other structures in the vision triangle area which
obstruct the necessary view of the driver of a motor vehicle on a
public street or private driveway or which interfere with the
driver's control. The vision triangle area is defined as that part of a
corner lot bordered by any two existing or proposed intersecting
street or alley right-of-way lines and a line joining points on such
lines located a minimum of 25 feet from their intersection or as
required by § 475-21B(5)(d). In said vision triangle, fences, walls,
signs or other structures shall not exceed 2 1/2 feet in height
measured from the mean edge of pavement elevation within the
limits of the vision triangle. In the vision triangle area, trees,
shrubs and other vegetation shall be maintained to provide
unobstructed vision from 2 1/2 feet above the mean edge of
pavement elevation within the limits of the vision triangle to 10 feet
above said edge of pavement elevation. [Amended 3-5-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-07]
(2) Duties of the Street Superintendent. It shall be the duty of the
Street Superintendent or his representative to enforce this section
by appropriate order giving the offending party 30 days to remove
or correct the situation. Said order shall be served by certified mail.
Where the home is in joint tenancy, service on one of the
homeowners shall be presumed service on the other.
(3) Appeals of orders of the Forester. All appeals of orders issued by
the Street Superintendent shall be made within 15 days of the
service of the order and shall be addressed to the Town Clerk and
the matter heard by the Town Board.
B. Other obstructions. It is unlawful for any person to plant, cause to grow,
allow to grow or maintain any trees, bushes, shrubbery or vegetation of
any kind which is an obstruction to the clear and complete vision of any
traffic sign or driveway approach to a street in the Town.
§ 497-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 497-5
1:463
§ 497-6. Damage to public trees; excavations and construction near
trees.
C. Removal of obstruction. Any shrub, tree or other plant which obstructs
the view at an intersection or the view of a traffic sign shall be deemed
to be dangerous to public travel, and the Town Forester may order, by
written notice, the owner or occupant of any private place or premises
on which there stands a tree or shrub which unreasonably interferes
with or encroaches upon the street or sidewalk to take such steps as are
necessary to remove such interference. If such owner or occupant fails
within 10 days of receipt of notice to take such necessary steps, the
Street Superintendent shall order the Town employees to remove the
interference. The cost of removing the interference shall be levied and
collected as a special tax upon the property upon which or in front of
which such tree or shrub stands.
D. Penalty. Any person who is an owner or occupant or firm or corporation
failing to obey the written notice of the Forester as specified in
Subsection C above shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
forfeiture as established in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules.
A. Damage to public trees. No person shall, without the consent of the
owner in the case of a private tree or shrub or without written permit
from the Town Forester in the case of a terrace area tree, public tree or
shrub, perform or cause to be performed by others any of the following
acts:
(1) Secure, fasten or run any rope, wire sign, unprotected electrical
installation or other device or material to, around or through a tree
or shrub.
(2) Break, injure, mutilate, deface, kill or destroy any tree or shrub or
permit any fire to burn where it will injure any tree or shrub.
(3) Permit any toxic chemical, gas, smoke, oil or other injurious
substance to seep, drain or be emptied upon or about any tree or
shrub or place cement or other solid substance around the base of
the same.
(4) Remove any guard, stake or other device or material intended for
the protection of a public tree or shrub or close or obstruct any
open space about the base of a public tree or shrub designed to
permit access of air, water and fertilizer.
(5) Attach any sign, poster, notice or other object on any tree or fasten
any guy wire, cable, rope, nails, screws or other device to any tree,
except that the Town may tie temporary "No Parking" signs to trees
when necessary in conjunction with street improvement work, tree
maintenance work or parades.
(6) Cause or encourage any fire or burning near or around any tree.
§ 497-5 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 497-6
1:464
§ 497-7. Tree disease nuisances. [Added 12-20-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-30]
B. Excavations. All trees on any parkway or other publicly owned property
near any excavation or construction of any building structure or street
work shall be sufficiently guarded and protected by those responsible
for such work as to prevent any injury to said trees. No person shall
excavate any ditches, tunnels or trenches or install pavement within a
radius of 10 feet from any public tree without a permit from the Town
Forester.
C. Refusal to abate nuisance. No person shall permit any public nuisance
to remain on any premises owned or controlled by him when ordered by
the Forester to abate such nuisance. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-30]
A. The Town Board declares contagious tree diseases and insect pests to
be public nuisances, for the loss of trees growing on public and private
premises within the Town will substantially depreciate the value of
public and private property, impair the use and enjoyment of public and
private premises, and erode the tax base of the Town. [Amended
3-5-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-04]
B. Definitions. As used in this section, unless otherwise clearly indicated
by the context, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PERSON — Person, firm or corporation.
PUBLIC NUISANCES — [Amended 3-5-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-04]
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Owned or controlled by the Town, including,
without limitation because of enumeration, public sites, parks,
playgrounds, streets, alleys, sidewalks, boulevards, and the terrace
strip between the lot line and the curb or improved portion of any public
way.
Any tree or part thereof which by reason of its condition and
location is hazardous or dangerous to persons and property using
or upon any public street, sidewalk, alley, park or other public or
private place, including the terrace strip between the curb and lot
line.
(1)
Any tree infected with or fatally damaged by any contagious tree
disease.
(2)
(3) Any tree infected with or fatally damaged by insect pests.
C. Inspections.
(1) The Town Forester shall inspect or cause to be inspected all
premises and places within the Town to determine whether any
public nuisance exits thereon. He/she shall also inspect or cause
the inspection of any elm tree reported or suspected to be infested
§ 497-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 497-7
1:465
with Dutch elm disease or any elm bark bearing materials reported
or suspected to be infested with elm bark beetles.
(2) Whenever necessary to determine the existence of Dutch elm
disease or elm bark beetles in any tree, the person inspecting such
tree shall remove or cut specimens from the tree in such manner as
to avoid fatal injury thereto and deliver such specimens to the
Forester who shall forward them to the Wisconsin Department of
Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection at Madison for
analysis to determine the presence of such nuisances.
(3) The Forester and his/her agents or employees shall have authority
to enter upon private premises at reasonable times for the purpose
of carrying out any of the provisions of this section.
D. Abatement of nuisances; duty of Forester.
(1) The Forester shall order, direct, supervise and control the
abatement of public nuisances as defined in this section by
spraying, removal, burning or by other means which he determines
to be necessary to prevent as fully as possible the spread of Dutch
elm disease fungus, other deleterious tree diseases or the insect
pests or vectors know to carry such diseases.
(2) Whenever the Forester after inspection or examination shall
determine that a public nuisance as herein defined exists on public
property in the Town, he/she shall immediately abate or cause the
abatement of such nuisance in such manner as to destroy or
prevent as fully as possible the spread of Dutch elm disease, other
deleterious tree diseases, or the insect pests or vectors know to
carry such disease fungus.
(3) When the Forester shall determine with reasonable certainty that a
public nuisance exists upon private premises, he/she shall
immediately serve or cause to be served personally or by registered
mail upon the owner of such property, if he/she can be found, or
upon the occupant thereof a written notice of the existence of such
nuisance and of a time and place for a hearing, not less than 14
days after service of such notice, on the abatement action to be
taken. Such notice shall describe the nuisance and recommend
procedures for its abatement and shall further state that unless the
owner shall abate the nuisance in the manner specified in the
notice or shall appear at the hearing to show that such nuisance
does not exist or does not endanger the health of trees in the Town,
the Forester shall cause the abatement thereof at the expense of
the property served. If the owner cannot be found, such notice shall
be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Town.
(4) If, after hearing held pursuant to this subsection, it shall be
determined by the Town Board that a public nuisance exists, it shall
forthwith order the immediate abatement thereof. Unless the
§ 497-7 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 497-7
1:466
property owner abates the nuisance as directed within five days
after such hearing, the Forester shall proceed to abate the
nuisance and cause the cost thereof to be assessed against the
property in accordance with the procedures provided in this
section. The Forester may extend the time allowed the property
owner for abatement work but not to exceed 10 additional days.
E. Spraying.
(1) When the Forester shall determine that any tree or part thereof is
infected with a deleterious or fatal tree disease or is in a weakened
condition or harbors elm bark beetles, he may cause all trees within
a one-thousand-foot radius thereof to be sprayed with an effective
disease-destroying concentrate or other insecticide.
(2) In order to facilitate the work and minimize the inconvenience to
the public of any spraying operations conducted under this
subsection, the Forester shall cause to be given advance public
notice of such operations by newspaper, radio, television, public
service announcements or other effective means and shall also
cause the posting of appropriate warning notices in the areas and
along the streets where trees are to be sprayed at least 24 hours in
advance of spraying. When any residue or concentrate from
municipal spraying operations can be expected to be deposited on
any public street, the Forester shall also notify the Chief of Police,
who shall take all necessary steps to make and enforce temporary
parking and traffic regulations on such streets as conditions
require. Temporary "No Parking" notices shall be posted in each
block of any affected street at least 24 hours in advance of spraying
operations.
(3) When appropriate warning notices and temporary "No Parking"
notices have been given and posted in accordance with Subsection
E(2) of this Section, the Town shall not allow any claim for damages
to any vehicle caused by such spraying operations.
(4) When trees on private property are to be sprayed, the Forester
shall notify the owner of such property and proceed in accordance
with the requirements of Subsection D(3).
F. Assessment of costs of abatement.
(1) The entire cost of abating any public nuisance, spraying trees or
trimming trees located on public property shall be borne by the
Town.
(2) The cost of abating a public nuisance or spraying elm trees or elm
wood located on private premises when done at the direction and
under the supervision of the Forester shall be assessed to the
property on which such nuisance, tree or wood is located.
§ 497-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 497-7
1:467
§ 497-8. Tree brush disposal. [Added 12-20-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-30]
G. To prevent the spread of oak wilt, no person shall prune, cut, or
otherwise injure any oak tree on public or private property between
April 1 and August 1 in any year, except for instances where emergency
pruning is necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare, or
pruning is authorized in advance by the Town Forester, provided that
any person pruning a tree during this time shall immediately apply
wound dressing to each cut as well as the cut surface of stumps from
living noninfected oaks. [Added 3-5-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-04]
A. The Town provides three alternatives for the disposal of brush from
trees:
(1) Property owners/residents may take brush to the Outagamie
County Landfill.
(2) Property owners/residents may use public dropoff sites as provided
by the Town.
(3) Town-provided residential tree brush chipping service. This service
is intended to assist residents of single-family and two-family
properties with the disposal of brush from trees when the resident
has trimmed or pruned trees on his property. This service is not
intended to provide tree brush removal service when a commercial
service has been hired to trim, prune or remove trees or large
amounts of tree brush created as described in Subsection C.
B. Brush chipping will be provided to residents once per month utilizing
garbage pickup routes. Chipping will normally start on Tuesdays and it
will not be necessary for the resident to call his location in. Brush shall
be out by 7:00 a.m.
(1) Tuesday garbage pickup route will have chipping services provided
starting the first Tuesday of the month.
(2) Wednesday garbage pickup route will have chipping services
provided starting the second Tuesday of the month.
(3) Thursday garbage pickup will have chipping services provided
starting the third Tuesday of the month.
(4) Friday garbage pickup will have chipping services provided
starting the fourth Tuesday of the month.
C. Rules and regulations.
(1) Maximum amount of brush per stop is not to exceed 480 cubic feet,
calculated on a loose brush pile four feet high by 10 feet long by 12
feet deep.
§ 497-7 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 497-8
1:468
§ 497-9. Appeals. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
Any person who receives a determination or order under this chapter from
the Town Forester and objects to all or any part thereof shall have the right
to appeal such determination or order to the Town Board within seven days
of receipt of the order, and the Town Board shall hear such appeal within 30
days of receipt of written notice of the appeal. After such hearing, the Town
Board may reverse, affirm or modify the order of determination appealed
from and the grounds for its decision shall be stated in writing. The Town
Board shall, by letter, notify the party appealing the order or determination
of its decision with 10 days after the hearing has been concluded. The Town
Board shall file its written decision with the Town Clerk.
§ 497-10. Adoption of state statutes.
Sections 27.09 and 86.03, Wis. Stats., are hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference.
(2) Brush is to be stacked neatly and loosely along the shoulder or curb
of the road. Cut ends are to face the road.
(3) Brush shall be no larger than 12 inches in diameter and not to
exceed 75 pounds in weight.
(4) Brush should be no shorter than three feet in length.
(5) There shall be no root balls, stumps, or construction material.
D. Monthly chipping service is not available between November 1 and
March 31 of the following year, except for the Christmas tree disposal
program.
E. During instances of severe weather or other similar conditions, the
Town Chairperson or designee has the authority to suspend the normal
operations and amend the operations as outlined by this plan for the
good and safety of the public.
F. Brush piles in violation of the tree chipping policy will be red tagged.
Each red tag issued will include the nature of the violation and
employee number. Anybody in violation of this section will be given one
week from the date of violation to comply. Failure to comply will result
in the Department of Public Works removing the brush on the next
scheduled pickup day or sooner if the Street Superintendent or his
designee deems the violation a public nuisance. The property owner in
noncompliance will be charged a stop fee as well as an hourly charge
calculated to the quarter hour. Property owners that bring the brush
pile into compliance will not be charged. Any outstanding charges not
paid prior to October 31 of the year service was provided shall be added
to the property owner's real estate tax bill as a special charge.
§ 497-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 497-11
1:469
§ 497-11. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-20-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-30]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
due conviction thereof, forfeit an amount as prescribed in the Uniform
Forfeiture and Bond Schedules for each such offense, together with the
costs of prosecution, and in default of the payment of such forfeiture and
costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail until said forfeiture and costs of
prosecution are paid, but not to exceed 30 days.
Chapter 515
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 398.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 415.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 480.
§ 515-1. State traffic laws adopted. [Amended 4-15-1997;
12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
A. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the statutory
provisions in Chs. 340 to 348 and 350 and §§ 941.01 and 941.30, Wis.
Stats., describing and defining regulations with respect to vehicles and
traffic for which the penalty is a forfeiture only, excluding penalties to
be imposed and procedure for prosecution, are hereby adopted and by
reference made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Any act
required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated
herein by reference is required or prohibited by this section. Any future
amendments, revisions, or modifications of the statutes incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this section in order to secure
uniform statewide regulation of traffic on the highways, streets, and
alleys of the state.
B. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the rules of
the Wisconsin Department of Transportation promulgated under Ch.
110, 347 or 348, Wis. Stats, including but not limited to the regulatory
provisions in Ch. Trans 305, Wis. Adm. Code, except rules pertaining to
federal motor carrier safety standards, describing and defining
regulations for which the penalty thereof is a forfeiture, excluding
penalties to be imposed and procedure for prosecution, are hereby
adopted and by reference made a part of this section as though fully set
forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any
such regulation incorporated herein by reference is required or
prohibited by this section. Any future amendments, revisions, or
modifications of said rules and regulations incorporated herein are
intended to be made part of this section in order to secure uniform
§ 497-11 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 515-1
1:470
§ 515-2. State-approved speed zones. [Amended 3-21-2000;
4-7-2005; 2-23-2006]
statewide regulation of vehicles on the highways, streets and alleys of
this state.
A. A traffic and engineering investigation having been made on the
following described highways, the maximum permissible speed at
which vehicles may be operated on said highways, which speed is
herewith established as reasonable and safe pursuant to § 349.11, Wis.
Stats., shall be as set forth herein, subject to approval by the
Department of Transportation and upon the erection of standard signs
giving notice thereof: [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
(1) Twenty-five miles per hour.
Name of Street Location
Abendroth Street
Abitz Road
Alvin Street
Anita Court
Anita Street
Apache Court
Apache Place
Apple Creek Court
Apple Creek Road
Applegate Drive
Appleton Street
Associated Drive
Behm Court
Big Bend Drive
Birch Street
Bittersweet Court
Blossom Drive
Bluebell Lane
Bluemound Circle
Bluemound Court
Bluemound Drive North of CTH OO and south of
College Avenue
Blueridge Drive
Boardwalk Court
Bonita Street
§ 515-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 515-2
1:471
Name of Street Location
Brewster Street
Brookview Drive
Buran Way
Butte Des Morts Court
Buttercup Court
Capitol Court
Capitol Drive East of USH 41
Caribou Court
Casaloma Drive North of Capitol Drive to terminus
Century Court
Chappell Court
Chappell Drive
Cherrywood Court
Chicory Court
Chicory Lane
Chippewa Street
Christina Street
Cloudview Court
Cloudview Drive
College Avenue North and South Frontage Roads
Connies Court
Cortland Drive
Cottonwood Court
Cottonwood Drive
Country Run Drive
Crab Apple Court
Creek Valley Lane
Creek Water Court
Crestway Court
Darling Street
David Street
Deerview Drive
Deerwood Court
Division Street
Duchess Court
Earthrock Road
§ 515-2 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 515-2
1:472
Name of Street Location
Edward Street
Edwin Street
Eighth Street
Elberg Avenue
Erin Drive
Evergreen Court
Evergreen Drive STH 47 to Appleton City limits
First Avenue
Flight Line Drive
Florida Avenue
Fourth Street
Fox River Road
Franklin Street
Franzke Drive
Fraser Fir Lane
Garys Lane
Gillett Street [Amended
4-3-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-07]
From CTH JJ to termini
Glendale Avenue
Glenpark Drive
Glenridge Court
Glenwood Drive
Goldenrod Drive
Golf Terrace
Grande Market Drive
Grand Meadows Drive
Grand View Road
Green Grove Road
Green Haven Court
Greenlawn Lane
Greves Court
Hammond Avenue
Hanskimmel Drive
Harvest Drive
Heather Avenue
§ 515-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 515-2
1:473
Name of Street Location
Heritage Avenue
Heritage Court
Hiawatha Drive
Hickory Farm Lane
Hietpas Street
Highland Park Avenue
Highview Drive
Highway Drive
Hill Court
Hillcrest Drive
Hilltop Court
Hine Street
Holiday Drive
Hunters Lane
Idaho Avenue
Innovation Court
Integrity Way
Inverness Circle
Jody Road
Jonathon Drive
Justin Street
Keller Park Drive
Kools Court
Kools Street
Kurt Avenue
Lanser Court
Lanser Lane
Lawrence Street
Leroy Court
Lilas Drive
Long Court
Longwood Lane
Lynndale Court
Mall Drive
Maple Hill Drive
Margaret Street
§ 515-2 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 515-2
1:474
Name of Street Location
Marquette Street
Mason Street
Maximum Drive
McCarthy Road South of STH 76 south to CTH CA
McIntosh Drive
Meadowbrook Court
Meadowbrook Lane
Meadow Row Court
Medard Place
Melmar Court
Melmar Street
Melody Lane
Memory Lane
Metro Drive
Michael's Drive
Michelle Court
Millbrook Road
Misty Lane
Montana Avenue
Morning Star Court
Morrison Street
Mulberry Court
Mutual Way
Nicolet Circle
Nicolet Road Approximately 282 feet north of
Medard Place south to private road
Northland Court
Northridge Court
Northridge Lane
North White Hawk Drive
[Added 12-20-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-41]
Oakdale Lane
Olson Avenue
Oneida Court
Oneida Street
§ 515-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 515-2
1:475
Name of Street Location
Outagamie Street
Packard Street
Park Lawn Court
Parkmoor Court
Parkridge Avenue
Parksite Place
Parkview Drive
Parkview Way
Parkway Boulevard
Periwinkle Court
Perkins Street North of STH 96
Pershing Street
Pheasant Lane
Pine Court
Pine Street
Pleasant Street
Pleasantview Court
Pleasant Way
Popp Lane
Poppy Drive
Potato Point Road
Preservation Trail
Prospect Court
Quaker Ridge Lane
Rambling Rose Drive
Ranch Road
Randall Street
Rexford Street
Ridge Haven Lane
Ridge Lane
Ridgeview Circle
Ridgeview Drive
Rifle Range Road
Roberts Avenue
Rose Court
Roselawn Drive
§ 515-2 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 515-2
1:476
Name of Street Location
Rosewood Drive
Russet Court
Rynders Street
Sandra Street
Schuh Road
Second Street
Seneca Court
Seneca Drive
Shady Lane
Shawnee Avenue
Shawnee Lane
Sherri Lin Court
Shoshone Drive
Silver Spring Drive
Sioux Court
Sioux Drive
Skylark Drive
South Pine Court
Spencer Street West to Nicolet Road
Spencer Village Court
Spicewood Lane
Springbrook Circle Drive
Spring Hollow Drive
Spring Meadow Court
Spruce Street
Stames Drive
Steven Street
Story Street
Summit Street
Suncrest Lane
Sunflower Road
Sunny Slope Court
Sunnyview Boulevard
Sunnyview Circle
Sunnyview Road
Sunrise Court
§ 515-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 515-2
1:477
Name of Street Location
Sunrise Lane
Sunset Avenue
Sunset Court
Sun Valley Court
Systems Drive
Teardrop Court
Terri Lane
Tillman Street
Timmers Lane
Trasino Way
Tri-Park Way
Twin Willow Court
Twin Willows Drive
Tyler Drive
Utah Avenue
Van Dyke Road
Vosters Road
Wagon Wheel Drive
Wayman Court
Westfield Drive
Westland Drive
West Grand Chute
Boulevard [Added
12-20-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-41]
Rifle Range Road to CTH A
Wheeler Road
Whispering Pine Court
Whitetail Way
Whitman Avenue
Whitney Drive
Wildflower Lane
Wild Rose Court
Wild Rose Lane
Wilharms Drive
William Street
Windsong Lane
§ 515-2 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 515-2
1:478
Name of Street Location
Windtree Drive
Winesap Drive
Wintergreen Drive
Woodhaven Court
Woodlark Road
Woodlawn Road
Woodman Drive
Woodside Court
Woodstone Drive
Wren Drive
(2) Thirty miles per hour.
Name of Street Location
Bluemound Drive College Avenue to STH 96
Capitol Drive [Amended
11-6-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-10]
USH 41 to McCarthy Road
Spencer Street [Added
3-6-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-04]
Nicolet Road to Mayflower Drive
(3) Thirty-five miles per hour.
Name of Street Location
Capitol Drive [Added
11-13-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-13; amended
11-6-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-10]
McCarthy Road to Mayflower Drive
Casaloma Drive CTH BB to Capitol Drive
Edgewood Drive [Added
9-1-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-14]
Mayflower Drive to termini
Elsner Road
French Road Wisconsin Avenue to USH 41
Gillett Street CTH JJ to Elsner Road
Meade Street [Added
10-7-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-15]
City limits to Broadway Drive
Meade Street South of Apple Creek Road
§ 515-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 515-2
1:479
Name of Street Location
Nicolet Road South of College Avenue to Medard
Place
Nordale Drive
Perkins Street South of STH 96
Spencer Street [Repealed
3-6-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-04]
West Evergreen Drive
[Added 11-4-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-18]
STH 47 west to cul-de-sac
West Grand Chute
Boulevard [Added
12-20-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-41]
CTH A to dead end
Westhill Boulevard
(4) Forty miles per hour.
Name of Street Location
Lynndale Drive South of USH 41
(5) Forty-five miles per hour.
Name of Street Location
French Road USH 41 to Evergreen Drive
McCarthy Road STH 15 to CTH JJ
Meade Street [Repealed
10-7-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-15]
Meade Street South of CTH JJ to Apple Creek Road
West Broadway Drive
[Added 12-16-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-13]
STH 47 to Meade Street
Wisconsin Avenue East of Ballard Road
(6) Fifteen miles per hour.
Name of Street Location
Second Avenue
B. Speed limit modifications. The Town Board of the Town of Grand Chute
hereby determines that speed limits on the following streets and roads
or portions thereof are unreasonable, unsafe or imprudent and modifies
such speed limits under authority granted by § 349.11, Wis. Stats., as
follows:
§ 515-2 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 515-2
1:480
§ 515-3. Arterial streets.
Arterial streets shall be designated by stop signs or other appropriate signs,
and every operator of a vehicle approaching such sign shall comply with
§ 346.46, Wis. Stats.
§ 515-4. Parking, stopping and standing regulated. [Amended
2-18-1998; 7-6-1999; 8-7-2001; 12-7-2004; 4-7-2005; 5-17-2005;
1-17-2006; 7-18-2006; 3-26-2007; 9-1-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-13;
1-5-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-01; 9-7-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-14]
(1) Ten miles per hour in any public park located within the Town of
Grand Chute.
(2) Fifteen miles per hour on any street or road contiguous to a public
park located within the Town of Grand Chute.
C. Any person violating any provision of this section may be fined as
prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules.
A. There is hereby established a four-way arterial stop at the corners/
intersection of Nicolet Road and West Spencer Street in the Town of
Grand Chute. The Town of Grand Chute is hereby directed to erect the
appropriate stop signs pursuant to this subsection.
A. No person shall park, stop, or leave standing any vehicle, whether
attended or unattended, temporarily or otherwise, in any of the
following places. Any additional parking limitations and restrictions
may be enacted by the Town Board and shall be filed with the Town
Clerk and be indicated upon a map posted in the Grand Chute Town
Hall.
(1) The College Avenue service road, shoulder, and right-of-way on the
south side of College Avenue from Appleton city limits to U.S.
Highway 41. The College Avenue service road, shoulder, and rightof-
way on the north side of College Avenue from Bluemound Drive
westerly to U.S. Highway 41 and 650 feet east of Bluemound Drive.
(2) All Wisconsin Avenue/U.S. Highway 96 and Lynndale Drive service
roads, shoulder and right-of-way, extending from Appleton city
limits to the westerly boundary of the Town of Grand Chute.
(3) On both sides of West Fourth Street from Bluemound Drive easterly
to Stonehedge Drive.
(4) On both sides of South Bluemound Drive from College Avenue to
Lawrence Street.
(5) On both sides of West Spencer Street from Spencer Village Court
west to Lynndale Drive.
(6) On the north side of Highview Drive from Lilas Drive westerly 650
feet.
§ 515-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 515-4
1:481
(7) On both sides of West Capitol Drive from Lynndale Drive to U.S.
Highway 41 between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday
through Friday.
(8) On the north side of Capitol Drive from a point 126 feet west of
Chappell Drive to a point 360 feet east of Chappell Drive between
the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on school days.
(9) (Reserved)165
(10)On the west side of Longwood Lane from Spring Hollow Drive
south to Twin Willows Drive.
(11) Five-minute parking on the south side of West Capitol Drive
between the two westernmost driveways immediately in front of
Houdini Elementary School, between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and
4:30 p.m. on school days.
(12)On the south side of West Pershing Street from North Lynndale
Drive east.
(13) Both sides of Casaloma Drive from existing CTH GV to Capitol
Drive at any time.
(14) East side of Nicolet Road south of Pine Street at any time.
(15) Both sides of French Road from CTH OO north for 750 feet.
(16) Fifteen-minute parking on both sides of Pershing Street east of
Tyler Drive, including the cul-de-sac.
(17) Memory Lane between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. while school is in
session.
(18) The south side of Glendale Street from Lynndale Drive east to
Perkins Street.
(19) Both sides of Evergreen Drive west of Gillett Street up to the first
driveway of Rangeview Villas.
(20) The east side of Chappell Drive from Seneca Drive to Capitol Drive
between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on school days.
[Amended 2-1-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-06]
(21) The west side of Grand Chute Boulevard from a point 200 feet
south of the private road Ryegrass Drive to the private road
Pampas Drive.
(22)On both sides of Meade Street between CTH JJ and Broadway Drive
lying within the Town. [Added 10-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-14]
165. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(9), regarding a portion of both sides of Gillett Street,
was repealed 1-21-2020 by Ord.No. 2020-03.
§ 515-4 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 515-4
1:482
(23)On both sides of Popp Lane from Wisconsin Avenue northerly 135
feet. [Added 5-19-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-08]
(24)On the north side of West Champion Drive from North McCarthy
Road to a point 115 feet east of North McCarthy Road. [Added
1-21-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-03]
(25)On the south side of West Champion Drive from North McCarthy
Road to North Silverspring Drive. [Added 1-21-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-03]
(26)On the west side of North Silverspring Drive from CTH GV to West
Champion Drive. [Added 1-21-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-03]
(27)On the east side of North Silverspring Drive from CTH GV to 115
feet north of CTH GV. [Added 1-21-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-03]
(28)On both sides of West Woodman Drive from North Westhill
Boulevard to North Bluemound Drive. [Added 1-21-2020 by Ord.
No. 2020-03]
(29)On both sides of North McCarthy Road from CTH CA to West
Capitol Drive. [Added 1-21-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-03]
(30)On both sides of West Spring Hollow Drive from North Windsong
Lane to North Longwood Lane except for a five-minute loading
zone on school days from 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on the north side of
West Spring Hollow Drive from 200 feet west of North Windsong
Lane to North Longwood Lane. [Added 1-21-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-03]
(31)On both sides of North Gillett Street from a point 175 feet north
and south of Interstate 41 and on both sides of North Gillett Street
from West Capitol Drive to 300 feet north.
(32)On the east side of North Perkins Street from the township limits to
350 feet north. [Added 1-21-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-03]
(33)On the west side of North Rexford Street from West Wisconsin
Avenue to West Randall Street. [Added 1-21-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-03]
(34)On the north side of West Randall Street from North Rexford Street
to 75 feet east. [Added 1-21-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-03]
B. The Chief of Police and the Director of Public Works are hereby
authorized to impose temporary parking restrictions and temporary
intersection control regulations on existing streets and detour routes
during street repair or reconstruction or during special events. Such
temporary regulations may be enforced like other provisions of this
chapter, and appropriate signs shall be erected in accordance with
§ 515-6.
§ 515-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 515-4
1:483
C. All-night parking regulated. [Amended 7-18-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-08]
(1) When signs have been erected at or reasonably near the corporate
limits of the Town as provided in § 349.13, Wis. Stats., no person
shall park any motor vehicle on any street or road in the Town of
Grand Chute for a period of time longer than 30 minutes between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. from November 1 of each year
to April 1 of the following year.
(2) When signs have been erected at or reasonably near any park
parking lot owned by the Town of Grand Chute indicating no
overnight parking, no person shall park any motor vehicle on any
part of the park premises outside of the park hours specified in
§ 409-4 without authorization from the Director of Public Works,
his/her designee or the Grand Chute Police Department.
(3) In addition to the penalty set forth hereinafter, any police officer
may cause any vehicle parked in violation of this subsection to be
moved to a public parking lot or garage, and the cost of moving and
storage shall be paid by the owner or operator of said vehicle, and
the law enforcement authority of the Town of Grand Chute shall
hold said vehicle until all charges of moving and storage have been
paid.
D. Snow emergencies.
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
EMERGENCY SNOWSTORM — One in which snow is gathering in
such a manner as to produce a congestion of traffic or impede the
operation of emergency vehicles.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Includes police cars, fire-fighting
apparatus, ambulances, rescue squad cars and Town-owned or
Town-hired snowplows, snow removal equipment, and machinery.
(2) Declaration of emergency. A snow emergency is in existence when
the Chairperson or his designee declares an emergency to exist in
the Town of Grand Chute by reason of an emergency snowstorm.
Said emergency is declared to continue for a period of 48 hours
after declaration or until such earlier time as snowplowing
operations have been declared completed by the Director of Public
Works.
(3) Notice of emergency. The Chairperson or his designee may declare
a snow emergency through the press, radio or other public means
of communication.
(4) Parking prohibited during emergency. No person shall park any
vehicle on any street, alley or public parking lot during the period
§ 515-4 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 515-4
1:484
of a snow emergency, or immediately thereafter, until such street,
alley or public parking lot has been cleared of snow.
(5) Removal of vehicles. Whenever such an emergency exists, as
hereinbefore defined, and any vehicles are illegally parked,
stopped, or standing in such a manner as to prevent or impede
snow clearance or removal in any manner upon any street, alley,
highway, or public parking lot, the Director of Public Works or his
designee shall be authorized to move or remove such vehicles,
where such vehicles will no longer prevent or impede such
aforesaid snow clearance or removal. Towing fees will be assessed
against the violator in addition to any and all fines.
E. Parking violation forfeitures.
(1) Any person to whom a parking violation citation has been issued for
a violation of § 346.505, Wis. Stats., pertaining to handicap parking
shall incur a forfeiture of $300, which may be paid by delivering or
direct mailing $300 and the citation to the Town of Grand Chute
Police Department within 30 days of the date of the citation.
(2) Any person to whom a parking violation citation has been issued for
violation of any overtime parking regulation shall incur a forfeiture
of $35. Said forfeiture may be satisfied by delivering or direct
mailing $20 and the citation to the Town of Grand Chute Police
Department within 10 days of the date of the citation. Failure to
satisfy the forfeiture within 10 days will result in the full forfeiture
being imposed.
(3) Any person to whom a parking violation citation has been issued for
violation of any regulation prohibiting parking during a special
event shall incur a forfeiture of $55. Said forfeiture may be satisfied
by delivering or direct mailing $40 and the citation to the Town of
Grand Chute Police Department within 10 days of the date of the
citation. Failure to satisfy the forfeiture within 10 days will result in
the full forfeiture being imposed.
(4) Any person to whom a parking violation citation has been issued for
violation of any parking regulation prohibiting stopping, standing,
or parking around a school shall incur a forfeiture of $55. Said
forfeiture may be satisfied by delivering or direct mailing $40 and
the citation to the Town of Grand Chute Police Department within
10 days of the date of the citation. Failure to satisfy the forfeiture
within 10 days will result in the full forfeiture being imposed.
(5) Any person to whom a parking violation citation has been issued for
violation of § 346.52, Wis. Stats., as adopted in § 515-1 of this
chapter, except § 346.52(2), Wis. Stats., prohibiting stopping,
standing, or parking around a school, shall incur a forfeiture of $35.
Said forfeiture may be satisfied by delivering or direct mailing $20
and the citation to the Town of Grand Chute Police Department
within 10 days of the date of the citation. Failure to satisfy the
§ 515-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 515-4
1:485
§ 515-5. Accident reports.
The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident within the corporate
limits of the Town of Grand Chute shall, within 10 days after such accident,
file with the Police Department a copy of the report required by § 346.70,
Wis. Stats., if any. If the operator is unable to make such report, any
forfeiture within 10 days will result in the full forfeiture being
imposed.
(6) Any person to whom a parking violation citation has been issued for
violation of § 346.53, Wis. Stats., as adopted in § 515-1 of this
chapter, shall incur a forfeiture of $35. Said forfeiture may be
satisfied by delivering or direct mailing $20 and the citation to the
Town of Grand Chute Police Department within 10 days of the date
of the citation. Failure to satisfy the forfeiture within 10 days will
result in the full forfeiture being imposed.
(7) Any person to whom a parking violation citation has been issued for
violation of Subsection C above prohibiting parking from 2:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m. shall incur a forfeiture of $35. Said forfeiture may be
satisfied by delivering or direct mailing $20 and the citation to the
Town of Grand Chute Police Department within 10 days of the date
of the citation. Failure to satisfy the forfeiture within 10 days will
result in the full forfeiture being imposed.
(8) Any person to whom a parking violation citation has been issued for
parking on posted private property or any other parking restriction
for which a forfeiture is not otherwise specifically established in
this section shall incur a forfeiture of $35. Said forfeiture may be
satisfied by delivering or direct mailing $20 and the citation to the
Town of Grand Chute Police Department within 10 days of the date
of the citation. Failure to satisfy the forfeiture within 10 days will
result in the full forfeiture being imposed.
(9) Any person wanting to contest a parking violation citation shall,
within 10 days of the date of issuance, file an appeal form with the
Grand Chute Police Department. Following the administrative
review, any person who is not satisfied with the results of that
review shall submit a written request for judicial review to the
office of the Town of Grand Chute Clerk of Court. The request for
judicial review shall be submitted within 30 days from the date the
parking violation citation was issued. When a timely request for
administrative or judicial review is not filed, the parking violation
citation shall be presumed to be uncontested. Forfeitures not paid
within 30 days of the parking violation citation's issuance may
result in action being commenced by the Town in accordance with
the uniform traffic procedure for nonmoving violations as set forth
in § 345.28, Wis. Stats., to include forwarding the matter to the
State Department of Transportation for enforcement under the
state traffic violation and registration program.
§ 515-4 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 515-5
1:486
occupant of the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of making such
report shall have a duty to comply with this section. Such reports shall be
subject to the provisions and limitations in §§ 346.70 and 346.73, Wis. Stats.
§ 515-6. Official traffic signs and signals.
§ 515-7. Obedience to crossing guards.
No operator of a vehicle shall fail or refuse to stop for a crossing guard or
school crossing guard when, in the performance of his or her duties, the
crossing guard so directs by use of sign or signal.
§ 515-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-7-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-14]
The penalty for violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a forfeiture
as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules, together with
costs pursuant to § 345.27, Wis. Stats., and a penalty assessment, where
applicable, as required under § 757.05, Wis. Stats., except where otherwise
set forth in this chapter.
§ 515-9. Enforcement. [Amended 9-7-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-14]
A. Authority to procure and erect signs and signals. The Police Chief, in
conjunction with the Town Director of Public Works or his designee, is
hereby authorized and directed to procure, erect and maintain
appropriate standard traffic signals, signs and markings conforming to
the rules of the State Department of Transportation giving notice of the
provisions of this chapter as required by state law. Signs shall be
erected in such location and manner as the Police Chief of the Town of
Grand Chute shall determine will best effect the purposes of this
chapter and give adequate warning to users of the streets, highways,
and roads.166
B. Removal of unofficial signs and signals. The Police Chief shall have the
authority granted by § 349.09, Wis. Stats., and is hereby directed to
order the removal of a sign, signal, marking or device placed,
maintained or displayed in violation of this chapter or § 346.41, Wis.
Stats. Any charge imposed on the premises for removal of such an
illegal sign, signal or device shall be reported to the Town Board of
Supervisors at its next regular meeting for review and certification.
A. Enforcement procedure. This chapter shall be enforced according to
§§ 66.0114 and 345.20 to 345.53 and Ch. 800, Wis. Stats.
B. Deposit.
(1) Any person arrested for a violation of this chapter may make a
deposit of money, as directed by the arresting officer, at the police
166. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 515-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 515-9
1:487
station or at the office of the Clerk of Court or by mailing the
deposit to such places. The arresting officer or the person receiving
the deposit shall notify the arrested person, orally or in writing,
that:167
(a) If he fails to appear in court at the time fixed in the citation he
will be deemed to have tendered a plea of no contest and
submitted to a forfeiture plus costs not to exceed the amount of
the deposit; or
(b) If he fails to appear in court at the time fixed in the citation and
if the court does not accept the deposit as a forfeiture, he will
be summoned into court to answer the complaint.
(2) The amount of the deposit shall be determined in accordance with
the deposit schedule established by the Wisconsin Judicial
Conference and shall include the penalty assessment established
under § 757.05., Wis. Stats., and costs. If a deposit schedule has not
been established, the arresting officer shall require the alleged
offender to deposit the forfeiture established by the Grand Chute
Municipal Court, which shall include the twenty-six-percent penalty
assessment established under § 757.05., Wis. Stats. Deposits for
nonmoving violations shall not include the penalty assessment.
(3) The arresting officer or the person receiving the deposit shall issue
the arrested person a receipt therefor as required by
§ 345.26(3)(b), Wis. Stats.
C. Stipulation of no contest. Any person charged with a violation of this
chapter, except §§ 346.62(1) and 346.63(1), may make a stipulation of
no contest pursuant to § 345.27, Wis. Stats., which shall be received at
the police station or the office of the Clerk of Court within 10 days of the
date of the alleged violation. Such person shall, at the time of entering
into the stipulation, make the deposit required under Subsection B, if
he has not already done so. A person who has mailed or filed a
stipulation under this subsection may, however, appear in court on the
appearance date and may be relieved from the stipulation for cause
shown as required in § 345.37, Wis. Stats.
D. Uniform citations. The uniform traffic citation promulgated under
§ 345.11, Wis. Stats., shall be used for all moving traffic violations
under this chapter.
E. Parking citations. Citations for all nonmoving traffic violations under
this chapter shall conform to § 345.28, Wis. Stats., and shall permit
direct mail payment of the applicable minimum forfeiture to the Grand
Chute Police Department within 10 days of the issuance of the citation,
in lieu of court appearance. The issuing officer shall specify thereon the
amount of the applicable forfeiture as provided in this chapter.
167. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 515-9 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 515-9
1:488
§ 515-10. Snowmobiles.
F. Notice of demerit points and receipt. Every officer or person accepting
a forfeited penalty or money deposit under this section shall furnish a
receipt on a serially numbered form as provided in § 345.26(3)(b), Wis.
Stats. Every officer or person accepting a stipulation under the
provisions of this section shall comply with the provisions of §§ 343.28,
345.26(1)(a) and 345.27(2), Wis. Stats., and shall require the alleged
violator to sign a statement of notice in substantially the form contained
on the uniform traffic citation and complaint promulgated under
§ 345.11, Wis. Stats.
G. Forfeiture to go to treasury. All forfeitures and penalties recovered for
the violation of an ordinance shall be paid in to the Town of Grand
Chute treasury for use by the Town. Any officer or person accepting
deposits or forfeiture penalties under this section shall deliver them to
the Town Treasurer within 20 days after receipt.168
A. Unattended snowmobiles. No person shall leave or allow a snowmobile
to remain unattended on any public highway or public property while
the motor is running or with the starting key in the ignition.
B. Snowmobile renter's license.
(1) No person shall engage in the business of renting or leasing of
snowmobiles to the public or of renting or leasing use of a
snowmobile track or other private property to the public for the
operation of snowmobiles thereon in the Town of Grand Chute
unless he has first obtained a license therefor as provided in this
subsection.
(2) Application for snowmobile renters' licenses shall be filed with the
Town Clerk and shall include the name of the owner of the premises
on which such business will be conducted, the proposed period and
hours of operation, the name of the person, firm or corporation who
or which will conduct such business, the state registration number
of such commercial owner, if any, and the registration numbers of
any snowmobiles to be leased by such business and such other
information as the Town Board shall require to consider such
application. The application shall be accompanied by a fee as
prescribed in the Town Fee Schedule to cover the cost of
investigation and issuance of the license.
(3) No license shall be issued unless approved by the Town Board after
public hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be given as a Class 1
notice under Ch. 985, Wis. Stats. The Town Board shall approve
168. Editor's Note: Original § 4.10, Further amendments and changes to Wisconsin Traffic
Code, State Snowmobile Code, State Boating Code and regulations, adopted by reference,
and § 4.11, State snowmobile laws adopted, which immediately followed this section, were
repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II). See now
§ 515-1 of this chapter.
§ 515-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 515-10
1:489
issuance of the license only if it determines that the public health,
safety and welfare will not be adversely affected thereby and that
the following requirements are met:169
(a) The applicant must have on file with the Town Clerk proof of
liability insurance in force covering the premises to be licensed
and the operation of any snowmobile thereon or to be rented or
offered for use to the public by the business with limits of
$50,000 per person, $300,000 per accident, and $10,000
property damage.
(b) If snowmobiles are to be used on the licensed premises, such
use must be restricted to areas located at least 700 feet from
any dwellings not owned or occupied by the applicant.
(c) Snowmobiles shall be operated on the premises only between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:30 p.m.
(4) The licensing period shall be for one year from September 1 to
August 31.
(5) The Clerk shall issue a renewal license to any person, firm or
corporation holding a valid license under this subsection upon
payment of the annual license fee; provided, however, that any such
applicant who has been convicted within the preceding 12 months
of a violation of this section or any state statute regulating or
restricting the use of snowmobiles or snowmobile renters shall not
be entitled to a license renewal until approved by the Town Board
after public hearing as required under Subsection C(3) of this
section.
C. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, forfeit an amount as prescribed in the Uniform
Forfeiture and Bond Schedules, together with the costs of prosecution,
and in default of payment thereof may be imprisoned in the county jail
for not exceeding 90 days, provided that no person shall forfeit an
amount in excess of the maximum fine or forfeiture allowed in the
Wisconsin Statutes for the same offense and further provided that the
penalty and forfeiture for parking violations on highways shall be the
amount applicable to such violations by owners or operators of motor
vehicles under the Town Traffic Code.
D. Enforcement.
(1) Uniform citation for highway violations. The uniform traffic citation
promulgated under § 345.11, Wis. Stats., shall be used for
violations of this section relating to highway use, except as herein
provided, and shall be used for enforcement of violations of rules of
169. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 515-10 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 515-10
1:490
§ 515-11. Heavy traffic regulations. [Amended 8-1-2000; 5-20-2003;
10-6-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-16]
the road relating to parking of vehicles adopted by reference in
§ 515-1.
(2) Other violations. All violations of this section not described in
Subsection D(1) shall be enforced in accordance with §§ 66.0111
and 66.0114 and Ch. 799, Wis. Stats. Stipulations of guilt or no
contest may be made as provided in § 66.0114(1)(b), Wis. Stats., in
substantially the form provided in the uniform traffic citation within
five days of the date of the citation for such violation. Bail deposits
may also be made under § 66.0114, Wis. Stats. Such deposits shall
include a Clerk's fee and costs of prosecution. [Amended
12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
(3) Police Department to receive stipulations and penalties.
Stipulations, forfeited penalties and deposits for obtaining release
from arrest authorized under this section may be accepted by the
Town Police Department. The officer authorized to accept penalties
and deposits shall be bonded and such bond shall be filed with the
Town Clerk.
(4) Forfeited penalties and deposits. Except as otherwise provided in
§ 345.26, Wis. Stats., and the deposit schedule adopted by the
Wisconsin Judicial Conference thereunder, required forfeited
penalties and deposits or bail, not including costs or fees, for
violations of this section shall be as provided in the Uniform
Forfeiture and Bond Schedules. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-30]
E. Filing. The Clerk shall file a copy of this section upon its enactment and
publication with the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise expressly
stated, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this section:
GROSS WEIGHT — The weight of a vehicle equipped for service plus
the weight which the vehicle is carrying as a load.
HEAVY TRAFFIC — All vehicles not operating completely on pneumatic
tires and all vehicles or combinations of vehicles, other than motor
buses, designed or used for transporting property of any nature and
having a gross weight of more than 10,000 pounds.
TRAILER — A vehicle not capable of self-propulsion designed for
carrying property or passengers wholly on its own structure and for
being drawn by a motor vehicle.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except railroad
trains.
§ 515-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 515-11
1:491
B. Prohibited routes. Heavy traffic is prohibited from using any Town
street or highway not designated as a heavy traffic route.
(1) This section shall not act to prohibit heavy traffic from using a Town
street or highway for the purpose of obtaining orders for supplies
or moving or delivering supplies or commodities to or from any
place of business or residence which has an entrance on such
street or highway.
(2) This section shall not act to prohibit heavy traffic from using any
Town streets over which are routed state or county trunk highways.
C. Administration. The Director of Public Works, in cooperation with the
Police Department, shall administer this section. Administration shall
include:
(1) Posting of signs. Appropriate signs shall be posted giving notice of
this section and of the heavy traffic routes established herein.
(2) Maps. Heavy traffic routes shall be shown on the official Town map.
(3) Permits for construction equipment.
(a) The Director of Public Works or his designee may grant
temporary permits to allow heavy traffic to use Town streets or
highways not designated as heavy traffic routes. These permits
may be granted only when use of a nondesignated route is
necessary for the heavy traffic to reach a construction or
delivery site along a route that is not the shortest distance from
a designated heavy traffic route to the site. No permit may be
issued unless the person or corporation owning said vehicle
agrees to reimburse and hold the Town harmless for any
damage done to a Town street, highway, bridge, or culvert by
the vehicle and/or any personal injury or property damage
caused in part or whole by the damage to the street, highway,
bridge, or culvert.
(b) Town-owned or -operated vehicles are specifically excluded
from the provisions of this section.
D. Liability. Any operator, corporation, owner or agency whose heavy
traffic vehicle damages any Town street, highway, bridge, or culvert in
violating this section shall be liable and required to pay the Town the
cost of repair or replacement of the damaged street, highway, bridge, or
culvert, to the extent caused by these violations.
E. Special and seasonal weight limitations. The Director of Public Works
shall have the authority to impose special or seasonal weight limits on
any highway, bridge, or culvert maintained by the Town to prevent
damage to the highway, bridge, or culvert, or for the safety of the users
of such highway, bridge, or culvert, and shall be responsible for
§ 515-11 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 515-11
1:492
erecting uniform traffic control devices giving notice thereof in
accordance with the provisions of § 515-6.
F. Heavy traffic routes designated. All streets and alleys within the Town
are designated Class “B” highways subject to the weight limitations of §
348.16, Wis. Stats., except that the following highways or parts thereof
within the jurisdiction of the Town of Grand Chute are hereby
designated heavy traffic routes and are exempt from the Class “B”
weight limitations.
Name of Street Location
Consolidated Court From South Mayflower Drive to the east
terminus
Mall Drive From West College Avenue to Ring Road
North Bluemound Drive From West College Avenue to West
Northland Avenue
North Casaloma Drive From West College Avenue to West
Converters Drive
North Corporate Court From West Neubert Road to the south
terminus
North Hickory Farm Lane From West Packard Street to West
Wisconsin Avenue
North Lilas Drive From North Franklin Street to West
Highview Drive
North Lynndale Drive/
CTH A
From West Broadway Drive to the south
Town limits
North Mayflower Drive From West Prospect Avenue to West
Broadway Drive
North McCarthy Road From West College Avenue to West
Wisconsin Avenue
North McCarthy Road From West Greenville Drive to West
Capitol Drive
North New Horizon
Boulevard
From Prospect Court to South Casaloma
Drive
North Perkins Street From West Wisconsin Avenue to the south
Town limits
North Richmond Street From West Broadway Drive to West Elsner
Road
North Tempest Court From West Neubert Road to the south
terminus
North Victory Lane From North Casaloma Drive to the east
terminus
North Westhill Boulevard From West College Avenue to West
Wisconsin Avenue
§ 515-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 515-11
1:493
Name of Street Location
North Wren Drive From West Edgewood Drive to a point
1,500 feet south of West Edgewood Drive
Prospect Court From West Prospect Avenue to West New
Horizon Boulevard
Ring Road From West Integrity Way to the east
terminus
South Technology Drive From West Prospect Avenue to Technology
Circle
STH 15 From Mayflower Drive to U.S. 41
Technology Circle
West Abitz Road From the west terminus to West Prospect
Court
West Broadway Drive/
CTH JJ
From North Mayflower Drive to North
Lynndale Drive
West Clairemont Drive From the west terminus to the east
terminus
West College Avenue From Mayflower Drive to the east Town
limits
West Converters Drive From North Lynndale Drive to the west
terminus
West Deerview Drive From North Richmond Street to the west
terminus
West Edgewood Drive From North Lynndale Drive to the east
Town limits
West Elberg Avenue From North Hickory Farm Lane to West
Wisconsin Avenue
West Evergreen Drive From North Richmond Street to the west
terminus
West Franklin Street From North Bluemound Drive to North
Lilas Drive
West Greenville Drive From Mayflower Drive to West Wisconsin
Avenue
West Highview Drive From the west terminus to North Lilas
Drive
West Integrity Way From North Mayflower Drive to North
McCarthy Road
West Lynndale Court From North Lynndale Drive to the east
terminus
West Midwest Drive From South Mayflower Drive to
Technology Circle
§ 515-11 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 515-11
1:494
§ 515-12. One-way streets. [Added 4-9-1998]
§ 515-13. Neighborhood electric vehicles. [Added 2-3-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-02]
Name of Street Location
West Neubert Road From North McCarthy Road to North
Mayflower Road
West Nordale Drive From North Lynndale Drive to the east
terminus
West Northland Avenue From U.S. 41 to the east Town limits
West Packard Street From North Casaloma Drive to the west
terminus
West Packard Street From North Hickory Farm Lane to the east
terminus
West Pershing Street From North Lynndale Drive to the east
terminus
West Prospect Avenue From Mayflower Drive to U.S. 41
West Spencer Street From South Lynndale Drive to the east
Town limits
West Wisconsin Avenue From Mayflower Drive to the east Town
limits
A. One-way streets shall be designated by appropriate signs, and every
operator of a vehicle approaching such sign shall comply with
§ 346.04(2), Wis. Stats.
B. The following streets are designated as one-way streets: [Amended
11-4-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-17]
(1) The public entrance located between Parcels 10-1-1203-05 and
10-1-1203-04 to the north frontage road to Fox River Mall
(northbound egress only).
A. "Neighborhood electric vehicle" means a self-propelled motor vehicle,
excluding golf carts, that has successfully completed the Neighborhood
Electric Vehicle America Test Program conducted by the Federal
Department of Energy and that conforms to the definition and
requirements for low-speed vehicles as adopted in the Federal Motor
Vehicle Safety Standards for Low-Speed Vehicles under 49 CFR
571.3(b) and 571.500 and which is authorized under § 349.26, Wis.
Stats.
B. Neighborhood electric vehicles shall not be operated on any highway
within the Town of Grand Chute where the maximum speed limit
exceeds 35 miles per hour.
§ 515-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 515-13
1:495
§ 515-14. Designated snowmobile routes. [Added 1-15-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-01]
§ 515-15. Bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, and
play vehicles. [Added 8-6-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-13]
C. All operators of neighborhood electric vehicles shall conform to all
regulations contained in this chapter, including the provisions of the
state motor vehicle laws incorporated herein, except those provisions
which by their express terms have no application to a neighborhood
electric vehicle.
D. All operators of neighborhood electric vehicles shall have a valid
driver's license in the State of Wisconsin.
E. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be punished
by a forfeiture as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond
Schedules per occurrence.
A. The Town Board hereby declares the eastbound traffic lane of Broadway
Drive from North Ballard Road to a point 0.3 miles west as a
snowmobile route as provided for in § 350.04, Wis. Stats.
B. No parking of snowmobiles will be allowed along any segment of any
designated snowmobile route.
C. No person shall operate a snowmobile over the designated snowmobile
route at a rate of speed that exceeds the maximum speed limit posted
thereon.
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, unless otherwise expressly
stated, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them as follows:
BICYCLE — Any vehicle propelled by feet or hands acting upon pedals
or cranks and having wheels any two of which are not less than 14
inches in diameter.
BICYCLE LANE — The portion of the roadway set aside by the Town
Board for the exclusive use of bicycles, electric personal assistive
mobility devices, or other modes of transportation where permitted
under § 349.23(2)(a), Wis. Stats., and so designated by appropriate
signs and markings.
BICYCLE WAY — Any path or sidewalk or portion thereof designated
for the use of bicycles and electric personal assistive mobility devices
by the Town Board.
ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE — A selfbalancing,
two-nontandem-wheeled device that is designed to transport
only one person and that has an electric propulsion system that limits
the maximum speed of the device to 15 miles per hour or less.
§ 515-13 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 515-15
1:496
MOTOR BICYCLE — A bicycle that has fully operative pedals and an
electric motor of less than 750 watts and that is capable, when powered
solely by the motor, of a maximum speed of less than 20 miles per hour
with a one-hundred-seventy-pound rider on a dry, level, hard surface
with no wind.
PLAY VEHICLE — A coaster, skate board, roller skates, sled, toboggan,
unicycle, or toy vehicle upon which a person may ride, exclusive of inline
skates.
VEHICLE — For the purpose of this section, the term vehicle has the
same meaning as defined in § 340.01(74), Wis. Stats., excluding "play
vehicles" defined under § 340.01(43m), Wis. Stats.
B. State traffic laws adopted.
(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this section, the
statutory provisions of Ch. 346, Wis. Stats., describing and defining
regulations with respect to bicycles, electric personal assistive
mobility devices, and play vehicles, excluding penalties to be
imposed, are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this
section as if fully stated herein. Any future amendments, revisions,
or modifications of the statutes incorporated herein are intended to
be made part of this section.
C. Applicability of traffic regulations to persons operating bicycles and
electric personal assistive mobility devices.
(1) Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway or shoulder of a
highway is granted all the rights and is subject to all the duties
granted or applied to the operator of a vehicle by Ch. 346, Wis.
Stats., and the Town Code, except those provisions of laws and
ordinances which by their express terms apply only to motor
vehicles or which by their very nature would have no application to
bicycles.
(2) Every person operating an electric personal assistive mobility
device upon a roadway is granted the rights and is subject to the
duties granted or applied to the operator of a vehicle by Ch. 346,
Wis. Stats., pursuant to the limitations outlined in § 346.02(12),
Wis. Stats., and the Town Code.
D. Compliance with section; responsibility of parents.
(1) It is unlawful for any person to perform any act forbidden or fail to
perform any act required in this section.
(2) The parent or guardian of any child shall not authorize or
knowingly permit any child to violate any of the provisions of this
section.
E. Riding bicycles or electric personal assistive mobility devices on a
sidewalk or bicycle way.
§ 515-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 515-15
1:497
(1) Persons exercising due care may operate a bicycle or electric
personal assistive mobility device upon a sidewalk or bicycle way.
(2) Every person operating a bicycle or electric personal assistive
mobility device on a sidewalk or bicycle way is granted the same
rights and is subject to the same duties granted or applied to
pedestrians with respect to roadway intersection crossings and
other sidewalk or bicycle way crossings (alleys, driveways), as
outlined in §§ 346.23, 346.24, 346.25, 346.37 and 346.38, Wis.
Stats.
(3) Every person operating a bicycle or electric personal assistive
mobility device upon a sidewalk or bicycle way shall yield the rightof-
way to any pedestrian.
(4) Every person operating a bicycle or electric personal assistive
mobility device on a sidewalk or bicycle way open to two-way traffic
shall ride on the right side of the sidewalk or bicycle way.
(5) Every person operating a bicycle or electric personal assistive
mobility device on a sidewalk or bicycle way shall obey each traffic
signal or sign facing a roadway which runs parallel and adjacent to
a sidewalk or bicycle way and shall obey each traffic signal or sign
specifically intended to regulate traffic on the sidewalk or bicycle
way.
(6) Every person operating a bicycle or electric personal assistive
mobility device upon a sidewalk or bicycle way shall exercise due
care, giving an audible signal when passing a bicycle, electric
personal assistive mobility device, or pedestrian proceeding in the
same direction, and wait until it has become evident the person so
warned is aware of the approach of such person operating the
bicycle or electric personal assistive mobility device.
(7) No person may operate a motor bicycle on a sidewalk or bicycle
way when the motor bicycle is powered by the motor.
F. Lamps and other equipment on bicycles and electric personal assistive
mobility devices.
(1) No person may operate a bicycle or electric personal assistive
mobility device upon a highway, sidewalk, bicycle lane, or bicycle
way during hours of darkness unless the bicycle or electric
personal assistive mobility device is equipped with, or the operator
is wearing, a lamp emitting a white light visible from a distance of
at least 500 feet to the front of the bicycle or electric personal
assistive mobility device. A bicycle or electric personal assistive
mobility device shall also be equipped with a red reflector that has
a diameter of at least two inches of surface area or, with respect to
an electric personal assistive mobility device, that is a strip of
reflective tape that has at least two square inches of surface area,
on the rear so mounted and maintained as to be visible from all
§ 515-15 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 515-15
1:498
§ 515-16. Pedestrian safety. [Added 6-20-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-05]
distances from 50 feet to 500 feet to the rear when directly in front
of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp
emitting a steady or flashing red light visible from a distance of 500
feet to the rear may be used in lieu of the red reflector.
(2) No person may operate a bicycle or electric personal assistive
mobility device upon a highway, bicycle lane, or bicycle way unless
it is equipped with a brake in good working condition, adequate to
control the movement of and to stop the bicycle or electric personal
assistive mobility device whenever necessary.
G. Joint-use bicycle lane designated. All bicycle lanes are for the exclusive
use of bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, or other
modes of transportation where permitted under § 349.23(2)(a), Wis.
Stats., and so designated by appropriate signs and markings. The
bicycle lanes on the following roadways within the jurisdiction of the
Town of Grand Chute are designated for joint use by bicycles and
pedestrians. On joint-use bicycle lanes, bicycles shall yield to
pedestrians. [Added 10-3-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-15170]
Name of Street Location
Capitol Drive From I-41 to Mayflower Road
H. Penalty for violation of this section.
(1) Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, forfeit an amount as prescribed in the
Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedule, together with the cost of
prosecution.
(2) No person shall forfeit an amount in excess of the maximum fine or
forfeiture allowed in the Wisconsin Statutes for the same offense.
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, unless otherwise expressly
stated, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them as follows:
HIGHWAY — As defined in § 340.01(22), Wis. Stats., all public ways and
thoroughfares and bridges on the same. It includes the entire width
between the boundary lines of every way open to the use of the public
as a matter of right for the purposes of vehicular travel. It includes
those roads or driveways in the state, county or municipal parks and in
state forests which have been opened to the use of the public for the
purpose of vehicular travel and roads or driveways upon the grounds
of public schools, as defined in § 115.01(1), Wis. Stats., and institutions
under the jurisdiction of the County Board of Supervisors, but does
not include private roads or driveways as defined in § 340.01(46), Wis.
Stats.
170. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection G as Subsection H.
§ 515-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 515-16
1:499
MEDIAN — An area dividing opposing lanes of traffic, excluding turn
lanes. They can be comprised of raised islands or surface level
pavement marking and may also encompass pedestrian safety zones.
PEDESTRIAN — As defined in § 340.01(43), Wis. Stats., any person
afoot or any person in a wheelchair, either manually or mechanically
propelled, or other low-powered, mechanically propelled vehicle
designed specifically for use by a physically disabled person, but does
not include any person using an electric personal assistive mobility
device.
PEDESTRIAN SAFETY ZONE — A raised island or median that divides a
highway at an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk, usually separating
opposing lanes of traffic, and offering refuge to pedestrians attempting
to cross the highway, thereby allowing them to identify adequate gaps
in a single direction of traffic before completing a crossing. Pedestrian
safety zones are typically constructed at locations where speed and/or
volume of traffic make crossing hazardous or the number of traffic lanes
increases a pedestrian's exposure to traffic.
ROADWAY — As defined in § 340.01(54), Wis. Stats., that portion of
a highway between the regularly established curblines or that portion
which is improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel,
excluding the berm or shoulder. In a divided highway the term
"roadway" refers to each roadway separately but not to all such
roadways collectively.
B. State traffic laws adopted.
(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this section, the
statutory provisions of Ch. 346, Wis. Stats., describing and defining
regulations and responsibilities with respect to presence of
pedestrians on highways, excluding penalties to be imposed, are
hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this section as if
fully stated herein. Any future amendments, revisions, or
modifications of the statutes incorporated herein are intended to be
made part of this section.
C. To minimize the potential for conflict arising from a driver's obligation
to yield to a pedestrian lawfully crossing a highway, which includes
reducing speed or stopping if necessary, to avoid endangering, colliding
with or interfering in any way with pedestrian travel, no pedestrian
shall loiter or be dilatory in crossing the highway once traffic has
yielded the right-of-way.
(1) Pedestrians may pause at a pedestrian safety zone located at an
intersection or crosswalk, or a median being utilized for the same
purpose, but must be expeditious in continuing across the
remaining roadway once they have secured the right-of-way and an
adequate gap exists to complete the crossing.
(2) It shall be deemed a violation of this section if a pedestrian fails to
complete a crossing and remains in a pedestrian safety zone or on a
§ 515-16 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 515-16
1:500
Chapter 520
WASTE MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 291.
Hazardous substances — See Ch. 310.
Housing standards — See Ch. 317.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 349.
Nuisances — See Ch. 398.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 423.
Sewers — See Ch. 440.
Trees and shrubs — See Ch. 497.
median through two traffic control signal cycles or adequate gaps
in traffic.
D. Penalty for violation of this section.
(1) Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, forfeit an amount as prescribed in the
Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedule, together with the cost of
prosecution.
(2) No person shall forfeit an amount in excess of the maximum fine or
forfeiture allowed in the Wisconsin Statutes for the same offense.
§ 515-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 515-16
1:501

ARTICLE I
Solid Waste and Garbage Disposal
[Adopted 1-7-1997 as Ch. 10 of the 1997 Code]
§ 520-1. Purpose.
The purpose of these regulations is to further the maintenance of safe
and healthful conditions, prevent and control water pollution, promote the
public health, safety and convenience and interests of the residents of
the Town of Grand Chute, Outagamie County, Wisconsin, by establishing
minimum standards covering the dumping of waste material, solid or liquid,
of any kind or nature in the Town of Grand Chute, Outagamie County,
Wisconsin, and provide for licensing and regulation of all garbage disposal
in said Town of Grand Chute.
§ 520-2. License required; unlawful disposal.
A license is required to dispose of any waste material of any kind or
nature, either liquid or solid. No person, firm or corporation owning land,
leasing it or having any interest therein whatsoever which is located in
the Town of Grand Chute, Outagamie County, Wisconsin, shall dispose of
garbage, rubbish or refuse, or liquid or solid waste material, including
sludge, sewage (excluding animal waste used as fertilizer) or waste liquids
of any kind or nature, on his property or on any property which is located
in the Town of Grand Chute, Outagamie County, Wisconsin, or permit any
other person, firm, or corporation to dispose of such garbage, rubbish,
refuse, sewage, sludge (excluding animal waste used as fertilizer), waste
material of any kind or nature, wastewater, or either liquid or solid waste
materials on his property or on any property in the Town of Grand Chute.
§ 520-3. Application for license.
The application for license hereunder shall be made to the Town Board
for the Town of Grand Chute, Outagamie County, Wisconsin, in writing.
The applicant shall state the name and address of the applicant and, if
the applicant is a corporation, the name and address of the corporation's
registered agent.
§ 520-4. Term of license.
A license issued hereunder should be for a term of one year commencing
on the day of issuance of the license. Such license may be renewed by the
Town Board for the Town of Grand Chute, Outagamie County, Wisconsin,
from year to year upon written application and payment of the license fee
and may be revoked by the Town Board at any time for cause as hereinafter
set out.
§ 520-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 520-5
1:503
§ 520-5. License fee.
The applicant shall accompany his application with an annual license fee
as prescribed in the Town Fee Schedule. If the application is denied, the
license fee shall be returned to the applicant.
§ 520-6. Insurance.
Prior to issuance of any license hereunder, the applicant shall furnish the
Town Board a certificate of insurance showing that the operations of the
applicant pursuant to the license will be covered by public liability and
property damage and indemnity insurance in the amount of $100,000 for
each death or injury, $300,000 for all deaths and injuries occurring in a
common accident, and $25,000 for property damage liability and will save
the Town harmless from any liability which may arise by reason of issuance
of a license hereunder or operations of the licensee hereunder. Failure to
provide the insurance required hereunder or cancellation of the insurance
shall automatically void the license issued hereunder.
§ 520-7. Revocation of license. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-30]
The Town Board may revoke any license issued hereunder for cause upon
three days' notice to the applicant and opportunity to be heard. Cause
shall include a violation of this article or any other ordinance or state
law regulating the disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse or the creation
of a public nuisance. Cause shall also include disapproval of the State
Department of Health Services of the dump site or dumping location or
of the dumping operations conducted thereon. If any license is revoked
hereunder the license fee shall not be returned to the applicant.
§ 520-8. Exceptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to dumping operations at a
dump site or sanitary landfill owned by Outagamie County, Wisconsin, nor
shall this article apply to sanitary landfill operations or dump sites owned
by the municipal corporation known as the "County of Outagamie," nor shall
this article apply to residents of the Town of Grand Chute engaged in private
agricultural or farming operations.
§ 520-9. Special limitations on loads, hauling and dumping.
A. No person shall operate a vehicle on a Town road or other road in the
Town of Grand Chute unless such vehicle is so constructed, loaded and
covered or secured as to prevent its contents from dropping, sifting,
leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom.
B. No person shall throw or deposit in any manner any type of debris or
waste material on or along any highway or road or on any other public
or private property.
§ 520-5 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 520-10
1:504
§ 520-10. Garbage, rubbish and ash disposal from residential
property.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
GARBAGE — Constitutes the refuse of animal or vegetable matter
which has been used or intended as food for man or beast.
RUBBISH — Constitutes waste material, such as paper, fabric,
cardboard, tin cans, glass, furniture, cartons, boxes, and the like,
excluding garbage.
B. Care of garbage. No person shall:
(1) Deposit, handle or dispose of any garbage or other debris or waste
material within said Town of Grand Chute except in the way and
manner hereinafter provided.
(2) Deposit, throw or place any garbage, offal, rubbish, dead animal,
refuse or other matter offensive to health, sight or comfort along or
within any public street, alley, park, sidewalk, or other public place.
(3) Deposit, throw, place or leave any garbage, offal, rubbish, dead
animal, refuse or other matter decaying or offensive to health, sight
or comfort on or within any private property or premises, whether
owned, kept, or controlled by such person or not, except and unless
placed in cans, tanks or containers as provided in Subsection C and
D.
C. Containers. [Amended 3-20-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-06]
(1) Approved containers shall consist of:
(a) Automated collection containers provided by the Town’s
contracted waste hauler, not exceeding the weight capacity
marked on the container.
(2) Rubbish and garbage not contain within an approved container will
not be collected.
(3) Larger containers are permitted but only in the form known as the
"mechanical dumpster." On dates designated for pickup by the
Town Board, such containers shall be placed in an orderly manner
near the street or alleyway of the premises.
(4) Containers too tightly packed or frozen to prevent easy removal of
the contents will not be collected.
D. Mechanical dumpster containers may be required. The Town Board or
the person designated by the Town to regulate disposal of materials
under these regulations (or approval of the Town Board) may require
and direct that the container device known as a "mechanical dumpster"
be used by the owners of multifamily residential units when:
§ 520-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 520-10
1:505
(1) The volume is of such a nature that use of the dumpster would
substantially facilitate pickup.
(2) The multifamily residential unit contains more than four families or
family units. [Amended 3-20-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-06]
E. Duty of resident.
(1) Every resident of the Town shall clean up all ashes, rubbish, and
garbage which may be in or upon the premises owned and occupied
by him and shall store the same in containers as above provided. If
the owner or occupant fails to do so, the same shall be done by the
Town, and the expense thereof shall be charged against the
premises and become a lien against the same and shall be included
as a special assessment against the property.
(2) It shall further be the duty of all residents to place at the roadside
at or before 6:00 a.m. of the day designated for pickup of trash in
their area by the Town Board all containers of rubbish and garbage
so that the same may be picked up by the contractor of the Town.
Said containers shall be placed within six feet of the roadside and
in an obvious position so that they can be easily discoverable by
persons picking up said materials. The container shall not be
placed at the roadside sooner than 12 hours before 6:00 a.m. of the
day designated for pickup. Said container shall be removed from
the roadside within 12 hours of said 6:00 a.m. deadline specified
herein on the day of pickup, and no containers for rubbish, garbage
and storage of other materials shall be left at the roadside by the
occupant or owner after 7:00 p.m. of the day specified for pickup.
(3) It shall be the duty of the residents in multiple-family dwellings to
deposit said rubbish and garbage into mechanical dumpsters or
other large containers provided at the said residence, and it shall
be the responsibility of the landlord of the multiple-family dwelling
to see that said placement of the containers is made in a
satisfactory manner to the contractor of the Town with approval of
the Town Board for said method of pickup and placement of said
containers. This subsection shall apply only to multiple-family
dwellings, and all single-family residential dwellings shall be
required to follow Subsection E(1) and (2) of this regulation with
regard to placement of said containers upon the premises and at
the roadside.
F. Salvaging prohibited. No person other than authorized Town employees
shall go through, sort or take anything from any rubbish or waste
material that has been set out for the purpose of being picked up. No
person shall set out any of the following material:
(1) Hot ashes.
(2) Material resulting from building or remodeling of structures,
including masonry or concrete.
§ 520-10 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 520-10
1:506
§ 520-11. Violations and penalties.171
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any provision of
this article shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit an amount as prescribed
in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules, together with the costs
of prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs
of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the county jail until said forfeiture
and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90 days. Each violation and each
day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
This section shall not preclude the Town from maintaining any appropriate
action to prevent or remove a violation of this article.
§ 520-12. Interference with rubbish and garbage placed for
collection.
G. Collection. Said Town Board shall, from time to time, hereinafter and as
often as may be necessary and required, cause to be collected the
garbage and glass deposited and contained in said cans or containers
and shall collect all other burnable and waste material so piled or
contained upon such real estate and premises and shall cause the same
to be hauled, dumped and deposited in the dumping grounds directed
by the Town Board or in some other suitable or proper place provided
by said Town. Collection times shall be as designated by the Town
Board.
H. Rules and regulations. The Town Board may establish and enforce
proper rules and regulations for the collection of rubbish and garbage,
including special contract removal for residents where normal pickup
under this article is refused because of the regulations contained
herein. Such special contract shall require the resident to pay the cost
of use of the equipment and men directly to the Town contractor.
Special contracts shall not be performed during regular pickup hours as
established by the Town Board.
A. Town residents of the Town of Grand Chute are required to place
rubbish and garbage at the street curb for pickup by the refuse hauler
designated from year to year by the Town of Grand Chute. From time to
time there have been complaints that third parties have directly or
indirectly interfered with such rubbish/garbage as placed at the street
line by going through the garbage and taking items therefrom without
permission of the property owner. It is determined by the Town of
Grand Chute that this section is necessary to promote the public health,
safety, convenience and public interest of the residents of the Town of
Grand Chute.
B. Third parties (by definition excluding the Town of Grand Chute and its
contract hauler and the affected property owner) are prohibited from
going upon Town roads, Town road rights-of-way or private property as
171. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 520-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 520-12
1:507
§ 520-13. Composting sites. [Amended 6-6-2000]
abutting a Town road for the purpose of removing any item of garbage/
rubbish as placed by the affected property owner at the Town road
right-of-way line for Town road refuse pickup (unless upon and with the
express consent of the affected property owner).
C. A person violating this section shall be subject to the penalty provision
set forth under § 520-11 of this article.172
A. Adopted herein by reference are Chs. NR 140 and NR 502, Wis. Adm.
Code, as now in effect and as amended by the Department of Natural
Resources from time to time.
B. Backyard and neighborhood composting sites less than 50 cubic yards
are exempt from Ch. NR 502, Wis. Adm. Code, of the Department of
Natural Resources. However, any and all backyard and neighborhood
composting sites shall be subject to all Town of Grand Chute ordinances
dealing with public nuisances when and if the same are established or
operated in such a fashion or method as to cause a public nuisance to
neighboring property owners or where the same would cause damage
to any water source.
C. All compost piles and bins shall be maintained using approved
composting procedures to comply with the following requirements:
(1) All compost piles other than compost piles consisting solely of yard
waste, excluding fruit, shall be enclosed in a freestanding compost
bin. Compost bins used shall be designed especially for the nature
of this type of service.
(2) All compost piles and bins shall be so maintained as to prevent the
attraction or harborage of rodents and pests.
(3) All compost piles and bins shall be so maintained as to prevent
unpleasant odors. Composting bins containing fruit shall be kept
covered, except when turning. All composting piles or bins shall be
located not less than three feet from a property line or building.
(4) No compost pile or bin shall be located in any yard except a rear
yard. All piles or bins shall be placed between the rear building wall
of the primary dwelling and the rear lot line extended to the side lot
line. Subsection C(1) above shall not apply to a compost pile or bin
located in a side yard or abutting a public street substantially
screened from view from the street right-of-way and from the
ground level of the adjacent residences by shrubs and other
plantings or by fencing, provided that such plantings or fencing
shall at all times exceed the height of the compost bin or pile by no
less than one foot and comply with vision corner requirements.
172. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II). Original § 10.13, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 6-20-2000.
§ 520-12 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 520-13
1:508
(5) No backyard or neighborhood composting site shall be located
within a floodplain or within 75 feet of a navigable stream.
(6) Permitted ingredients of a composting bin shall include:
(a) Yard waste.
(b) Raw vegetables and fruit scraps that are suitable for
composting.
(c) Commercial compost additives.
(d) Coffee grounds and tea leaves.
D. Yard waste composting facilities which exceed 50 cubic yards shall be
required to obtain an annual permit from the Town of Grand Chute. The
permit fee shall be as prescribed in the Town Fee Schedule.
E. All yard waste composting facilities which exceed 50 cubic yards, on or
before requesting the Town of Grand Chute's annual permit, shall be
required to comply with all terms and conditions of Ch. NR 502, Wis.
Adm. Code, of the Department of Natural Resources and shall exhibit to
the Town Clerk the written approval from the Department of Natural
Resources under § NR 502.08(4), Wis. Adm. Code, where appropriate.
F. All yard waste composting sites in excess of 20,000 cubic yards shall be
prohibited within the municipal boundaries of the Town of Grand Chute.
G. Penalty.
(1) Any violation of this section, including a violation for failure to
obtain a Town of Grand Chute permit or for failure to comply with
any or all provisions of Ch. NR 502, Wis. Adm. Code, of the
Department of Natural Resources, shall be subject to a forfeiture
for each and every violation as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture
and Bond Schedules.
(2) Citations issued for violation of this section shall be issued from
time to time by Town of Grand Chute personnel as determined and
directed from time to time by the Town Board of Supervisors. Each
violation shall be cumulative within a calendar year.
H. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating this section shall,
upon conviction, be subject to the above forfeiture plus all costs of
prosecution and in the event of default of payment of such forfeiture
and/or costs of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the county jail until
the forfeiture and costs of prosecution are paid, for a period not to
exceed 30 days.
I. In the event that any person, firm, partnership or corporation shall
violate this section, in addition to the above forfeiture, the violator shall
be required to discontinue and remove the violating yard waste
composting facility. Any costs incurred by the Town of Grand Chute,
§ 520-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 520-13
1:509
being reasonable attorney fees and all costs and disbursements related
thereto, incurred to effectuate the removal of a yard waste composting
facility in violation of this section shall be collected by legal suit against
the violator, being a civil suit initiated on behalf of the Town of Grand
Chute in the appropriate Circuit Court. Similarly, any reasonable legal
fees, costs and disbursements incurred therein on behalf of the Town
of Grand Chute by way of injunction or restraining order enforcing the
terms and provisions of this section shall be collected from the violator
of this section by lawsuit in the appropriate Circuit Court.
§ 520-13 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 520-13
1:510
ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
§ 520-14. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote recycling, composting and resource
recovery through the administration of an effective recycling program, as
provided in § 287.11, Wis. Stats., and Ch. NR 544, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 520-15. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted as authorized under § 287.09, Wis. Stats., and the
Town.
§ 520-16. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or
interfere with any existing rules, regulations, ordinances or permits
previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, whenever this
article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall apply.
§ 520-17. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be
held to be the minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other power granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. When any
terms or requirements of this article may be inconsistent or conflicting,
the more restrictive requirements or interpretation shall apply. Where a
provision of this article is required by state statutes or by a standard in Ch.
NR 544, Wis. Adm. Code, and where the provision of this article is unclear,
the provision shall be interpreted in light of the state statutes and Ch. NR
544 standards in effect on the date of adoption of this article or in effect on
the date of the most recent amendment to this article.
§ 520-18. Applicability.
The requirements of this article apply to all persons within the Town of
Grand Chute.
§ 520-19. Administration.
The provisions of this article shall be administered by the Town
Administrator of the Town of Grand Chute.
§ 520-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 520-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 520-20
1:511
BIMETAL CONTAINER — A container for carbonated or malt beverages that
is made primarily of a combination of steel and aluminum.
CONTAINER BOARD — Corrugated paperboard used in the manufacture of
shipping containers and related products.
HDPE — High-density polyethylene plastic containers marked by the SPI
Code No. 2.
LPDE — Low-density polyethylene plastic containers marked by the SPI
Code No. 4.
MAGAZINES — Magazines and other material printed on similar paper.
MAJOR APPLIANCE — A residential or commercial air conditioner, clothes
dryer, clothes washer, dishwasher, freezer, oven, microwave oven,
refrigerator or stove.
MIXED OR OTHER PLASTIC RESIN TYPES — Plastic containers marked by
the SPI Code No. 7.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A property containing five or more
residential units, including those which are occupied seasonally.
NEWSPAPER — A newspaper or other materials printed on newsprint.
NONRESIDENTIAL FACILITIES AND PROPERTIES — Commercial, retail,
industrial, institutional and governmental facilities and properties.
OFFICE PAPER — High-grade printing and writing papers from offices in
nonresidential facilities and properties. Printed white ledger and computer
printout are examples of office paper accepted as high grade. This term
does not include industrial process waste.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, association, local
governmental unit as defined in § 66.0131(1)(a), Wis. Stats., state agency or
authority or federal agency.
PETE — Polyethylene terephthalate plastic containers marked by the SPI
Code No. 1.
POST-CONSUMER WASTE — Solid waste other than waste generated in the
production of goods, hazardous waste as defined in § 291.01(7), Wis. Stats.,
waste from construction and demolition of structures, scrap automobiles or
high-volume industrial waste as defined in § 289.01(17), Wis. Stats.
PP — Polypropylene plastic containers marked by the SPI Code No. 5.
PS — Polystyrene plastic containers marked by the SPI Code No. 6.
PVC — Polyvinyl chloride plastic containers marked by the SPI Code No. 3.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Lead acid batteries; major appliances; waste
oil; yard waste; aluminum containers; corrugated paper or other container
board; foam polystyrene packaging; glass containers; magazines;
newspapers; office paper; plastic containers, including those made of PETE,
HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS and mixed or other plastic resin types; steel
containers; waste tires; and bimetal containers.
§ 520-20 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 520-20
1:512
SOLID WASTE — The meaning specified in § 289.01(33), Wis. Stats.
SOLID WASTE FACILITY — The meaning specified in § 289.01(35), Wis.
Stats.
SOLID WASTE TREATMENT — Any method, technique or process which
is designated to change the physical, chemical, or biological character or
composition of solid waste. Treatment includes incineration.
TRANSFER SITE — A location designated by the Town from time to time to
which residents may bring various items as permitted by Town ordinance
for disposal.
WASTE TIRE — A tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose
because of wear, damage or defect.
YARD WASTE — Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris and brush,
including clean woody vegetative materials no greater than six inches in
diameter. This term does not include stumps, roots or shrubs with intact
root balls.
§ 520-21. Separation of recyclable materials.
Occupants of single-family dwellings, two- to four-family residences,
multiple-family dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties shall
separate the following materials from post-consumer waste:
A. Lead acid batteries.
B. Major appliances.
C. Waste oil.
D. Yard waste.
E. Aluminum containers.
F. Bimetal containers.
G. Corrugated paper or other container board.
H. Foam polystyrene packaging.
I. Glass containers.
J. Magazines or other material printed on similar paper.
K. Newspaper or other materials printed on newsprint.
L. Office paper.
M. Rigid plastic containers made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS and
other resins or multiple resins.
N. Steel containers.
O. Waste tires.
§ 520-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 520-22
1:513
§ 520-22. Exemptions from separation requirements.
The separation requirements of § 520-21 do not apply to the following:
§ 520-23. Care of separated recyclable material.
To the greatest extent practicable, the recyclable materials separated in
accordance with § 520-21 shall be clean and kept free of contaminants, such
as food or product residue, oil or grease, or other nonrecyclable materials,
including but not limited to household hazardous waste, medical waste and
agricultural chemical containers. Recyclable materials shall be stored in a
manner which protects them from wind, rain and other inclement weather
conditions.
§ 520-24. Lead acid batteries, major appliances, waste oil and yard
waste.
Occupants of single-family dwellings, two- to four-unit residences, multiplefamily
dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties shall manage
lead acid batteries, major appliances, waste oil and yard waste as follows:
§ 520-25. Preparation and collection of recyclable materials.
Except as otherwise directed by the Town, occupants of single-family and
two- to four-unit residences shall do the following for the preparation and
collection of the separated materials specified in § 520-21E to O:
A. Occupants of single-family dwellings, two- to four-unit residences,
multiple-family dwellings and properties that send their post-consumer
waste to a processing facility licensed by the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources that recovers the materials specified in § 520-21
from solid waste in as pure form as is technically feasible.
B. Solid waste which is burned as a supplemental fuel at a facility if less
than 30% of the heat input to the facility is derived from solid waste
burned as supplemental fuel.
C. A recyclable material specified in § 520-21 for which a variance or
exemption has been granted by the Department of Natural Resources
under § 287.07(7)(d) or 287.11(2m), Wis. Stats., or § NR 544.14, Wis.
Adm. Code.
A. Lead acid batteries shall be taken back to the dealer or facility required
to accept them.
B. Major appliances shall be brought to the transfer site for disposal or
picked up by the hauler for a pickup fee as set forth in the Town's
current refuse and recycling collection contract.
C. Waste oil shall be taken to a licensed waste oil dealer for disposal.
D. Yard waste shall be taken to the transfer site for disposal.
§ 520-22 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 520-25
1:514
§ 520-26. Multiple-family dwellings.
A. Aluminum containers shall be brought to the transfer site for disposal.
B. Bimetal containers shall be brought to the transfer site for disposal.
C. Corrugated paper or other container board shall be brought to the
transfer site, broken down flat and not bundled.
D. Foam polystyrene packaging shall be brought to the transfer site for
disposal.
E. Glass containers shall be brought to the transfer site, clean of all debris.
F. Magazines or other material printed on similar paper shall be brought
to the transfer site not bundled for disposal.
G. Newspaper or other materials printed on newsprint shall be brought to
the transfer site not bundled for disposal.
H. Office paper shall be brought to the transfer site not bundled for
disposal.
I. Plastic containers made of PETE, including liquor and soda bottles,
shall be brought to the transfer site.
J. Plastic containers shall be prepared and collected as follows:
(1) Plastic containers made of PETE, including liquor and soda bottles,
shall be brought to the transfer site loose and not bagged.
(2) Plastic containers made of HDPE, including milk jugs and
detergent bottles, shall be brought to the transfer site clean with
the tops removed.
(3) Plastic containers made of PVC, LDPE, PP and PS shall be brought
to the transfer site clean with the tops removed.
K. Steel containers shall be brought to the transfer site clean.
L. Waste tires shall not be brought to the transfer site.
A. Owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings shall do all of
the following for recycling the materials specified in § 520-21E to O:
(1) Provide adequate, separate containers for recyclable materials.
(2) Notify tenants in writing at the time of renting or leasing the
dwelling and at least semiannually thereafter about the established
program.
(3) Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid
waste by the users, tenants and occupants and the delivery of the
materials to a recycling facility.
§ 520-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 520-26
1:515
§ 520-27. Nonresidential facilities and properties.
§ 520-28. Haulers; right to reject materials.
(4) Notify users, tenants and occupants of reasons to reduce and
recycle, which materials are collected, how to prepare materials in
order to meet the processing requirements, collection methods or
sites, locations and hours of operation and a contact person or
company, including a name, address and telephone number.
B. The requirements specified above do not apply to the owners or
designated agents of multiple-family dwellings if the post-consumer
waste generated within the dwelling is treated at the processing facility
licensed by the Department of Natural Resources that recovers for
recycling the materials specified in § 307-10E to O from solid waste in
as pure a form as is technically feasible.
A. Owners or designated agents of nonresidential facilities and properties
shall do all of the following for recycling the materials specified in
§ 520-21E to O:
(1) Provide adequate, separated containers for the recyclable
materials.
(2) Notify in writing, at least semiannually, all users, tenants and
occupants of the properties about the recycling program.
(3) Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid
waste by the users, tenants and occupants and the delivery of the
materials to a recycling facility.
(4) Notify users, tenants and occupants of reasons to reduce and
recycle, which materials are collected, how to prepare materials in
order to meet the processing requirements, collection methods or
sites, locations and hours of operation and a contact person or
company, including a name, address and telephone number.
B. The requirements specified in Subsection A do not apply to the owners
or designated agents of nonresidential facilities or properties if the
post-consumer waste generated within the facility or property is
treated at a processing facility licensed by the Department of Natural
Resources that recovers for recycling the materials specified in
§ 520-21E to O from solid waste in as pure a form as technically
feasible.
A. Haulers who collect solid waste or recyclables in the Town of Grand
Chute for storage, treatment, processing, marketing or disposal shall
obtain and maintain all necessary municipal or state permits, licenses
and approvals prior to collecting any materials in the Town of Grand
Chute.
§ 520-26 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 520-28
1:516
§ 520-29. Rights reserved by Town.
The Town of Grand Chute reserves the right to designate additional solid
waste materials as recyclable or current materials as no longer recyclable
in accordance with state law and to either add or delete them from any
collection services provided by the Town or its contractors. The Town shall
provide written notice to its service recipients of this declaration.
§ 520-30. Violations and penalties
Any person who violates a provision of this article shall be subject to a
penalty as provided in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules.
B. The hauler or Town has the right to reject or leave at the curb any
recyclable material that is not prepared according to the specifications
in this article. Materials may also be left if not separated from solid
waste, not placed in the proper container, or not designated recyclable
materials for collection. The hauler or Town also has the right to refuse
to pick up any solid waste if it contains recyclable containers and
material. In such cases, the hauler or attendant shall notify the
generator of the materials about the reasons for rejecting the items.
The hauler shall also keep a list of such occurrences and provide it to
the Town of Grand Chute quarterly upon request.
C. The recycling haulers and processors operating in the Town of Grand
Chute are required to maintain records and report in writing to the
Town of Grand Chute Clerk or other designee at least once each year.
Reports shall include the amount of solid waste and recyclables
collected and transported from the Town of Grand Chute. Failure to
report shall be cause for the municipality to revoke any license or sever
any contract with the hauler/processor.
D. Haulers may not dispose in a landfill or burn in a solid waste facility any
recyclable materials generated in the Town of Grand Chute.
§ 520-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 520-30
1:517
Chapter 523
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Special assessments and charges — See Ch.
57, Art. II.
Building construction — See Ch. 220.
Housing standards — See Ch. 317.
Impact fees — See Ch. 330.
Sewers — See Ch. 440.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 463.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 475.
§ 523-1. Water Department.
The term "Water Department" as used in these rules shall be construed to
mean that department of the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1
having charge and control of the waterworks system of the Town of Grand
Chute Sanitary District No. 1.
§ 523-2. Board of Water Commissioners.
The Commissioners of Sanitary District No. 1 are hereby established as
the Board of Water Commissioners. The Board shall have control of and be
charged with management of the Water Department.
§ 523-3. Superintendent of Water Department.
The Superintendent shall have general supervision of the Water
Department. He shall have charge of the direct operations of the Water
Department and all matters connected therewith and shall enforce all
ordinances, rules, and regulations governing the water system.
§ 523-4. Rules and regulations.
The following rules and regulations are hereby established for the
government of the Water Department of the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary
District No. 1 and the control of all persons doing work in and upon
any of the mains, connections, and appliances pertaining to the water
system of the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1 and all persons
and companies requesting and receiving water service: See current Public
Service Commission (PSC) rules and regulations.
§ 523-5. Rate schedules.173
Current rate schedules are on file at the Water Department.
173. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 520-30 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 523-6
1:518
§ 523-6. Compliance with rules.
All persons receiving water service from the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary
District No. 1 Water Department, or who may hereafter make application
therefor, shall be considered as having agreed to be bound by the rules and
regulations as filed with the Public Service Commission of Wisconsin.
§ 523-7. Establishment of service.
A. Application for water service shall be made by the owner or authorized
agent of the property in writing on a form furnished by the Water
Department. The application shall contain the legal description of the
property to be served, name of the owner, the exact use to be made of
the service, and the size of the supply pipe and meter desired. (Note
particularly any special refrigeration and/or air-conditioning waterconsuming
appliances.)
B. Service will be furnished only if:
(1) The premises has a frontage on a properly platted street or public
strip in which a ductile iron or other long-life water main has been
laid or where the property owner has agreed to and complied with
the provisions of the Water Department's main extension rule;
(2) The property owner has installed or agrees to install a service pipe
from the curb stop to the point of use, laid not less than six feet
below the surface of an established or proposed grade, according
to the Utility's specifications; and
(3) The premises has adequate piping beyond the metering point.
C. No division (tap) of the water service of any lot or parcel of land shall be
made for the extension and independent meterage of the supply to an
adjoining lot or parcel of land without the approval of Town of Grand
Chute Sanitary District No. 1. No division (tap) of a water supply
service shall be made at the curb stop for separate supplies therefrom
for two or more separate premises having frontage on any street or
public service strip, whether owned by the same or different parties.
[Amended 9-2-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-09]
D. The Superintendent is hereby empowered to withhold approval of any
application wherein full information of the purpose of such supply is not
clearly indicated and set forth by the applicant property owner.174
E. No connection will be made to the water system without concurrent
meter installation.
F. Private distribution systems. [Amended 9-2-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-09]
174. Editor's Note: Throughout this chapter, references to the "Manager" were amended to
read "Superintendent" 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30.
§ 523-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 523-7
1:519
§ 523-8. Service contract.
(1) The Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1 is required to own
all water mains on private property which are, or in the future may
become, connected to the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District
No. 1 distribution system at more than one point, thereby allowing
possible backflow through the public water system. See Ch. NR
811, Wis. Adm. Code. An acceptable alternative to this subsection
is the requirement that the private user emplace inspection vaults
and check valves at the locations on the private water distribution
system where the water distribution mains connect to the Town of
Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1 system. Therefore, any private
distribution system under Ch. NR 811, Wis. Adm. Code, above
referenced, shall require the owner of the private distribution
system to install inspection vaults and check valves that will
prevent backflow to the public distribution system. The private
distribution system shall remain under the ownership of the
nonmunicipal person or entity. All costs applicable to installation
and the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1 Engineer's
inspection of the vault and check valves, including any engineering
plans, specifications and Department of Natural Resources
approvals (cost associated therewith), will be borne by the owner of
the private distribution system.
(2) The owner or authorized agent of any private water distribution
system within the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1 that
serves two or more premises shall perform a full leak detection
survey every four years and submit a report of the findings to the
Sanitary District. Said survey must be performed by a contractor
approved by the Sanitary District and include all, but not limited to,
hydrants, valves and curb stops within the private distribution
system. All existing private water distribution systems within the
Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1 that serve two or more
premises shall have the survey completed and submit a report
detailing the findings of the survey to the Sanitary District within
nine months of the approval of this subsection and every four years
thereafter. Any leak discovered by the distribution system surveys
shall be repaired within 14 days of its discovery and the repair
inspected by the Town’s plumbing inspector. All costs associated
with the survey and/or leak repairs will be borne by the owner of
the private distribution system. Estimated water loss from
discovered leaks shall be charged to the customer in accordance
with § 523-16
(3) Failure to conduct the survey or file reports as required by this
Subsection F is considered a violation of the provisions of this
chapter and shall subject violating property owners to citation and
forfeitures as listed in the Town’s Uniform Forfeiture and Bond
Schedule, each day of delinquency constituting a separate offense
subject to citation.
§ 523-7 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 523-8
1:520
§ 523-9. Temporary metered supply, meter and deposits.
An applicant for temporary water supply on a metered basis shall make and
maintain a monetary deposit as prescribed in the Town Fee Schedule for
each meter installed as security for payment for use of water and for such
other charges which may arise from the use of the supply. The charge for
setting the valve and furnishing and setting the meter will be as prescribed
in the Town Fee Schedule. Water usage will be billed at present rates.
§ 523-10. Water for construction.
A. The minimum service contract shall be one year unless otherwise
specified by special contract or in the applicable rate schedule. Where a
customer, at his request, has been disconnected prior to expiration of
his minimum contract period and his account is not delinquent and
where thereafter he requests the reconnection of service in the same
location, a reconnection charge as prescribed in the Town Fee
Schedule, payable in advance, shall be collected. The minimum contract
period is renewed with each reconnection.
B. A reconnection charge as prescribed in the Town Fee Schedule shall
also be required from consumers whose services are disconnected
because of nonpayment of bills when due (not including disconnection
for failure to comply with deposit or guarantee rules).
C. A consumer shall be considered as the same consumer provided that
the reconnection is requested for the same location by any member of
the same family or, if a place of business, by any officer of the same
business.
A. When water is wanted for construction purposes, or for filling cisterns,
tanks or tank wagons, steam tractors or rollers, or portable steam
boilers, an application therefor shall be made to the Superintendent, in
writing, upon an application form provided for that purpose in the
Water Department office, giving a statement of the amount of
construction work to be done or the size of the cistern, boiler, tank or
tank wagon to be filled. Payment for the water shall be made in advance
at the scheduled rates. For construction, the service must be drawn. No
temporary connection with the service pipe at the curb stop shall be
made without special permission from the Superintendent.
B. In no case will any employee of the Utility turn on water for
construction work unless the contractor first presents a permit. Upon
completion of the construction work, the contractor must return the
original permit to the Water Department, together with a statement of
the actual amount of construction work performed.
C. Consumers shall not allow contractors, masons or other persons to take
water from their premises without first showing a permit from the
Department. Any consumer failing to comply with this provision is
§ 523-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 523-10
1:521
§ 523-11. Use of hydrants for construction.
§ 523-12. Operation of valves and hydrants; unauthorized use of
water.
Any person who shall, without permission from the Superintendent, allow
contractors, masons, or other unauthorized persons to take water from their
premises, operate any valve connected with the street or supply mains, or
open any fire hydrant connected with the distribution system, except for the
purpose of extinguishing fire, or who shall wantonly injure or impair the
same shall be subject to a fine as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and
Bond Schedules, plus he shall pay for repair of the damage he has caused.
§ 523-13. Refunds of monetary deposits.
All moneys deposited as security for payment of charges arising from the
use of temporary water supply on a metered basis, or for the return of a
sprinkling valve wheel or reducer, if the water is used on an unmetered
subject to having his water service discontinued, fines, and other
penalties.
A. In cases where no other supply is available, permission may be granted
by the Superintendent to use a hydrant. No hydrant shall be used until
it is equipped with a sprinkling valve. A charge as prescribed in the
Town Fee Schedule will be made for setting a valve or for moving it
from one hydrant to another. In no case shall any valve be moved except
by a member of the Water Department.
B. The Water Utility has invested a sum of money in excess of $200 for
purchase of the hydrant, valve and meter. To help assure the Utility that
this valve or meter is not lost while in the possession of a contractor, a
deposit as prescribed in the Town Fee Schedule is requested. If the
meter or valve becomes damaged or lost, the deposit will be used
towards repair or replacement and will cover the insurance deductible.
(See additional charges PSC report.)
C. Before a meter is set, payment must be made for its setting and for the
water to be used at the scheduled rates. When the contractor has
finished using the hydrant, he must notify the Water Department to that
effect. The minimum charge for the use of water from a hydrant will be
as prescribed in the Town Fee Schedule, exclusive of the deposit. (See
additional charges PSC report.)
D. In the use of a fire hydrant supply, the hydrant meter will be set at the
proper opening by the Water Department when the sprinkling valve is
set, and the flow of water must be regulated by means of the sprinkling
valve. If the water is to be used through iron pipe connections, all such
pipe installations shall have the swing joint to facilitate quick
disconnection from the fire hydrant.
§ 523-10 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 523-13
1:522
basis, will be refunded to the depositor on the termination of the use of
depositor and the return of the wheel and reducer in good condition.
§ 523-14. Service connection or water laterals. [Amended
5-18-1999]
§ 523-15. Replacement and repair of service pipe.
A. No water service shall be laid through any trench having cinders,
rubbish, rock or gravel fill, or any other material which may cause
injury to or disintegration of the service pipe, unless adequate means of
protection are provided by sand filling or such other insulation as may
be approved by the Superintendent. Service pipes passing through
masonry shall be adequately safeguarded by provision of a channel
space or pipe casing not less than twice the diameter of the service
connection. The space between the service pipe and channel or pipe
casing shall be filled and lightly caulked with an oakum, mastic cement,
or other resilient material and made impervious to moisture.
B. In backfilling the pipe trench, the service pipe must be protected
against injury by carefully hand tamping sand fill, free from hard lumps,
rocks, stones, or other injurious material, around and at least six inches
over the pipe.
C. All water supplies shall be of undiminished size from the street main in
to the point of meter placement, unless otherwise approved by the
Superintendent. Beyond the meter outlet valve the piping shall be sized
and proportioned to provide, on all floors, at all times, an equitable
distribution of water supply for the greatest probable number of
fixtures or appliances operating simultaneously.
D. The minimum size water service line hereafter installed shall be one
inch in diameter. Service line sizes over one inch in diameter shall be
according to the State Plumbing Code, unless a variance is approved by
the Board.175
E. No building shall be constructed in the Town of Grand Chute, within the
geographical boundaries of the district, after the effective date of this
chapter, unless water service installation for said building is the
installation of copper service from the water main to the curb stop.
Ductile iron pipe or PVC pipe with tracer wire may be substituted for
copper service with the express permission of the Utility
Superintendent.
A. Where the property owner requests that a large service lateral be
installed to replace an existing smaller diameter pipe, he shall pay the
actual cost of the installation. When replacing a water service, in many
cases the existing material has been damaged or has deteriorated
175. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 523-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 523-15
1:523
§ 523-16. Charges for water wasted due to leaks.
§ 523-17. Thawing frozen services.
through natural causes. Thus the salvage value is minimal or
nonexistent. It is extremely difficult to determine what the salvage
value really is. To eliminate any conflict over determining the amount
of the salvage value, the Utility has decided not to take a salvage
value into consideration when replacing a water service. [Amended
12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
B. The service pipe from the main to and through the curb stop will be
maintained and kept in repair and, when worn out, replaced at the
expense of the Water Department. The property owner shall maintain
the service pipe from the curb stop to the point of use and can be billed
for any water which has not passed through the meter and has been
wasted by leakage or defective pipes and fixtures, as estimated by the
Superintendent.
C. If a consumer fails to repair a leaking or broken service pipe from curb
stop to point of metering or use within such time as may appear
reasonable to the Superintendent after notification has been served on
the consumer by the Superintendent, the water will be shut off and will
not be turned on again until the repairs have been completed.
A. Water losses that occur between the main in the street and the curb
stop box are the responsibility of the Utility and may not be charged to
the customer. The property owner has the responsibility for repair or
replacement of the service piping from the curb stop to a point of
metering, and the Utility is responsible for repair and replacement from
the main through the curb stop. Water will be shut off after notification
by the Superintendent that repair is required and will not be turned on
again until repairs have been completed.
B. If a leak is not reported to the Utility, all investigation charges shall be
billed, along with water wasted estimates by Superintendent, to the
contractor who signed the permit.
C. Water losses that occur on the premises which are registered by the
water meter shall be the responsibility of the customer and should be
billed at the filed rate of the Utility. The Water Utility shall inform each
customer at least once each year that it is the sole responsibility of the
customer to prevent leakage in all piping and fixtures on the premises
at and beyond the metering point and that any leaks or other losses of
water registered by the meter will be billed at the filed rate.
D. Water losses from a leak found in a customer's appliance or plumbing
shall be estimated and billed to the customer at a rate not less than the
Utility's cost. [Section PSC 185.35(6), Wis. Adm. Code.] [Amended
12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
§ 523-15 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 523-17
1:524
§ 523-18. Stop boxes.
The consumer shall protect the stop box and shall keep the same free from
dirt and other obstructions. The Utility shall not be liable for failure to
locate the stop box and shut off the water in case of a leak on the consumer's
premises.
§ 523-19. Installation of meters. [Amended 7-15-1997]
A. Frozen services shall be thawed by and at the expense of the Water
Department except where the freezing was caused by contributory fault
or negligence on the part of the consumer, such as undue exposure of
the piping in the building or on the consumer's property or failure to
comply with Water Department specifications and requirements as to
depth of service, lack of sufficient backfill, etc.
B. Following the freezing of a service, the Water Department shall take
such steps and issue such instructions as may be necessary to prevent
the refreezing of the same service. No charge will be made for
rethawings if the instructions were followed. In case it is necessary to
allow the water to flow to prevent refreezing, the consumer must make
provision for proper disposal of the wastewater.
C. For the period in which the water is allowed to run, the consumer will
be billed according to his meter readings, but in no event to exceed the
average amount paid in the corresponding billing periods of the
previous two years. A new consumer will be charged the average bill for
other customers of the same class receiving service under comparable
conditions.
A. Meters and outside reading devices will be furnished and placed by the
Water Department and are not to be disconnected or tampered with by
the consumer. All meters and reading devices shall be so located that
they shall be protected from obstructions and permit ready access
thereto for reading, inspection, and servicing, such locations to be
designated or approved by the Superintendent. All piping within the
building must be supplied by the consumer. Where additional meters
are desired by the consumer, he shall pay for all piping and an
additional amount sufficient to cover the cost of maintenance and
depreciation of the additional meter and reading device. [Amended
12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
B. Multiunit buildings (apartment houses, high rises, etc.) shall be
supplied from a single large service and meter or with each unit
separately plumbed and individually metered with a remote register. All
meters shall be contained in a separate locked room or area accessible
to Utility personnel. The room or area will be limited to Utility
personnel and the owner to ensure the integrity of the meter readings.
The Utility and owner will be the only persons with a key to the room or
area mentioned above.
§ 523-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 523-19
1:525
§ 523-20. Repairs to meters.
§ 523-21. Service piping for meter settings.
C. The Sanitary District No. 1 may reinstall water meters that have been
removed by Sanitary District personnel for construction, winterization,
foreclosures or other requests from water customers, subject to the
following fees and restrictions: [Added 12-4-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-16]
(1) Water meter reinstallation within one year of removal shall be
charged at Wisconsin Public Service Commission rates.
(2) Water meter reinstallation greater than one year from the date of
removal, that had not previously paid the initial connection fees,
will be required to pay the current Town of Grand Chute water
impact fee as set forth in the Town of Grand Chute's Fee
Schedule176 in addition to reinstallation charges at Wisconsin
Public Service Commission rates.
(3) Where the meter has been removed by someone other than the
Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District personnel, reinstallation
shall also require the payment of a tampering fee as set forth on the
Town of Grand Chute's Bond Schedule and fees for surreptitious
use of water (see § 523-27).
(4) All fees are due prior to reinstallation of the meter.
(5) Such fees may be charged to the customer, owner, or both.
A. Meters will be repaired by the Water Department, and the cost of such
repairs caused by ordinary wear and tear will be borne by the Water
Department.
B. Repair of any damage to a meter or reading device resulting from the
carelessness of the owner of the premises, his agent, or tenant, or from
the negligence of any one of them to properly secure and protect the
same, including any damage that may result from allowing a water
meter to become frozen or to be injured from the presence of hot water
or steam in the meter, shall be paid for by the consumer or the owner of
the premises.
A. In cases where a new customer whose service is to be metered installs
the original service piping or where an existing metered customer
changes his service piping for his own convenience, or where an
existing flat rate customer requests to be metered, the customer shall,
at his expense, provide a suitable location and the proper connections
for the meter. The Superintendent should be consulted as to the type
and size of meter setting. Where it is possible to set meters in the
176. Editor's Note: For the most current fees, consult the Town Fee Schedule on file in the
Town Clerk's office.
§ 523-19 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 523-21
1:526
§ 523-22. Turning on water.
The water cannot be turned on for a customer except by a duly authorized
employee of the Water Department. When a plumber has completed a job,
he must leave the water turned off. This does not prevent him from testing
his work.
§ 523-23. Failure to read meters.
§ 523-24. Complaint meter tests.177
If a customer requests, the Water Department shall promptly make an
accuracy test in addition to the periodic or installation test if 24 months or
more have elapsed since the last complaint test of the same meter in the
same location. If less than 24 months has expired, there will be a charge
as prescribed in the Town Fee Schedule, payable in advance. If the meter
is found fast in excess of 3%, any payment that was made for the test will
be refunded and there will be an adjustment for past billings. See §§ PSC
185.61 through 185.78, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 523-25. Right of entry.
During reasonable hours, any officer or authorized employee of the Water
Department shall have the right of access to the premises supplied with
basement or other suitable place within the building, a short nipple
shall be inserted after the stop and waste cock, then a union, and then
another nipple and coupling of the proper length. The nipple attached
to the union and coupling shall be cut to a standard length provided by
the plans of the Superintendent (he may require a horizontal run of 18
inches in such pipeline) which may later be removed from the insertion
of the meter into the supply line.
B. No permit will be given to change from metered to flat rate service.
A. Where the Water Department is unable to read a meter after two
successive attempts, the fact will be plainly indicated on the bill, and
either an estimated bill will be computed or the minimum charge
applied. The difference will be adjusted when the meter is again read,
that is, the bill for the succeeding quarter will include the previous
quarter. Only in unusual cases or where approval is obtained from the
customer shall more than two consecutive estimated bills be rendered.
B. If the meter is damaged (see § 523-27, Surreptitious use of water) or
fails to operate, the bill will be based on the average use during the past
year unless there is some reason why the use is not normal. If the
average use cannot be properly employed, the bill will be estimated by
some equitable method.
177. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 523-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 523-25
1:527
service for the purpose of inspection or for the enforcement of the Water
Department's rules and regulations. At least once every 12 months the
Water Department will make a systematic inspection of all unmetered water
taps for the purpose of checking waste and unnecessary use of water.
§ 523-26. Deposit and guarantee rules.
A. Customer deposits.
(1) New residential service. The Utility may require a cash deposit or
other guarantee as a condition of new residential service if, and
only if, the customer has an outstanding account balance with the
Utility which accrued within the last six years and which at the time
of the request for new service remains outstanding and not in
dispute.
(2) Existing residential service. The Utility may require a cash deposit
or other guarantee as a condition of continued service if, and only
if, either or both the following circumstances apply:
(a) Service has been shut off or discontinued within the last 12
months for violation of these rules and regulations or for
nonpayment of a delinquent bill for service which is not in
dispute.
(b) Credit information obtained by the Utility subsequent to the
initial application indicates that the initial application for
service was falsified or incomplete to the extent that a deposit
would be under these rules and regulations.
(3) Commercial and industrial service. If the credit for an applicant for
commercial or industrial service has not been established to the
satisfaction of the Utility, it may be required to make a deposit or
otherwise guarantee to the Utility payment of bills for service.
(4) Conditions of deposit. The customer shall be advised, in writing if
requested, why a deposit or other guarantee is being required. The
deposit for a new residential service customer, commercial
customer or industrial customer shall not exceed the highest
estimated gross bill for any two consecutive months selected by the
Utility. The deposit for an existing residential customer shall not
exceed the highest actual gross bill for any two consecutive months
selected by the Utility within the preceding twelve-month review
period. Deposits shall bear simple interest at the legal rate, payable
from the date of deposit to the date of refund or discontinuance of
service, whichever is earlier.
(5) Refund of deposits. The Utility shall review the payment record of
each residential customer with a deposit on file at not less than
twelve-month intervals and shall not require or continue to require
a deposit unless a deposit could be required under the conditions
stated above. In the case of a commercial or industrial customer,
§ 523-25 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 523-26
1:528
the Utility shall refund the deposit after 24 consecutive months of
prompt payment if the customer's credit standing is satisfactory to
the Utility. Payment shall be considered "prompt" if it is made prior
to notice of disconnection for nonpayment of a bill not in dispute.
Any deposit or portion thereof refunded to a customer shall be
refunded by check unless both the customer and the Utility agree
to credit the regular bill or unless service is terminated, in which
case the deposit with accrued interest shall be applied to the final
bill and any balance returned to the customer promptly.
(6) Other conditions. A new or additional deposit may be required upon
reasonable written notice of the need therefor if such new or
additional deposit could have been required under the
circumstances when the initial deposit was made. Service may be
refused or disconnected for failure to pay a deposit request as
provided in the rules. When service has been disconnected for
failure to comply with the terms of a deferred payment agreement
and satisfactory arrangements have been made to have service
restored, a reconnection charge as specified elsewhere in these
rules shall be paid by the customer as a condition to restoration of
service.
(7) Guarantee contracts.
(a) The Utility may accept, in lieu of a cash deposit, a contract
signed by a guarantor satisfactory to the Utility whereby
payment of a specified sum not exceeding the cast deposit
requirement is guaranteed. The term of a guarantee contract
shall be two years but shall automatically terminate after the
customer has closed his account or at the guarantor's request
upon 30 days' written notice to the Utility.
(b) Upon termination of a guarantee contract or whenever the
Utility deems the same insufficient as to amount or surety, a
cash deposit or a new additional guarantee may be required
upon reasonable written notice to the customer. Service to any
customer who fails to comply with these requirements may be
refused or, upon eight days' written notice, disconnected.
(c) The Utility shall mail the guarantor copies of all disconnection
notices sent to the customer whose account he has guaranteed
unless the guarantor waives such notice in writing.
(d) In lieu of a cash deposit or guarantee, an applicant for new
service who has an outstanding account accrued within the last
six years with the Utility shall have the right to receive service
from the Utility under a deferred payment agreement as
provided in these rules and regulations for the outstanding
account balance.
(e) In the event that the Water Department is not able to collect
any bill for water service even though deposit and guarantee
§ 523-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 523-26
1:529
§ 523-27. Surreptitious use of water.
§ 523-28. Vacation of premises.
When premises are to be vacated, the Water Department shall be notified in
writing at once so that it may remove the meter and shut off the supply at
the curb stop. The owner of the premises shall be liable to prosecution for
any damage to the property of the Water Department by reason of failure to
notify the Water Department of vacancy.
§ 523-29. Repairs to mains.
The Water Department reserves the right to temporarily shut off the water
in the mains to make repairs, alterations or additions to the plat or system.
When circumstances permit, the Water Department will give notification,
by newspaper publication or otherwise, of the discontinuance of the supply.
No rebate will be allowed to customers for such temporary suspension of
supply.
§ 523-30. Protection of public safety.
When the Water Department with its own forces is making repairs or
installing new mains and services, it shall be the duty of the Superintendent
rules are in force, the bill may be put upon the tax roll as
provided in § 66.0809, Wis. Stats.
A. When the Water Department has reasonable evidence that a customer
is obtaining a supply of water, in whole or in part, by means of devices
or methods used to stop or interfere with the proper metering by the
Water Department's equipment, the Water Department reserves the
right to estimate and present immediately a bill for service unmetered
as a result of such interference, and such bill shall be payable subject to
a twenty-four-hour disconnection of service. When the Water
Department shall have disconnected the customer for any such reason,
the Water Department will reconnect the customer upon the following
conditions:
(1) The customer will be required to deposit with the Water
Department an amount sufficient to guarantee the payment of the
customer's bills for water service to the Water Department.
(2) The customer will be required to pay the Water Department for any
and all damages to its equipment on the customer's premises due
to such stoppage or interference with its metering.
(3) The customer must further agree to comply with reasonable
requirements to protect the Water Department against further
losses.
B. Sections 98.26 and 943.20, Wis. Stats., as relating to water service, are
hereby adopted and made a part of these rules.
§ 523-26 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 523-30
1:530
to see that all open ditches for water mains, hydrants, and service pipes are
properly guarded to prevent accident to any person or vehicle, and at night
there shall be displayed amber signal lights in such manner as will, so far
as possible, ensure the safety of the public.
§ 523-31. Contractors responsible for water mains and service
pipes.
§ 523-32. Superintendent to approve contractor's methods.
The contractor installing a sewer or other utility that crosses or exposes any
main, service line or other equipment of the Water Department shall, before
backfilling his trench, get approval of his methods from the Superintendent
of the Water Department. The Water Superintendent shall also view the
exposed water main, service line or appurtenant equipment before and
while the sewer or other utility is backfilled.
§ 523-33. Bond and permit required of contractor.
A. Where excavating machines are used in digging sewers or other
utilities, all water mains, service laterals and appurtenant Water
Department equipment shall be maintained at the expense of the
contractor.
B. Contractors must ascertain for themselves the existence and location of
all Water Department mains, service laterals and appurtenances.
Where they are removed, cut or damaged in the construction of a sewer
or other utility, the contractor must at his own expense cause them to
be replaced or repaired at once under the observation of and to the
satisfaction of the Superintendent of the Water Department. He must
not shut off the water service pipes from any customer for a period
exceeding six hours.
A. To assure compliance with §§ 523-26 and 523-27 above, a contractor
contemplating underground work (trenching, open cutting, tunneling,
etc.) shall obtain a permit from, and post a bond with, the
Superintendent of the Water Department. The permit shall be on the
form furnished by the Water Department. Before a permit will be
issued, the exact scope and nature of the contractor's intended work
shall be made known to the Water Department Superintendent. The
permit will cost the contractor an amount as prescribed in the Town Fee
Schedule and double charges if work is started without permit
application on file. The bond shall be in the amount of $2,000 and shall
be held by the Water Department as a guarantee that any damage the
contractor causes to the mains, service lines and equipment of the
Water Department is repaired at the expense of the contractor to the
complete satisfaction of the Superintendent of the Water Department.
The contractor may combine this bond, for a total bond of $5,000,
combining the same within the provisions of § 440-5 of this Code, where
applicable. Under this subsection, all costs and expenses incident to the
§ 523-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 523-33
1:531
§ 523-34. Protective devices.
installation and connection of water mains shall then be borne by the
owner and/or agent or contractor of the owner. Costs and expenses
shall include any damage caused by the owner, or any agent/contractor
of the owner, either to the Town of Grand Chute, the Town of Grand
Chute Sanitary District No. 1, or to any third party resulting from said
installation and connection of water mains or further resulting from
negligent construction, negligent installation or negligent connection
of water mains by the owner and/or any agent or contractor of the
owner. Damages shall further include any loss or damages directly
or indirectly occasioned by the installation and connection of water
mains, including any damages resulting from trenching, open cutting or
tunneling. Damages shall further include any legal expenses incurred
by the Town of Grand Chute or the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary
District No. 1 as a result of damages sustained during said installation
and connection. The bond under this subsection, or under this section
in general, shall provide, within its terms and conditions, that the bond
shall remain in full force and effect for one year from date of completion
of the installation of water mains.
B. In all cases where the installation and connection of water mains shall
include any construction within a federal highway, state highway, or
county highway right-of-way, or any trenching, open cutting or
tunneling of any federal highway, state highway, or county highway,
then the owner or any agent/contractor hired by the owner to
accomplish the project shall post a bond with the Town or with the
Water Department Superintendent as a guarantee and indemnity that
any and all damages caused to any federal, state or county right-of-way
or any federal highway, state highway, or county highway or any and all
appurtenances thereto shall be repaired at the sole expense of the
owner or the agent/contractor of the owner, all to the complete
satisfaction of the Town or the Water Department Superintendent. This
bond shall be in the amount of $50,000 when the installation and
connection of water mains includes any trenching, open cutting or
tunneling within any federal, state, or county highway or federal, state,
or county highway right-of-way. The combined bond under this
subsection and § 440-3C shall be in the amount of $50,000. Damages
are defined hereunder to include all damages resulting from said
installation and connection or resulting from any negligent installation,
negligent connection or negligent construction. The term "damages" as
utilized herein shall include any legal expenses incurred by the Town of
Grand Chute or the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1 as a
result of damages sustained during said installation and connection.
A. Protective devices in general. The owner or occupant of every premises
receiving water supply shall apply and maintain suitable means of
protection of the premises supply, and all appliances thereof, against
damage arising in any manner from the use of the water supply,
variation of water pressure, or any interruption of water supply.
§ 523-33 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 523-34
1:532
§ 523-35. Cross-connection control and backflow prevention.
[Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30; 3-17-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02]
Particularly, such owner or occupant must protect water-cooled
compressors for refrigeration systems by means of high-pressure safety
cutout devices. There shall likewise be provided means for the
prevention of the transmission of water hammer or noise of operation
of any valve or appliance through the piping of his own or adjacent
premises.
B. Relief valves. On all closed systems (i.e., systems having a check valve,
pressure regulator, or reducing valve, water filter or softener) an
effective pressure relief valve shall be installed either in the top tapping
or the upper side tapping of the hot water distribution pipe connection
at the tank. A one-half-inch drainpipe shall be connected to the relief
valve for discharge on the floor or into a sink or open drain through an
air gap. No stop valve shall be placed between the hot water sink and
the relief valve or on the drainpipe.
C. Air chambers. An air chamber or approved shock absorber shall be
installed at the terminus of each riser, fixture branch, or hydraulic
elevator main for the prevention of undue water hammer. The air
chamber shall have a diameter not less than that of the pipe it serves
and a length not less than 15 diameters of said supply pipe. Where
possible, the air chamber shall be provided at its base with a valve and
drain cock for water drainage and replenishment of air.
A. Purpose:
(1) To protect the public water supply served by Grand Chute Sanitary
District No. 1 (the Water Department) from the possibility of
contamination or pollution by isolating such contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow or backsiphon into the public
water system.
(2) To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections,
actual or potential, between the customer's potable water system
and nonpotable water systems or other sources of possible
contamination.
(3) To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of crossconnection
control that will systematically and effectively prevent
or eliminate the contamination or pollution of all potable water
systems.
B. Authority/responsibility.
(1) The Safe Drinking Water Act, created by the federal government,
and established through the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA), sets national safe drinking water standards and compels the
states to take responsibility for the enforcement of these standards
§ 523-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 523-35
1:533
as well as the supervision of public water supplies and sources of
drinking water.
(2) The Wisconsin DNR, through Chs. NR 810 and 811 and SPS 381
through 387, Wis. Adm. Code, requires that the Water Department
shall cause surveys/inspections to be made of all properties served
by the municipal water system where cross-connection with the
public water system is deemed possible.
(3) The owner shall be responsible for the elimination of, or protection
from, all cross-connections on his/her premises. The owner shall, at
his/her expense, have installed, maintained, and/or tested any and
all required backflow preventers on his/her premises.
(4) A qualified representative of the Department shall have the power
and authority, at all reasonable times and for proper purpose, to
inspect any property served by the municipal water system for
cross-connections.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BACKFLOW — The unwanted reverse flow of liquids, solids or gases.
BACKFLOW PREVENTER — Any assembly, device or means designed
to prevent backflow caused by back pressure or backsiphonage.
BACK PRESSURE — A pressure greater than the supply pressure that
may cause backflow.
BACKSIPHONAGE — The creation of a backflow as a result of negative
pressure.
CROSS-CONNECTION — Any connection or potential connection
between any part of a water supply system and another environment
containing substances in a manner that, under any circumstances,
would allow the substances to enter the water supply system by means
of backsiphonage or back pressure.
D. Administration.
(1) The Water Department will operate a comprehensive crossconnection
control program, to include the initiation and
notification of required surveys and testing for commercial,
industrial and public authority properties, and surveying,
notification and follow-up inspections as required for residential
properties as well as keeping of all necessary records.
(2) The owner of each commercial, industrial and public authority
property will be notified and shall, at his/her own expense, have
his/her premises surveyed by the qualified contractor of his/her
choice.
§ 523-35 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 523-35
1:534
(3) The Water Department reserves the right to perform random
compliance surveys of any commercial, industrial and public
authority property in place of the routinely scheduled survey.
(4) All cross-connection control surveyors must be Wisconsin Cross-
Connection Control Tester certified, Wisconsin-licensed
journeymen or master plumbers or trained Water Department
personnel.
(5) The frequency of surveys and inspections is based on the potential
health hazards involved and shall be established by the Water
Department in accordance with DNR guidelines.
(6) The owner shall allow his/her property and all piping, fixtures,
appliances and appurtenances to be inspected for possible crossconnections
at all reasonable times.
(7) Copies of all cross-connection control assembly performance
testing conducted on any backflow preventer shall be provided to
the Water Department and shall be available for review on site.
(8) This section does not supersede the State Plumbing Code or
§ 220-31 of the Town of Grand Chute Municipal Code, entitled
"Plumbing."
E. Requirements; cross-connections prohibited.
(1) No person shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or
permit to be maintained any cross-connection.
(2) No person shall remove, alter, bypass, disable or permit to be
removed, altered, bypassed or disabled any cross-connection
control method, device or assembly without providing appropriate
protection in its place.
(3) No person shall establish or allow to be established any connection
between the municipal water supply and another water supply
supplied by a private well without prior written approval of both
the Department of Natural Resources and Grand Chute Utilities.
(4) Cross-connections between any part of a water supply system and
another environment containing substances other than municipal
water are prohibited.
(5) Water supply systems and the connection to each plumbing fixture,
appliance, piece of equipment, or appurtenance shall be protected
by methods, devices or assemblies as approved by § SPS 382.41,
Wis. Adm. Code.
(6) All direct connections to the sewer or other potential contamination
source shall be eliminated immediately.
§ 523-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 523-35
1:535
§ 523-36. Additional rules and regulations.
Chapter PSC 185, Wis. Adm. Code, as relating to standards for water public
utility service, is hereby adopted and made a part of these rules.
§ 523-37. Connection to water system.
F. Reinspections. Any property owner, tenant, company or association
which fails or neglects to comply with any lawful repair order issued by
the Water Department or authorized personnel may be assessed a
reinspection fee as listed in the current Town Fee Schedule, per
inspections in excess of one.
G. Discontinuance of water service.
(1) The Water Department is hereby authorized and directed to
discontinue water service to any property wherein any connection
in violation of this section exists, and to take such precautionary
measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of
contamination of the public water supply.
(2) If it is determined by the Water Department that a cross-connection
or an emergency endangers public health, safety or welfare, water
service may be immediately discontinued.
(3) Water service shall not be restored until cross-connections have
been eliminated in compliance with this section.
A. All premises to which water service is made available by the placement
and/or extension of water main shall connect to the water system no
later than 90 days from the date that service is first made available. If
the Sanitary District Commissioners find that an unusual hardship
exists or that special circumstances exist regarding proposed water
services made available to residents within the jurisdiction of the
Sanitary District, then this requirement can be modified in the sole
discretion of the Sanitary District Commissioners. In no event may the
time for connection to the water system be extended beyond five years
from the date that service is first made available; provided, however,
that any time extension for connection to the water system shall be
immediately terminated if either a biological or chemical test of the
existing well reveals contamination in the private water system. In such
event, the property in question shall connect to the public water system
as quickly as possible, but in no event later than 30 days from the date
that the test results are made available.
B. If an individual private water supply is available at the premises, such
private water supply may be utilized by the owner after public water is
extended, at his discretion, provided that no cross-connection shall be
made between the private supply and the Water Department's water
system and provided that the owner of the premises must still connect
to the Water Department's system and will be responsible for all fees,
§ 523-35 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 523-37
1:536
§ 523-38. Separate water service.178
Where two or more residences, stores, commercial buildings, or other
buildings are joined by a common wall so that it is possible to have two or
more persons own the two or more residences, stores, commercial buildings
or other buildings, or portion thereof, each such residence, store,
commercial building or other building shall have a separate water service
to the water main and shall be separately metered. If this rule creates an
unreasonable situation in the opinion of the Board of Water Commissioners,
the Board reserves the right to waive or modify this rule.
§ 523-39. Service outside of district limits.
No water service will be provided to property located outside of the Town of
Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1 boundaries. If the owner of the property
or properties located adjacent to but outside of the Town of Grand Chute
Sanitary District No. 1 boundaries desires to obtain service, such owner
or owners must petition the Board of Water Commissioners for annexation
to the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1. Water service may be
provided to such properties after annexation has been completed.
§ 523-40. Tax levy.
The Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1 reserves the right to
levy a tax pursuant to § 60.77(6), Wis. Stats., upon all taxable property
in the district to provide adequate funds to help meet the debt service
requirements and operating expenses of the system.
§ 523-41. Water main extensions.
Water mains will be extended for new customers on the following basis:
assessments, minimum charges, etc., resulting from the extension of
water service and the connection to the Water Department's water
system. Any building hereinafter erected or constructed in the Town
of Grand Chute where the owner desires an individual private water
supply shall have such construction reviewed and approved by the
Sanitary District Commissioners. Such approval shall generally be
limited to outdoor water uses, such as ponds, pools, and landscaping
uses. If the owner requests use of a private well for indoor plumbing,
it shall be provided such that, in addition to no cross-connection as
above stated, the individual owner's drinking and toilet facilities shall
be connected to the Water Department's system.
A. Where the cost of the extension is to immediately be collected through
assessment by the municipality against the abutting property, the
procedure set forth under § 66.0703, Wis. Stats., will apply, and no
additional customer contribution to the Utility will be required.
178. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 523-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 523-41
1:537
§ 523-42. Water main assessment procedure.
B. Where the municipality is unwilling or unable to make a special
assessment, then extension will be made on a customer-financed basis
as follows:
(1) The applicant(s) will advance as a contribution in aid of
construction, the total amount equivalent to that which would have
been assessed for all property under Subsection A.
(2) Part of the contribution required in Subsection B(1) will be
refundable. When additional customers are connected to the
extended main within 20 years of the date of completion,
contributions in aid of construction will be collected equal to the
amount which would have been assessed under Subsection A for
the abutting property being served. This amount will be refunded
to the original contributor(s). In no case will the contributions
received from additional customers exceed the proportionate
amount which would have been required under Subsection A nor
will it exceed the total assessable cost of the original extension.
C. When a new customer(s) is connected to an existing main, not financed
by customer contributions, it shall not be considered as a main
extension and no contribution may be collected from the customer(s).
A. Whenever the Board of Water Commissioners, Town of Grand Chute
Sanitary District No. 1 (water service), shall cause to be constructed a
water main in any street, alley, easement area or right-of-way within the
Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1, the District shall assess
abutting property owners, utilizing its police powers, under the
provisions of Chs. 60 and 66, Wis. Stats., in particular § 66.0703(1)(b),
Wis. Stats., as amended. The rate, per front foot of charged special
assessment, for water main construction to abutting property owners
shall be as determined by the Board of Water Commissioners following
public hearing and final resolution procedures under the above-stated
statutes.
B. Assessments shall be charged as per Town of Grand Chute Special
Assessment Policy approved August 17, 1993.179
C. In addition to any of the assessment methods heretofore set forth in this
chapter, the Board of Water Commissioners of the Town of Grand Chute
Sanitary District No. 1 (water service) may also implement a unit cost
assessment method for calculating special assessments. Use and
implementation of the unit cost assessment method shall be determined
in the discretion of the Board of Water Commissioners, Town of Grand
Chute Sanitary District No. 1. The unit cost assessment shall be
determined by distributing the total project costs among each parcel
abutting the construction areas on a residential equivalent user basis.
179. Editor's Note: See Ch. 57, Art. II, Special Assessments and Charges.
§ 523-41 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 523-42
1:538
§ 523-43. Initial user contribution charge for multiunit dwellings.180
Where the owner of a multiunit dwelling exercises the option pursuant to
Public Service Commission rules and regulations for the Town of Grand
Chute Sanitary District No. 1, being individual metered water service to
each unit, all fees, assessments and minimum charges under § 523-5 shall
be paid for each individual metered service and all meter services added in
the future.
§ 523-44. Regulations part of contract.
This chapter establishes rules, rates and regulations governing the Water
Department of the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1. In addition,
the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1 operating rules and
regulations, adopted pursuant to Public Service Commission Authorization
Order No. 2-U-8037, letter dated September 15, 1975, are incorporated
herein by reference. All such rules and regulations, including the provisions
of Ch. PSC 185, Wis. Adm. Code, adopted herein by reference, shall be
considered a part of the contract, and every person, company or corporation
Residential equivalent users (REU) shall be determined for each parcel,
property, resident and business in the following manner:
(1) Each single-family home or lot shall be the equivalent of one REU.
(2) Residential equivalent users shall be determined for all other
parcels, properties and businesses on a meter equivalency basis as
follows:
Water Meter Size
(inches) REU
5/8 or 3/4 1.0
1 2.5
1 1/4 3.7
1 1/2 5.0
2 8.0
2 1/2 12.5
3 15.0
4 25.0
6 50.0
8 80.0
10 120.0
12 160.0
180. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 523-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 523-44
1:539
who or which is supplied with water agrees to be bound thereby. Each
such person, company or corporation shall be known in these rules and
regulations as the "customer."
§ 523-45. Violations and penalties.
§ 523-46. Extensions outside of municipal boundaries.
A. Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter,
where the provision has no penalty terms or conditions or corrective
terms and conditions, shall be served by the Town with written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit
for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the
time prescribed in such notice, permanently cease all violations.181
B. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in Subsection A above shall, upon conviction thereof,
forfeit an amount as prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond
Schedules for each such violation, together with the costs of
prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and the costs
of prosecution shall be imprisonment in the county jail until such
forfeiture and costs of prosecution are paid, not to exceed 90 days.
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, where not in
violation of any statute or Public Service Commission rule or regulation,
shall become liable to the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1
for any expenses, losses or damage occasioned to the Sanitary District
by reason of such violation, which shall be recovered by a civil action by
the Attorney for the Sanitary District.
A. Effective January 22, 1982, the Town of Grand Chute and the Town of
Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1 shall not extend water mains or
water laterals, nor make available water services, to parcels of real
estate which are not within the municipal boundaries of either the Town
of Grand Chute or the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1.
B. This section is adopted by the Town of Grand Chute and the Town of
Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1 pursuant to and under the
authority of § 66.0813, Wis. Stats., as amended.
C. The Town of Grand Chute has attempted without success to negotiate
with the City of Appleton a statement of policy and procedure whereby
the Town of Grand Chute and/or the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary
District No. 1 and the City of Appleton would provide water service to
real estate parcels adjacent to but not within their respective municipal
boundaries, where the parcel is not a part of the community that has
water mains available for service to the parcel, and further to provide
for the collection by the servicing community, from the parcel not within
181. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 523-44 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 523-46
1:540
§ 523-47. Reimbursement for attachment costs.
Each person, firm, corporation, or other entity petitioning the Town of
Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1 for attachment of properties to the
Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1 shall, prior to the date that the
Town of Grand Chute adopts the required order for attachment, be required
to prepay an amount as prescribed in the Fee Schedule to reimburse the
Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1 for required publication costs
and attorney fees. In those cases where the real estate, as petitioned, will
be attached to both Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1 for water
services and Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 2 for sewer services
and the real estate has the exact similar description and scale map, the
total reimbursement fee to be paid to the two Sanitary Districts shall be as
prescribed in the Fee Schedule.
§ 523-48. Well abandonment.
the servicing community's municipal boundaries, for the regular water
service patron charges. Until such time as a reciprocal and mutual
statement of policy and procedure is agreed in writing between the
Town of Grand Chute and the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District
No. 1 and the City of Appleton, this section prohibiting water main
extensions or water main laterals to service parcels which are not
within the municipal boundaries of the Town of Grand Chute or the
Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1 shall remain in full force
and effect.182
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prevent contamination of
groundwater and to protect public health, safety and welfare by
assuring that unused, unsafe or noncomplying wells, or wells which
may serve as conduits for contamination, or wells which may be
illegally cross-connected to the municipal water system, are properly
abandoned.
B. Applicability. This section applies to all wells located on premises
served by the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1 municipal
system.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM — A system for the provision to the
public of piped water for human consumption, when such system has at
least 15 service connections or regularly serves at least 25 year-round
residents, owned and operated by a city, village, county, town, town
sanitary district, utility district or public institution or a privately owned
water utility serving any of the above.183
182. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
183. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 523-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 523-48
1:541
NONCOMPLYING — A well or pump installation which does not comply
with the provisions of Ch. NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code, in effect at the
time the well was constructed, a contamination source was installed,
the pump was installed or work was done on either the well or pump
installation.
PUMP INSTALLATION — The pump and related equipment used for
withdrawing water from a well, including the discharge piping, the
underground connections, pitless adapters, pressure tanks, pits,
sampling faucets and well seals and caps.
UNSAFE — A well or pump installation which produces water which
is bacteriologically contaminated or contaminated with substances in
exceedance of the standards of Ch. NR 809 or NR 812, Wis. Adm.
Code, or for which a health advisory has been issued by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources.
UNUSED — A well or pump installation which is not in use or does not
have a functional pumping system.
WELL — An excavation or opening into the ground made by digging,
boring, drilling, driving, or other methods for the purpose of obtaining
groundwater for consumption or other use.
WELL ABANDONMENT — The filling and sealing of a well according to
the provisions of Ch. NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
D. Abandonment required. All wells located on premises served by the
municipal water system shall be abandoned in accordance with the
terms of this section and Ch. NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code, no later than one
year from the date of connection to the municipal water system, unless
a well operation permit has been obtained by the well owner from the
Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1.
E. Well operation permit. The Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1
may grant a permit to a private well owner to operate a well for a period
not to exceed five years, provided that the conditions of this subsection
are met. An owner may request renewal of a well operation permit by
submitting information verifying that the conditions of this subsection
are met. The Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1, or its agents,
may conduct inspections or have water quality tests conducted at the
applicant's expense to obtain or verify information necessary for
consideration of a permit application or renewal. Permit applications
and renewals shall be made on forms provided by the Town of Grand
Chute Sanitary District No. 1. The following conditions must be met for
issuance or renewal of a well operation permit:
(1) The well and pump installation meet or are upgraded to meet the
requirements of Ch. NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code;
(2) The well construction and pump installation have a history of
producing bacteriologically safe water as evidenced by at least two
samplings taken a minimum of two weeks apart. No exception to
§ 523-48 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 523-48
1:542
this condition may be made for unsafe wells, unless the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources approves, in writing, the
continued use of the well;
(3) There are no cross-connections between the well and pump
installation in the municipal water system; and
(4) The proposed use of the well and pump installation can be justified
as being necessary in addition to water provided by the municipal
water system.
F. Abandonment procedures.
(1) All wells abandoned under the jurisdiction of this section or rule
shall be abandoned according to the procedures and methods of
Ch. NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code. All debris, pump, piping, unsealed
liners and any other obstructions which may interfere with sealing
operations shall be removed prior to abandonment.
(2) The owner of the well, or the owner's agent, shall notify the Town of
Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1 at least 48 hours prior to the
commencement of any well abandonment activities. The
abandonment of the well shall be observed by agents and/or
employees of the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1.
(3) An abandonment report form, supplied by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources, shall be submitted by the well
owner to the Town of Grand Chute Sanitary District No. 1 and to
the Wisconsin Department Natural Resources within 10 days of the
completion of the well abandonment.
G. Penalties. Any well owner violating any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction, be punished by forfeiture as prescribed in the Uniform
Forfeiture and Bond Schedules and the costs of prosecution, including
attorney fees. Each day a violation exists constitutes a separate offense.
If any person fails to comply with this section for more than 10 days
after receiving written notice of the violation, the municipality may
impose a penalty and cause the well abandonment to be performed and
the expense to be assessed as a special tax against the property.
§ 523-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 523-48
1:543
Chapter 535
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 220.
Comprehensive Plan — See Ch. 246.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 275.
Impact fees — See Ch. 330.
Mobile homes and mobile home parks — See
Ch. 382.
Sewers — See Ch. 440.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 463.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 475.
Water — See Ch. 523.
§ 523-48 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 523-48
1:544
ARTICLE I
Introduction
§ 535-1. Statutory authority; title.
This chapter is established pursuant to the provisions of § 60.62, Wis. Stats.,
and shall be known as the "Town of Grand Chute Zoning Ordinance."
§ 535-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety,
convenience and general welfare; to protect property values and the
property tax base; to permit the careful planning and efficient maintenance
of highway systems; to ensure adequate highway, utility, health, educational
and recreational facilities; to recognize the needs of agriculture, forestry,
industry and business in future growth; to encourage uses of land and
other natural resources which are in accordance with their character and
adaptability; to provide adequate light and air, including access to sunlight
for solar collectors and to wind for wind energy systems; to encourage
the protection of groundwater resources; to preserve wetlands; to conserve
soil, water and forest resources; to protect the beauty and amenities of
landscape and man-made developments; to provide healthy surroundings
for family life; and to promote the efficient and economical use of public
funds.
§ 535-3. Applicability and scope.
This chapter is designed to determine, establish, regulate and restrict:
A. The areas within which agriculture, forestry, industry, mining, trades,
business and recreation may be conducted.
B. The areas in which residential uses may be regulated or prohibited.
C. The areas in and along or in or along natural watercourses, channels,
streams and creeks in which trades or industries, filling or dumping,
erection of structures and the location of buildings may be prohibited or
restricted.
D. Trailer camps or tourist camps and motels, or both, and mobile home
parks.
E. Certain areas, uses or purposes which may be subjected to special
regulation.184
F. The location of buildings and structures designed for specific uses and
designation of uses for which buildings and structures may not be used
or altered.
184. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-3
1:545
G. The location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of buildings and
other structures.
H. The location of roads and schools.
I. Building setback lines.
J. The density and distribution of population.
K. The percentage of lot which may be occupied and size of yards, courts
and other open spaces.
L. Places, structures or objects with a special character, historic interest,
aesthetic interest or other significant value, historic landmarks and
historic districts.
M. Burial sites, as defined in § 157.70(1)(b), Wis. Stats.
§ 535-3 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-3
1:546
ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 535-4. Districts established. [Amended 1-18-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-04185]
To achieve the purposes of this chapter, the Town of Grand Chute is hereby
divided into the following districts as set forth in Article V of this chapter:
AED Exclusive Agricultural District
AGD General Agricultural District
RSF Single-Family Residential District
RTF Two-Family Residential District
R-2 Two-Family Residence District
R-3 Single-Family Attached Residence District
R-4 Multifamily Residence District.
R-5 Multifamily Residence District.
RMF Multifamily Residential District
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District
C-2 Office Commercial District
CL Local Commercial District
CR Regional Commercial District
CP Planned Commercial District
IND Industrial District
PDD Planned Development District
§ 535-5. Official Zoning Atlas.
A. Establishment. The location and boundaries of the districts shall be as
shown in a map atlas titled the "Official Zoning Atlas of Town of Grand
Chute, Outagamie County, Wisconsin." The district symbol as set out in
§ 535-4 above and Article V of this chapter shall be used to designate
each district. The Official Zoning Atlas with all notations, dimensions,
designations, references and other data shown shall accompany and be
part of this chapter, and upon adoption by the Town of Grand Chute
Board, each map page shall be signed by the Town Chairperson and
attested by the Town Clerk bearing the date of adoption.
B. Amendments. Amendments to the Official Zoning Atlas shall be
approved by the Outagamie County Board of Supervisors in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter and § 60.62, Wis. Stats. Amendments
shall be effective as provided in § 60.62, Wis. Stats. Amendments shall
185. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-5
1:547
§ 535-6. Interpretation of district boundaries.
promptly be portrayed on the appropriate map page and include the
ordinance number and effective date of the amendment.
C. Final authority as to zoning status. Regardless of the existence of
purported copies of all or part of the Official Zoning Atlas which may
from time to time be made or published, the Official Zoning Atlas which
shall be located in the Clerk's office shall be the final authority as to the
current zoning status of any lands.
D. Replacement of Official Zoning Atlas. If the Official Zoning Atlas, or any
page or portion thereof, becomes damaged, lost, destroyed or difficult
to interpret, the Town Board may by resolution adopt a new Official
Zoning Atlas, or any page or pages thereof, which shall supersede the
prior Official Zoning Atlas, or page or pages thereof. The new Official
Zoning Atlas, or page or pages thereof, may correct drafting or other
errors or omissions, but no such correction shall have the effect of
amending the original Official Zoning Atlas, or page or pages thereof. If,
in the process of correcting drafting or other errors or omissions,
district boundaries are changed or altered, then action shall be taken
only in the form of an amendment.
E. Retention of earlier maps. All zoning maps which have had the force
and effect of official zoning maps for the Town of Grand Chute prior to
the effective date of adoption of this chapter shall be retained as a
public record and as a guide to the zoning status of lands prior to such
date.
A. Except as otherwise specifically provided, a district symbol or name
shown within district boundaries on the Official Zoning Atlas indicates
that the district regulations pertaining to the district extend throughout
the whole area surrounded by the boundary line.
B. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts shown on the
Official Zoning Atlas, the following rules apply:
(1) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways, alleys or rights-of-way shall be construed as
following such center lines as they exist on the ground.
(2) Boundaries indicated as approximately following lot lines shall be
construed as following such lines; provided, however, that where
such boundaries are adjacent to the dedicated street, highway or
right-of-way and the zoning status of the street, highway or right-ofway
is not indicated, the boundaries shall be construed as running
to the middle of the street, highway or right-of-way.
(3) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the limits of
incorporated municipalities shall be construed as following such
limits.
§ 535-5 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-6
1:548
§ 535-7. Application of regulations.
The regulations set by this chapter shall be minimum regulations and shall
apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, and particularly,
except as hereinafter provided:
§ 535-8. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be considered minimum requirements. Where the provisions of this chapter
(4) Boundaries indicated as following railroad tracks shall be
construed as being midway between the main tracks.
(5) Where boundaries do not follow property lines and distances are
not specified, boundaries shall be determined by the use of the
scale in the Official Zoning Atlas.
(6) Where the property layout existing on the ground is at variance
with that shown in the Official Zoning Atlas, the Zoning
Administrator shall interpret the Official Zoning Atlas. The
determination by the Zoning Administrator may be appealed as
provided in § 535-95.
A. No land, building or structure shall hereafter by used or occupied, and
no building, structure, or part thereof shall hereafter be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered, except in
conformity with all the regulations herein specified for the district in
which it is located.
B. No sign shall hereafter be erected, hung, placed, painted, altered, or
moved except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which
it is located.
C. No part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space
required about or in connection with any building for the purpose of
complying with this chapter shall be included as part of a yard, open
space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any
other building.
D. No lot or yard existing at the effective date of adoption of this chapter
shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements
set forth herein. Lots or yards created after the effective date of
adoption of this chapter shall meet the minimum requirements
established by this chapter.
E. No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the
construction of the main building has actually commenced. No
accessory building shall be used unless the principal building on the lot
is also being used. No cellar, basement or accessory building shall be
used as a dwelling prior to substantial completion of the dwelling of
which it is part.
§ 535-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-8
1:549
impose greater restrictions than any statute, other regulation, ordinance or
covenant, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Where the provisions
of any statute, other regulation, ordinance or covenant impose greater
restrictions than the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of such
statute, other regulation, ordinance or covenant shall prevail.
§ 535-9. Other regulations.186
In addition to the applicability of these regulations, certain lands and
structures in the Town of Grand Chute are also subject to, without
limitation, county regulations pertaining to floodplains, shorelands and
wetlands, and airports and airport operations.
186. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-8 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-9
1:550
ARTICLE III
Word Usage and Definitions
§ 535-10. Word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following shall apply as indicated
throughout this chapter:
§ 535-11. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same lot
with the principal use or structure and of a nature customarily incidental
and subordinate to the principal structure.
AIRPORT (PUBLIC) — Any airport which complies with the definition
contained in Ch. 114, Wis. Stats., or any airport which serves or offers to
serve common carriers engaged in air transport.
ALLEY — A public or approved private way which affords only a secondary
means of access to abutting property.
ALTERATION — A change or rearrangement in the structural parts of a
structure, an enlargement of a structure, whether by extending on the
side or by increasing the height, or the movement of a structure from one
location to another.
AUTOMOBILE — A motorized passenger vehicle, car, van, or lightweight
truck designed for operation on ordinary roads.[Added 6-21-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-16]
AUTOMOBILE FILLING STATION — Buildings and premises where
gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires and automobile accessories and
convenience retail goods may be supplied, dispensed and sold and where
minor repair or maintenance work may be performed, such as ignition
service, tire repair, repair and replacement of minor parts such as pumps
and filters and the like. A filling station is not a repair or body shop.
AUTOMOBILE SALVAGE YARD — Premises used for the storing,
dismantling, crushing, shredding or disassembly of used motor vehicles or
their parts.
A. The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual.
B. The present tense includes the future tense, and the singular includes
the plural.
C. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive.
D. The word "used" or "occupied" also means intended, designed or
arranged to be used or occupied.
§ 535-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-11
1:551
BILLBOARD — See Article XV, Signs and Billboards, § 535-105, of this
chapter.[Amended 2-19-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-01]
BOARDINGHOUSE — An establishment where meals and lodging are
provided for compensation by prearrangement other than in dwelling units,
without limitation on time periods involved, and for a total of at least four
or more boarders.
BUFFER — The use of land, topography, physical space, elevation
differences, fences, and/or landscape planting to screen or partially screen
a use of property from adjacent uses of property.[Added 4-7-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-09]
BUILDING — A structure having one or more stories and a roof which is
used or intended to be used for shelter or enclosure for persons, property
or animals.
BUILDING FRONTAGE — The front of a building shall be construed to be
the portion facing a street. For purposes of computation of the number and
area of signs, the frontage of a building shall be computed as nearly at
ground level as computation of horizontal distance permits. In cases where
this test is indeterminate or cannot be applied, as for instance where there
is a diagonal corner entrance, the Administrator or Inspector shall select
the building frontage on the basis of interior layout of the building, traffic
on adjacent streets, or other indicators.
BUILDING HEIGHT — A building's vertical measurement from the main
level of the finished grade in front of the building to the highest point on the
roofline of a flat roof, or a roof having a pitch ratio of less than 1.4 from the
horizontal, and to a point midway between the peak and the eaves of a roof
having a pitch ratio of more than 1.4.
BUILDING LINE — The rear edge of any required front yard or the rear
edge of any required setback line.
BUILDING SITE — The lot or lots or portion of a lot or lots used for building,
the total area of which lots is ascribed to the building for compliance with
these zoning regulations.
CLINIC — An office or group of offices relating to the health care
professions, including physicians, dentists and the like engaged in the
treatment of persons.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of
water or combination of land and water designated and intended for either
the recreational use and enjoyment of residents of the development for
which it was established and for the general public or for the exclusive
recreational use and enjoyment of residents of the development for which it
was established. No yard required in connection with any principal use or
structure shall be designated or intended for use as common open space.
COMMUNITY LIVING ARRANGEMENT — Facilities defined in § 46.03, Wis.
Stats.
§ 535-11 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-11
1:552
CONVALESCENT HOME and NURSING HOME — A place where regular
care is provided to three or more infirm persons, children, or aged persons
who are not members of the family which resides on the premises.
COUNTY — Outagamie County, Wisconsin.
DAY CARE —
DECIDUOUS — A woody plant with foliage that is shed annually.[Added
4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
DECK — An open structure not enclosed with walls which is accessory to
the principal dwelling. For the purpose of determining location on a lot, a
deck is considered an accessory structure.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to construction or additions or substantial
improvements to buildings, other structures, or accessory uses, mobile
homes, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations, and deposition of materials.
DOG KENNEL — A place where more than two adult dogs are boarded for
a fee on a recurrent basis or a place that keeps, harbors or has custody of
more than three dogs for any purpose.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT — Any establishment dispensing or serving food
in automobiles, including those establishments where customers serve
themselves and may eat or drink in the building or in their automobiles on
the premises.
DWELLING, MOBILE HOME — A building transportable in one or more
sections, built on a permanent chassis, with body width exceeding eight feet
or body length exceeding 32 feet, designed to be used as a single dwelling
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities.
DWELLING, MODULAR HOME — A building made up of two or more
modular sections transported to the home site, put on a permanent
foundation and joined to make a single dwelling. For the purposes of this
chapter, modular homes shall be allowed as a single-family detached
dwelling.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A building containing three or more
dwelling units. The term "multiple-family dwelling" shall include
cooperative apartments, condominiums, apartments and the like.
Regardless of how rental units are equipped, any multiple-family dwelling
FAMILY DAY CARE — A place where regular day care is provided to not
more than eight children and which is licensed pursuant to Ch. 48, Wis.
Stats.
A.
GROUP DAY CARE — A place where regular day care is provided to
nine or more children and which is licensed pursuant to Ch. 48, Wis.
Stats.
B.
§ 535-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-11
1:553
in which units are available for rental periods of less than one week shall be
considered a motel.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED — A building containing not more
than one dwelling unit attached at the side or sides in a series or group of
three or more buildings each containing not more than one dwelling unit.
Each building shall be separated from the adjoining building or buildings
by a party wall or walls extending from footings through roofs. The term
"attached dwelling" is intended to imply townhouses, patio or atrium houses
or any form which conforms to this definition.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A building containing not more
than one dwelling unit entirely separated from structures on adjacent lots.
The term "detached dwelling" shall not include mobile homes, travel
trailers, or other forms of portable or temporary housing.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — One building containing not more than two
dwelling units or two buildings, attached at the side, with not more than one
dwelling unit per building. The term "two-family dwelling" is intended to
imply single-family semidetached buildings and duplexes or any form which
conforms to this definition.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or rooms connected together constituting a
separate, independent housekeeping establishment for one family only, for
owner occupancy or for rental, lease or other occupancy on a weekly or
longer basis, physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units,
and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities.
EVERGREEN — A woody plant with foliage that persists and remains green
year round.[Added 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
FAIR MARKET VALUE — Assessed value adjusted for equalized value.
FAMILY — One person or two or more persons related by blood, foster
relationship, marriage or adoption and, in addition, any domestic servants
or gratuitous guests thereof, or one or more persons who need not be so
related and, in addition, domestic servants or gratuitous guests thereof,
who are living together in a single, nonprofit dwelling unit and maintaining
a common household with single cooking facilities. A roomer, boarder or
lodger shall not be considered a member of the family.[Amended
12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors
of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from
the center line of walls separating two buildings, excluding public corridors,
common rest rooms, attic areas, unenclosed stairways, elevator structures,
heating or other building machinery or equipment or basement space.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The ratio of the total floor area of a building to the
total lot area.
FUR FARM — Land, buildings or structures used for the purpose of raising
or harboring fur-bearing animals, including those defined in § 29.001, Wis.
Stats., and also including chinchillas, whether the animals kept for
breeding, slaughtering or petting.
§ 535-11 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-11
1:554
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building designed or used for inside
parking of not more than three private motor vehicles, recreational vehicles
or boats by the occupant of the principal building. A private garage attached
to or a part of the main building is to be considered part of the main
building.
GARAGE, STORAGE — An accessory building designed or used for the
storage of more than three motor vehicles, recreational vehicles or boats.
HOME OCCUPATION — A business, trade, or proprietorship that conforms
to all provisions within § 535-64, Home occupations.[Amended 3-4-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-04]
HOTEL — An establishment where sleeping accommodations are offered to
the public and intended primarily for rental to transients with daily charge,
as distinguished from multiple-family dwellings and boardinghouses, where
rentals are for periods of a week or longer and occupancy is generally by
residents rather than transients. Hotels may serve meals to both occupants
and others. The term "hotel" is also intended to imply motel, motor court,
motor lodge, tourist court or any form which conforms to this definition.
JUNKYARD — Premises or land, buildings or structures where junk, waste,
discarded, salvaged or similar materials, such as old metals, wood, lumber,
glass, paper, rags, cloth, cordage, barrels, containers, etc., are brought,
bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, stored or handled, including used
lumber and building materials, equipment, wrecking yards and the like.
This definition shall not include automobile salvage or wrecking yards
or pawnshops and establishments for the sale, storage or purchase of
secondhand vehicles, clothing, furniture, appliances or similar household
goods, all of which shall be usable, nor shall it apply to the processing of
used, discarded or salvageable materials incident to manufacturing activity
on the same site.[Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
LANDSCAPING — Alteration of the natural terrain, including the planting
of trees, shrubs, grass, and ground cover.[Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-09]
LANDSCAPING, BUFFER YARD — Treatment of grade, ground cover,
vegetation and ornamentation of a side or rear yard, where physical space
and vertical elements such as plantings, berms and fences combine to
separate commercial, industrial, and institutional uses from adjacent
residential zoning districts. A buffer yard shall be a green space where
no portion of a building, parking, driving, loading, or storage area may be
located.[Added 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
LANDSCAPING, FRONTAGE — Treatment of grade, ground cover,
vegetation and ornamentation of that portion of a front yard abutting
existing or dedicated road right-of-way.[Added 4-7-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-09]
LANDSCAPING, INTERIOR — Treatment of grade, ground cover, vegetation
and ornamentation within the parking, loading and driving area on a
lot.[Added 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
§ 535-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-11
1:555
LANDSCAPING, PERIMETER — Treatment of grade, ground cover,
vegetation and ornamentation of off-street parking, loading or driving areas
that are adjacent to and within 30 feet of a side or rear property line, but
excluding such areas when a building or structure is located between them
and a property line.[Added 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
LOT — A parcel of land used or set aside and available for use as the site
for one or more buildings and buildings accessory thereto or for any other
purpose, in one ownership and not divided by a street nor including any land
within the limits of a public or private street right-of-way. The term "record
lot" shall mean land designated as a distinct and separate parcel on a legally
recorded deed or plat in the office of the Register of Deeds.
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot.
LOT COVERAGE — The percentage of the lot area covered by the principal
structure.
LOT DEPTH — Depth of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between
the midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot
lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.
LOT FRONTAGE — The front of an interior lot shall be construed to be
the portion nearest the street. For the purpose of determining yard
requirements on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to a
street shall be considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as set out in
these zoning regulations. For the purpose of computing number and area of
signs, frontage of a lot shall be established by orientation of the frontage of
buildings thereon or of principal entrance points to the premises if building
frontage does not clearly indicate lot frontage. If neither of these methods is
determinant, the Building Inspector shall select on the basis of traffic flow
on adjacent streets, and the lot shall be considered to front on the street
with the greater flow.
LOT TYPES — The diagram which follows illustrates terminology used
in these zoning regulations with reference to corner lots, interior lots,
reversed frontage lots and through lots.
A = Corner lot, defined as a lot located at the intersection of two or
more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be
considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost point
of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than 135°. See lots A(1) in
the diagram.
§ 535-11 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-11
1:556
B = Interior lot, defined as a lot other than a corner lot with only one
frontage on a street.
C = Through lot, defined as a lot other than a corner lot with frontage
on more than one street. Through lots abutting two streets may be
referred to as "double frontage lots."
D = Reversed frontage lot, defined as a lot on which the frontage is at
right angles or approximately right angles (interior angle less than
135°) to the general pattern in the area. A reversed frontage lot may
also be a corner lot (A-D in the diagram), an interior lot (B-D) or a
through lot (C-D).
LOT WIDTH — Width of a lot shall be considered to be the average distance
between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the
lot, measured as straight lines between the foremost points of the side lot
lines in front (where they intersect with street line) and the rearmost points
of the side lot lines in the rear; provided, however, that the width between
the side lot lines at their foremost points in the front shall not be less than
80% of the required lot width, except in the case of lots on the turning circle
of a cul-de-sac, where the width shall not be less than 60% of the required
lot width.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Premises designed and maintained for location of
two or more mobile homes under a continuing local general management
and including special facilities for common use by the occupants, such as
open space areas and recreational areas and buildings.
MOBILE HOME SITE — A parcel or lot within a mobile home park
designated for the accommodation of not more than one mobile home.
MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION — Premises where more than two mobile
homes are located for nontransient living purposes and where lots are set
aside and offered for sale for use by mobile homes for living purposes.
NET ACRE — The total acreage of a lot, tract or parcel of land excluding
land in existing and proposed streets and street rights-of-way.
NET DENSITY — Refers to the number of residential dwelling units
permitted per net acre of land and is determined by dividing the number
of units by the total area of land within the boundaries of a lot or parcel,
not including street rights-of-way. In the determination of the number of
dwellings to be permitted on a specific parcel of land, a fractional unit shall
not entitle the applicant to an additional unit.
§ 535-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-11
1:557
OFFICE, BUSINESS — An office for such activities as real estate agencies,
advertising agencies (but not sign shops), insurance agencies, travel
agencies and ticket sales, chamber of commerce, credit bureau (but not
finance company), abstract and title agencies or insurance companies,
stockbrokers, and the like. It is characteristic of a business office that
retail or wholesale goods are not shown on the premises to a customer. A
barbershop or beauty shop is not a business office.
OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL — An office for the use of a person or persons
generally classified as professionals, such as architects, engineers,
attorneys, accountants, doctors, dentists, chiropractors, psychiatrists,
psychologists, and the like.
PARKING SPACE — A durable, impervious surface, either outside of or
within a structure, which is permanently maintained and of sufficient size to
store a parked automobile or other motorized vehicle.[Added 4-7-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-09]
PLAN COMMISSION — The agency or commission designated by the Town
Board pursuant to § 62.23, Wis. Stats.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — A residential land development
comprehensively planned as an entity via a unitary plan which permits
flexibility in building siting, mixtures of housing types, usable open spaces
and the preservation of significant natural features.
PLANTING ISLAND — A landscaping feature surrounded on all sides by
parking and/or driving surfaces.[Added 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
PLANTING PENINSULA — A landscaping feature that is attached on one
side to open space, sidewalks, buildings or structures and on all other
sides to parking and/or driving surfaces.[Added 4-7-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-09]
RECREATIONAL CAMP — Premises and facilities used occasionally or
periodically for the accommodation of members of groups or associations
for outdoor recreational activities.
SHRUB — A woody plant, smaller than a tree, which consists of small stems
or branches at the ground and which is of either deciduous or evergreen
species.[Added 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
SIGN — See Article XV, Signs and Billboards, § 535-105 of this chapter.187
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — Those uses or structures that may not be
appropriate generally or without restriction throughout a district but which,
if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to the neighborhood,
would promote the public health, safety, welfare, comfort, convenience or
the general welfare. Such uses or structures may be permitted in a zoning
district if they meet the requirements of the district in which they are
located and Article XI.
187. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II). The following definitions, which immediately followed this definition, were repealed at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II): "sign, accessory"; "sign
area"; "sign, number of"; and "sign types."
§ 535-11 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-11
1:558
STABLE — Premises where more than one horse (livestock) is boarded,
raised, kept or trained regardless of whether such horses are (livestock is)
owned by the occupants or owners of the premises. A stable shall provide
not less than one acre of lot area per horse.
STABLE, RIDING — Premises on which horses are (livestock is) kept for the
purpose of renting them to the public on any basis. A riding stable shall
consist of not less than five acres.
STORAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Premises where goods and materials or
more than three motor vehicles, recreational vehicles or boats are stored
for a fee.
STORY — That portion of a building, other than a basement, that is between
the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it or, if there
is not a floor above, then the space between such floor and the ceiling next
above it.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between the street and the lot. The street
line shall be the same as the legal right-of-way line.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the
ground or attached to something with a fixed location on the ground.
TREE — A large, woody plant having one or several self-supporting stems
or trunks and numerous branches and which is of either deciduous or
evergreen species.[Added 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
TREE, ORNAMENTAL — A deciduous tree planted primarily for ornamental
value or screening purposes and which at maturity will tend to be smaller
than a shade tree.[Added 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
TREE, SHADE — A deciduous tree planted primarily for its high crown of
foliage or its overhead canopy.[Added 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
VARIANCE — A relaxation of the terms of this chapter where such variance
will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions
peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a
literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary and undue
hardship. Variances may be granted only if they meet the requirements of
Article XII of this chapter.
VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL — Any vehicle subject to registration fees under
§ 341.25(2), Wis. Stats., or any vehicle primarily intended for commercial
business use, including trailers, semi-tractors/trailers, and school
buses.[Added 6-21-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-16]
VEHICLE, RECREATIONAL/UTILITY — Any motorized or nonmotorized
vehicle (other than a passenger vehicle, car, van, or lightweight truck)
primarily manufactured for the express purpose of providing recreational/
utility activities, including but not limited to motor homes, trucks with
camper shells, unmounted camper shells, camper and travel trailers, horse
trailers, all-terrain vehicles, boats, jet skis, snowmobiles, motorcycles, farm
or lawn/garden tractors, golf carts, neighborhood electric vehicles, ice
shanties, utility trailers, trailers used to transport recreational/utility
§ 535-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-11
1:559
vehicles, and any motorized or nonmotorized vehicles similar to those listed
herein.[Added 6-21-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-16]
YARD — An open space, other than a court, on a lot, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward; provided, however, that fences,
walls, poles, posts and other customary yard accessory ornaments and
furniture may be permitted in any yard subject to height limitations and
requirements limiting obstruction to visibility. "Required yard" means that
minimum distance specified by these regulations measured from the
property line.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending across the front of a lot between the
side lot lines and extending from the street line to the nearest line of the
principal structure or projection of the principal structure.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the rear of a lot between the side
lots lines and extending from the rear property line to the nearest line of
the principal structure or projection of the principal structure.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending between the nearest building or projection
thereof and the side lot line and extending from the front yard to the rear
yard.
§ 535-11 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-11
1:560
ARTICLE IV
Nonconformities
§ 535-12. Applicability and intent.
Any use of land or structures or any lot or structure which lawfully existed
at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter which would
not be permitted or permissible by the provisions of this chapter as adopted
or amended shall be deemed nonconforming. It is the intent of this chapter
to permit such nonconformities to continue, subject to certain restrictions.
§ 535-13. Nonconforming uses of land.
Where at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter a use
of land exists which would not be permitted or permissible in the district
in which it is located and where such use involves a structure or structures
with a fair market value of less than $10,000, such use may be continued
subject to the following restrictions:
§ 535-14. Nonconforming uses of structures.
Where at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter the
use of a structure exists which would not be permitted or permissible in the
district in which it is located and where such use involves a structure with
a fair market value exceeding $10,000, such use may be continued subject
to the following restrictions:
A. Such use shall not be enlarged, increased, or extended to occupy a
greater area of the lot than was occupied at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this chapter.
B. Such use shall not be moved in whole or part to any other portion of the
lot other than the portion occupied by such use at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this chapter.
C. When such use is discontinued or abandoned for a period of more than
12 consecutive months for any reason whatever, or when such use is
replaced by a permitted or permissible use, a nonconforming use shall
not thereafter be resumed.
D. No additional structure in connection with such use shall be erected.
A. No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted or permissible
shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or
structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use
permitted or permissible in the district in which it is located.
B. Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at
the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter. Any
nonconforming use which occupied a portion of a building not originally
designed or intended for such use shall not be extended to any part of
§ 535-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-14
1:561
§ 535-15. Nonconforming structures.
Where at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter a
structure exists which could not be erected in the district in which it is
located by reason of restriction on area or coverage, height, yards, its
location on the lot or other requirements concerning the structure, such
structure may continue in existence subject to the following restrictions:
§ 535-16. Nonconforming characteristics of use.
If characteristics of use, such as lighting, parking, noise or other matters
pertaining to the use of land, structures and premises, are made
nonconforming by the provisions of this chapter as adopted or amended,
no change shall thereafter be made in such characteristics of use which
the building. No nonconforming use shall be extended to occupy any
land outside the building nor any other building not used for such
nonconforming use.
C. There may be a change in tenancy, ownership, or management of a
nonconforming use, provided that there is no change in the nature or
character of such nonconforming use.
D. When such use of a structure is discontinued or abandoned for a period
of more than 12 consecutive months for any reason whatever, or when
such use is replaced by a permitted or permissible use, a
nonconforming use shall not thereafter be resumed.
E. If a structure occupied by a nonconforming use is removed or destroyed
or damaged to an extent of more than 50% of its fair market value at the
time of destruction, the nonconforming use shall not be resumed.
A. Such structure shall not be altered in any manner which would increase
the degree of nonconformity. The total structural repairs or alterations
in such nonconforming structure shall not during its life exceed 50% of
the fair market value of the structure.
B. If such structure is destroyed or damaged to an extent of less than 50%
of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it may be
reconstructed, provided that reconstruction shall substantially reflect
the prior structural arrangement and shall not increase the degree of
nonconformity. If such structure is destroyed or damaged to an extent
of more than 50% of its fair market value at the time of destruction, it
shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of
the district in which it is located. A nonconforming structure damaged
or destroyed by violent wind, vandalism, fire, flood, ice, snow, mold or
infestation after March 2, 2006, may be restored in accordance with the
provisions of § 60.61(5m), Wis. Stats.188
188. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-14 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-16
1:562
increases the nonconformity; provided, however, that changes may be made
which do not increase, or which decrease, such nonconformity.
§ 535-17. Nonconforming lots of record.
§ 535-18. Nonconforming signs.189
See Article XV, Signs and Billboards, § 535-112.
§ 535-19. Casual, temporary or illegal use.
The casual, temporary, or illegal use of land or structures, or land and
structures in combination, shall not be sufficient to establish the existence
of a nonconforming use or to create rights in the continuance of such use.
§ 535-20. Repairs and maintenance.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent normal maintenance
or repair of any structure or to prevent restoring to a safe condition any
structure declared to be unsafe.
§ 535-21. Existing special exceptions.
Any use or structure existing on the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter which is classified as a special exception in
the district in which it is located shall be deemed to have been granted
approval, subject to maintaining the character and extent of such use or
structure existing on that date. Any extension, enlargement or change in
such use or structure shall require approval according to the terms of this
chapter.
A. In any district, any permitted or permissible structure may be erected
on a single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment
of this chapter This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to
meet the requirements of lot area, lot width, or both, for the district in
which it is located, provided that such lot shall be in separate
ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same
ownership, and provided that all other requirements for the district are
met.
B. If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with
continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, the lands involved shall
be considered to be an individual parcel for the purposes of this
chapter, and no portion of such parcel shall be used, divided, or sold
which does not meet the lot area and lot width requirements for the
district in which it is located.
189. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-21
1:563

ARTICLE V
Schedule of District Regulations
§ 535-22. Interpretation and organization. [Amended 3-5-2002]
§ 535-23. AED Exclusive Agricultural District. [Amended 2-22-2001]
A. District regulations shall be as set forth in this article and as modified
and supplemented by Articles VI and VII.
B. Permitted principal and accessory uses and structures listed for any
district shall be permitted by right subject to the conditions as
specified.
C. Special exception uses and structures listed for any district are
permissible only upon approval by the Town Board of the Town of Grand
Chute, after notice and hearing, subject to the conditions as specified
and any other conditions as may be imposed by the Town Board to
promote the general health, safety and welfare.
D. In those instances where district regulations set forth a list of permitted
or permissible uses followed by the phrase "and uses of a similar
nature," it is understood that the list of permitted or permissible uses is
not exhaustive or all inclusive but that other uses of a like or similar
nature are also permitted or permissible. Determination of whether a
specific use, not enumerated, is of a like or similar nature shall be made
by the Zoning Administrator. The determination by the Zoning
Administrator may be appealed as provided in § 535-95.
E. All uses and structures and dimensional, sign and off-street parking
regulations in the Schedule of District Regulations shall be subject to
Article VI.
F. All uses and structures, as specified in the Schedule of District
Regulations, shall be subject to the regulations and requirements for
the use as provided in Article VII.
A. Purpose. The intent of this district is to maintain highly productive
agricultural lands in agricultural production by effectively limiting
encroachment of nonagricultural development, by minimizing land use
conflicts between agricultural and nonagricultural uses, and by
minimizing public service and facility costs associated with
nonagricultural development. This district is further intended to comply
with standards contained in Ch. 91, Wis. Stats., to permit eligible
landowners to receive tax credits under § 71.09, Wis. Stats., in
connection with their agricultural operations.
B. Permitted principal uses and structures.
(1) Agricultural uses, including beekeeping, dairying, floriculture,
poultry and livestock raising, stables, plant nurseries and orchards,
raising of grain and seed crops, raising of grass and mint, raising of
§ 535-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-23
1:565
nuts and berries, raising of fruits and vegetables, viticulture, and
forest and game management.
(2) Dwellings existing before the effective date of adoption of this
chapter which are not accessory to or associated with agricultural
uses.
(3) For purposes of farm consolidation, farm residences or structures
which existed prior to the effective date of adoption of this chapter
may be separated from the larger farm parcel.
C. Permitted accessory uses and structures.
(1) Uses and structures customarily accessory and clearly incidental to
permissible principal uses and structures. Single-family dwellings
or mobile homes shall be considered accessory to agricultural uses
provided that such dwellings are occupied by a person or a family
at least one member of which earns a substantial part of his or her
livelihood from farming operations on the farm parcel or is the
parent or child of the farm operator. Accessory dwellings may be
established on a separate parcel.
(2) One roadside stand per farm used solely for the sale of products
produced on the premises.
(3) Home occupations.
(4) Public utility installations.
D. Special exception uses and structures.
(1) Fur farms.
(2) Riding stables.
(3) Sawmills.
(4) Farm equipment and machinery sales and service.
(5) Establishments for the processing, centralized bulk collection,
storage, or distribution of agricultural products.
(6) Governmental uses, including landfills, highway storage facilities
and public buildings.
(7) Public and semipublic nonprofit institutional uses, including
churches, schools, libraries, museums and the like.
(8) Veterinary offices.
E. Dimensional requirements.
(1) Principal agricultural uses and structures. Minimum lot area: 35
acres. There are no minimum lot width or yard requirements and
no height limitations.
§ 535-23 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-23
1:566
§ 535-24. AGD General Agricultural District. [Amended 3-18-1997;
4-3-1997; 2-22-2001; 3-5-2002]
(2) Preexisting dwellings and accessory dwellings on a separate
parcel. Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet; minimum lot width:
100 feet. Yards shall be a minimum of 25 feet in depth if at the front
or rear and 15 feet in width if at the side. There are no height
limitations.
(3) Other permissible principal uses and structures. Minimum lot area:
one acre; minimum lot width: 150 feet; minimum front and rear
yard depth: 40 feet. Minimum lot area and yard requirements may
be increased as a condition of a special exception permit.
F. Permitted accessory signs. As stipulated in Article XV, Signs and
Billboards.
A. Purpose. The intent of this district is to maintain open land areas
predominantly devoted to farming and agricultural-related uses. It is
anticipated that while certain areas within this district will eventually
be used for nonagricultural uses, the intensity of development will
remain significantly limited due to a lack of urban facilities and
services. It is also intended that this district provide for small-scale,
family-oriented businesses on a case-by-case basis.
B. Permitted principal uses and structures.
(1) Permitted principal uses and structures in § 535-23B(1) in the AED
District.
(2) Parks and nature preserves.
(3) Single-family detached dwellings and mobile homes, unrelated to
any farm operations, as a principal use and structure on individual
lots which are not part of a recorded subdivision plat as defined in
Chapter 475, Subdivision of Land, of this Code. Mobile homes shall
be further subject to § 382-10C of this Code requiring a ten-acre
parcel and a special permit.
C. Permitted accessory uses and structures. Permitted accessory uses and
structures in § 535-23C(1) through (4) in the AED District.
D. Special exception uses and structures.
(1) Special exception uses and structures in § 535-23D(1) through (6)
in the AED District; provided, however, that no such use or
structure shall be located within 500 feet of an existing residential
dwelling other than the owner's or within 500 feet of the exterior
boundary of a recorded subdivision plat.
(2) Public and semipublic nonprofit institutional uses of similar nature.
(3) Golf courses.
§ 535-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-24
1:567
(4) Two-family dwellings, provided that the dimensional requirements
of § 535-27 are met.
(5) Cemeteries.
(6) Veterinary offices.
(7) Warehouse, storage, and building supply establishments subject to
the conditions in Subsection D(1) above.
(8) Resource extraction uses, including quarrying and sand and gravel
pits, subject to the requirements to § 535-58.
(9) Outdoor commercial recreational uses, including recreational
camps, campgrounds, golf, archery and rifle ranges, sledding and
skiing facilities and uses of a similar nature.
(10) Commercial exhibits of historical or natural significance.
(11) Contractor's storage yard.
(12) The following uses, provided that the owner or proprietor resides
on the premises: automobile, farm equipment and small engine
repair shops; offices and/or shops in connection with skilled
tradesman, including plumbers, electricians, carpenters, welders
and the like; and production and/or sales of crafts produced on the
premises, provided that mechanical or chemical processes are
incidental or nonexistent.
(13) Taverns existing before the effective date of adoption of this
chapter.
(14) Sales of lawn and garden equipment in connection with a plant
nursery.
(15) Airports, public or private.
(16) Dog kennels.
(17) Antennas and towers in accordance with Article XVI of this
chapter.190
E. Dimensional requirements.
(1) Principal agricultural uses.
(a) Minimum lot area: four acres.
(b) Minimum lot width at setback line: 200 feet.
(c) Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
(d) Minimum side yard: zero feet.
190. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 535-24 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-24
1:568
§ 535-25. RSF Single-Family Residential District. [Amended
1-4-2000; 12-19-2000; 2-22-2001; 2-7-2002; 1-20-2004; 8-3-2004]
(e) Minimum rear yard: zero feet.
(2) Single-family detached dwellings and mobile homes on individual
lots.
(a) Minimum lot area: 24,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width at setback line: 100 feet.
(c) Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
(d) Minimum side yard: 20 feet.
(e) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
(3) Other permitted or permissible uses and structures.
(a) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(b) Minimum lot width at setback line: 150 feet.
(c) Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
(d) Minimum side yard: six feet. [Amended 6-19-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-04]
(e) Minimum rear yard: 50 feet.
(4) For any structure over 40 feet in height, the side yards shall be
increased by one foot for every two feet in additional height.
Minimum lot area and yard requirements may be increased as a
condition for a special exception permit.
F. Permitted accessory signs. As stipulated in Article XV, Signs and
Billboards.
G. Landscape and screening standards. As set forth in § 535-52 of this
chapter. [Added 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
A. Purpose. This district is intended to provide for single-family detached
residential development. The density of development is based on the
availability of public facilities and the extent of coordination and
planning as indicated by whether the development is part of an
approved and recorded subdivision plat.
B. Permitted principal uses and structures.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Parks and playgrounds.
§ 535-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-25
1:569
(3) Community living arrangements subject to the provisions and
limitations of § 59.69(15), Wis. Stats.
(4) Day care (family).
C. Permitted accessory uses and structures.
(1) Uses and structures customarily accessory and clearly incidental to
permissible principal uses and structures. Specific attached garage
requirements are as follows:
(a) No attached garage shall exceed 1,000 square feet per
dwelling unit unless located on a parcel larger than 24,000
square feet.
(b) No attached garage foundation shall exceed the size of the
living area foundation of each dwelling unit.
(2) Temporary structures in connection with the construction of
principal structures, provided that such structures are not used for
living purposes. Temporary structures shall not remain over 90
days after construction of the principal structure is substantially
complete.
(3) Home occupations.
(4) Public utility installations.
D. Special exception uses and structures.
(1) Convalescent homes and nursing homes.
(2) Cemeteries.
(3) Gardens, nurseries and orchards, provided that no sales are
conducted on the premises.
(4) Cluster subdivisions subject to the provisions of § 535-60.
(5) Mobile home subdivisions subject to the provisions of § 535-63.
(6) Mobile home parks subject to the provisions of § 535-62.
(7) Accessory dwellings subject to the provisions of § 535-57.
(8) Bed-and-breakfast establishments, provided that the owner resides
on the premises.
(9) Storage garage as an accessory building.
(10) Day care (group).
(11) Public and semipublic nonprofit institutional uses, including
churches, schools, libraries and the like, provided that principal
access shall be directly onto a collector or arterial street.
§ 535-25 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-25
1:570
(12) Golf course and community centers.
(13) Residential/office, provided that:
(a) The building(s) is/are constructed prior to January 1, 1950.
(b) The building(s) is/are located on a collector or arterial street.
(c) Signage shall be limited to one identification sign of no greater
than 32 square feet in accordance with Article XV.
(d) The use will preserve a historic or culturally significant site or
structure that serves as an example of a style of architecture or
design that is characteristic of a past time or culture in the
Town of Grand Chute. For example, a farmstead containing a
house of Folk Victorian design could be determined to have
historic or cultural significance. The applicant shall provide
information or documentation on the site or structure's historic
or cultural significance. The Plan Commission shall make the
final determination whether the proposed project preserves a
historic or culturally significant site or structure. The Plan
Commission may determine that the proposed site or structure
is historic but the site or structure need not be enrolled in a
national, state or local historical register.
(e) The Town approves the proposed parking, landscaping and
lighting.
(f) A residential/office use may include a contractor's office,
showroom, gift shop, and workshop located in a restored barn.
[Added 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-17]
(14) Model homes.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to provide for the
erection of model homes in new subdivisions without adversely
affecting the character of surrounding residential
neighborhoods by creating a general nuisance. As model
homes represent a unique temporary commercial use, special
consideration must be given to peculiar problems associated
with them and special standards must be applied to ensure
reasonable compatibility with their surrounding environment.
(b) Procedure. The erection of a model home(s) used as a
temporary real estate or builder's office(s) shall require a
special exception permit.
(c) Requirements.
[1] Model homes with on-site sales staff shall be a special
exception use provided for in the applicable zoning district
in which they are located. Any such model home shall
comply with the Grand Chute Building Code.191
§ 535-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-25
1:571
[2] All model home lots shall be identified on the final plat and
located on either side of the public roads that enter the
subdivision.
[3] A model home may be located only in a platted subdivision
of 10 or more vacant lots.
[4] Performance requirements.
[a] No model home shall incorporate outside lighting
which creates a nuisance due to glare or intensity.
Exterior lighting shall be limited to 100 watts per light
and 40 watts per bulb. No light shall be cast off the
model home lot.
[b] No audible music or other exterior sound shall be
audible beyond the lot line.
[c] No dumpsters, port-a-potties or building materials
shall be stored on the site.
[d] All model home signage shall comply with the sign
regulations as contained in Article XV.
[e] Temporary parking facilities shall be provided on the
site and shall include four parking spaces per model
home unit. Such temporary parking facilities shall
provide handicap accessible parking and accessible
routes as required by the Grand Chute Building Code.
The overall design, drainage and surfacing of the
temporary parking facility shall be subject to the
approval of the Town.
[5] The special exception permit for a model home shall be for
the shorter of one year or when houses are constructed on
85% of the lots in the subdivision.
[6] No residential occupancy permit shall be issued for a
model home until such time as the structure has been fully
converted to a residence. Such conversion shall include,
but not be limited to, elimination of temporary parking,
driveway restoration and the removal of signage and
lighting. The restoration of all temporary parking areas
with appropriate landscaping shall be completed by the
end of the next growing season. The developer or
contractor constructing the model home shall provide the
Town with a performance bond to insure the residential
conversion upon termination of the use or special
exception permit. The Town shall determine the amount of
the bond.
191. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Building Construction.
§ 535-25 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-25
1:572
[7] The developer may apply for up to four special event
permits for special sales events in a calendar year, which
may be individually granted or denied in the discretion of
the Town Board based upon the risk of nuisance affecting
occupied residences.
[8] The Town shall set the hours of model home open houses
and exterior lighting. The standard hours shall be 1:00
p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on Saturday and Sunday and 6:00 p.m. to
8:00 p.m. on Mondays and Thursdays.
(15) Dog kennel, provided that: [Added 6-21-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-14]
(a) The property must contain an owner-occupied single-family
residence and be a minimum lot size of two acres.
(b) Based on the positioning of the residence on the lot, the rear
yard must abut:
[1] A county, state, or federal highway;
[2] A mainline railroad track;
[3] The Fox River;
[4] Property zoned and used for industrial purposes;
[5] Property zoned and used exclusively for agricultural
purposes; or
[6] Property designated and mapped as forested or
nonforested wetlands.
(c) No more than 12 dogs may be boarded, kept, harbored or
owned in custody
(d) The special exception permit holder will be obligated to
maintain quiet dogs as a condition for continuing the permit
and reasonably prevent other nuisances from occurring as a
result of operating a dog kennel.
(e) If the special exception permit holder derives remuneration in
any form from the keeping, breeding, boarding, care, or
training of dogs at the dog kennel, a major home occupation
must be secured, in accordance with the requirements of
§ 535-64.
E. Dimensional requirements.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(a) Within an approved and recorded subdivision plat served by
public sewer, minimum dimensions as follows: lot area: 7,200
§ 535-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-25
1:573
square feet per dwelling; lot width: 60 feet; front yard: 25
feet; side yards: six feet each; rear yard: 25 feet; maximum lot
coverage: 30%; maximum height: 35 feet (2 1/2 stories).
(b) Not within an approved and recorded subdivision plat but
served by public sewer, minimum dimensions as follows: 9,000
square feet per dwelling; lot width: 75 feet; front yard: 25 feet;
side yards: six feet each; rear yard: 25 feet; maximum lot
coverage: 20%; maximum height: 35 feet (2 1/2 stories).
(c) Within an approved and recorded subdivision plat not served
by public sewer, minimum dimensions as follows: lot area and
lot width as provided in Ch. Comm 85, Wis. Adm. Code, but in
no event shall lot area be less than 15,000 square feet and lot
width be less than 90 feet; front yard: 25 feet; side yards: six
feet each; rear yard: 35 feet; maximum lot coverage: 15%;
maximum height: 35 feet (2 1/2 stories).
(d) Not within an approved and recorded subdivision plat not
served by public sewer, minimum dimensions as follows: lot
area and lot width as provided in Ch. Comm 85, Wis. Adm.
Code, but in no event shall lot area be less than 18,000 square
feet and lot width be less than 100 feet; front yard: 25 feet; side
yards: six feet each; rear yard: 40 feet; maximum lot coverage:
15%; maximum height: 35 feet (2 1/2 stories).
(e) Lot splitting. The purpose of this subsection is to assure
harmonious development and to reduce negative impact on
values, aesthetics, and transition of neighborhood character
resulting from extraordinary variations in lot size for singlefamily
residential dwellings that may result from the creation
of new lots which are exceptionally small in relation to existing
adjacent lots. It is recognized that the creation of new small
lots adjacent to larger lots, even if such lots meet other
minimum lot size requirements under Town ordinances, may
be damaging to the values of adjacent residential properties
and result in home sizes out of character with the other
development in the immediate neighborhood. In furtherance of
the purposes of this subsection the following provisions shall
apply: [Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
[1] The creation of any new lot resulting from creating a
parcel or split of an existing tax parcel creating any new
lot less than 14,400 square feet shall be subject to the
restrictions below:
[a] Such newly created lot shall equal a minimum of 75%
of the square footage lot area of any residential lot
bordering the new subject lot being created.
§ 535-25 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-25
1:574
§ 535-26. RTF Two-Family Residential District. [Amended 1-4-2000]
[b] Any such new lot created shall meet minimum square
footage requirements under the Outagamie County
Airport Overlay Zoning Code regardless of any other
restrictions or authorizations in this subsection.
[2] The foregoing restrictions shall only apply under
circumstances where an adjacent bordering single-family
lot has an existing completed single-family residential
dwelling:
[a] The restrictions herein do not apply to plats consisting
of more than 10 newly created lots filed with the
Register of Deeds after the effective date of this
chapter.
[b] This subsection does not apply to existing lots created
prior to the passage of this chapter.
(2) Other permitted or permissible uses and structures.
(a) Detached accessory buildings. No detached accessory building
shall occupy any portion of the front yard, and no detached
accessory building shall occupy more than 30% of the rear
yard or be located within three feet of any other accessory
building, principal building or lot line.
(b) Accessory structures. Notwithstanding fences, residential
driveways and parking lots, unless otherwise provided by these
regulations, no structure shall be located within 10 feet of any
accessory building or principal building or three feet of any lot
line.
F. Permitted accessory signs. As stipulated in Article XV, Signs and
Billboards.
G. Off-street parking requirements. As stipulated in § 535-49.
H. Landscape and screening standards. As set forth in § 535-52 of this
chapter. [Added 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
A. Purpose. This district is intended to provide for medium-density
residential development with emphasis on two-family and single-family
attached residential uses. This district is also intended to provide for
infilling opportunities for parcels which for various reasons have been
bypassed by development. This district is primarily intended to apply to
areas presently served by a public sewer system.
B. Permitted principal uses and structures.
(1) Permitted principal uses and structures in § 535-25B(1) through (4)
in the RSF District.
§ 535-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-26
1:575
(2) Two-family dwellings served by a public sewer system.
(3) Single-family attached dwellings served by a public sewer system.
C. Permitted accessory uses and structures. Permitted accessory uses and
structures in § 535-25C(1) through (4) in the RSF District.
D. Special exception uses and structures.
(1) Special exception uses and structures in § 535-25D(1) through (10)
in the RSF District.
(2) Two-family dwellings not served by a public sewer system.
(3) Planned unit developments subject to the provisions of § 535-59.
E. Dimensional requirements.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings. Dimensional requirements as
provided in the RSF District.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(a) Served by public sewer and water, minimum dimensions as
follows: lot area: 9,000 square feet (4,500 square feet per
family); lot width: 75 feet; front yard: 25 feet; side yards: six
feet each; rear yard: 25 feet; maximum lot coverage: 30%;
maximum height: 35 feet (2 1/2 stories).
(b) Not served by public sewer, minimum dimensions as follows:
lot area and lot width as provided in Ch. Comm 85, Wis. Adm.
Code, but in no event shall lot area be less than 18,000 square
feet and lot width be less than 100 feet; front yard: 25 feet; side
yards: six feet each; rear yard: 40 feet; maximum lot coverage:
15%; maximum height: 35 feet (2 1/2 stories).
(3) Single-family attached dwellings. Each single-family attached
development shall have a minimum lot area of 12,000 square feet
and minimum lot width of 100 feet. Each group or series of singlefamily
attached dwellings shall have a minimum front yard of 25
feet, side yards of six feet each, and rear yard of 25 feet. Maximum
density is 10 dwelling units per net acre, maximum lot coverage is
25%, and maximum height is 35 feet (2 1/2 stories). Not more than
six dwelling units shall be contiguous or in one series or group, and
not more than two contiguous dwelling units in one group or series
shall have the same or approximately the same roofline or building
line. Not less than 40% of the total site area shall be landscaped in
lawns, gardens, decorative plantings or wooded areas. A site plan
under Article X is required for all single-family attached dwelling
developments. Common open spaces shall be subject to the
requirements of § 535-51.
§ 535-26 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-26
1:576
§ 535-27. R-2 Two-Family Residence District. [Added 1-4-2000]
(4) Other permitted or permissible uses and structures. Same
dimensional requirements as provided in the RSF District.
[Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
F. Permitted accessory signs. As stipulated in Article XV, Signs and
Billboards.192
G. Off-site parking requirements. As stipulated in § 535-49.
H. Landscape and screening standards. As set forth in § 535-52 of this
chapter. [Added 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
A. District intent.
(1) The R-2 District is intended to:
(a) Establish and preserve two-family residential districts in the
Town.
(b) Permit medium-density suburban two-family residential
development in a manner that is consistent with providing a
high-quality suburban character as set forth in the Town of
Grand Chute Comprehensive Plan.193
(c) Be served by public sanitary sewer and water supply facilities.
(d) Be used as a transitional district between the less dense RSF
District and other higher density residential districts and other
commercial and industrial districts.194
(2) Areas of open space may also be provided in this district in order to
maintain this character. The options in this district promote open
space and natural resource base protection. The requirements for
the various options available under the provisions of this district
are intended to reinforce the open nature of the Town's suburban
environment.
B. Development standards. The R-2 District requires development
standards as set forth in Subsection F of this section.
C. Permitted principal uses and structures.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
192. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
193. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
194. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-27
1:577
(2) Public and semipublic nonprofit institutional uses, including
churches, schools, libraries and the like, provided that principal
access shall be directly onto a collector or arterial street.
(3) Parks, playgrounds, golf courses and community centers.
(4) Community living arrangements subject to the provisions and
limitations of § 59.69(15), Wis. Stats.
(5) Day care (family).
(6) Two-family dwellings served by a public sewer system.
D. Permitted accessory uses and structures.
(1) Uses and structures customarily accessory and clearly incidental to
permissible principal uses and structures.
(2) Temporary structures in connection with the construction of
principal structures, provided that such structures are not used for
living purposes. Temporary structures shall not remain over 90
days after construction of the principal structure is substantially
complete.
(3) Home occupations.
(4) Public utility installations.
E. Special exception uses and structures.
(1) Convalescent homes and nursing homes.
(2) Cemeteries.
(3) Gardens, nurseries and orchards, provided that no sales are
conducted on the premises.
(4) Cluster subdivisions subject to the provisions of § 535-60.
F. District standards. [Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
(1) Maximum density.
(a) Net density (ND): less than or equal to six units per acre.
(2) Lot dimensional requirements.
(a) Minimum lot area: 14,520 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width at setback line: 90 feet.
(c) Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
(d) Minimum side yard: 10 feet.
(e) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
§ 535-27 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-27
1:578
§ 535-28. R-3 Single-Family Attached Residence District. [Added
1-4-2000]
(f) Minimum front yard from private road: 25 feet.
(g) Maximum building coverage (maximum percentage of lot
area): 30%.
(3) Maximum building height.
(a) Principal structure: 2.5 stories; 35 feet.
(b) Accessory structure: 1.0 story; 12 feet.
G. Landscape and screening standards. As set forth in § 535-52 of this
chapter. [Added 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
A. District intent.
(1) The R-3 District is intended to:
(a) Establish and preserve single-family attached residential
districts in the Town.
(b) Permit medium-density type, owner-occupied, single-family
attached residential development in a manner that is
consistent with providing a high-quality suburban character as
set forth in the Town of Grand Chute Comprehensive Plan and
components.195
(c) Be served by public sanitary sewer and water supply facilities.
(d) Be used as a transitional district between the less dense RSF
District and other higher density residential districts and other
commercial and industrial districts.196
(2) Areas of open space may also be provided in this district in order to
maintain this character. The options in this district promote open
space and natural resource base protection. The requirements for
the various options available under the provisions of this district
are intended to reinforce the open nature of the Town's suburban
environment.
B. Development standards. The R-3 District requires development
standards as set forth in Subsection J of this section.
C. Permitted principal uses and structures.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
195. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
196. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-28
1:579
(2) Public and semipublic nonprofit institutional uses, including
churches, schools, libraries and the like, provided that principal
access shall be directly onto a collector or arterial street.
(3) Parks, playgrounds, golf courses and community centers.
(4) Community living arrangements subject to the provisions and
limitations of § 59.69(15), Wis. Stats.
(5) Day care (family).
(6) Two-family dwellings served by a public sewer system.
(7) Single-family attached dwelling served by a public sewer system.
D. Permitted accessory uses and structures.
(1) Uses and structures customarily accessory and clearly incidental to
permissible principal uses and structures.
(2) Temporary structures in connection with the construction of
principal structures, provided that such structures are not used for
living purposes. Temporary structures shall not remain over 90
days after construction of the principal structure is substantially
complete.
(3) Home occupations.
(4) Public utility installations.
E. Special exception uses and structures.
(1) Convalescent homes and nursing homes.
(2) Cemeteries.
(3) Gardens, nurseries and orchards, provided that no sales are
conducted on the premises.
(4) Cluster subdivisions subject to the provisions of § 535-60.
F. Architectural standards. The R-3 District requires the following
architectural standards for principal and accessory structures:
(1) At least 70% of all exterior walls shall be faced with a brick, block,
fieldstone or other masonry surface.
(2) No flat walls exceeding 25 feet in length shall be permitted for any
structure; wall offsets, architectural details and wall facing shall be
used to meet this requirement.
(3) A colored perspective drawing of the following shall be submitted
to the Plan Commission: [Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-09]
§ 535-28 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-28
1:580
(a) The typical structures.
(b) The overall site plan for the entrance.
(c) The overall site plan from any adjoining RSF District.
G. Landscape and screening standards. The R-3 District requires the
following landscape standards: [Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-09]
(1) Landscaping other than turf or grass shall equal at least 30% of the
perimeter front, side and rear yards. The landscaping shall consist
of a mixture of trees, bushes and evergreens suited to the location
and providing year-round foliage.
(2) All other landscape and screening standards are set forth in
§ 535-52 of this chapter.
H. Lighting. No direct lighting shall be visible off the property. Light poles
shall not exceed 25 feet.
I. Planned unit development agreement. The applicant and Town shall
execute an agreement that addresses the following items:
(1) Ensure owner-occupied status.
(2) Building maintenance code.
(3) Common area and grounds maintenance code.
(4) On-site management.
J. District standards. [Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
(1) Maximum density.
(a) Net density (ND): less than or equal to eight units per acre.
(2) Lot dimensional requirements.
(a) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(b) Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
(c) Minimum side yard: 20 feet.
(d) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
(e) Maximum lot coverage (maximum percentage of lot area):
30%.
(f) Minimum side yard to RSF, RTF and R-2 Districts: see § 535-52.
(g) Minimum rear yard to RSF, RTF and R-2 Districts: see
§ 535-52.
§ 535-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-28
1:581
§ 535-29. R-4 Multifamily Residence District. [Added 1-4-2000]
(h) Minimum front yard from private road: 25 feet.
(i) Minimum distance between principal buildings: 30 feet, unless
in a PUD (see § 535-59).
(j) Minimum side and rear yard for parking lots adjacent to RSF,
RTF and R-2 Districts: see § 535-52.
(3) Maximum building height.
(a) Principal structure: 2.5 stories; 35 feet.
(b) Accessory structure: 1.0 story; 16 feet.
A. District intent.
(1) The R-4 District is intended to:
(a) Establish and preserve multiple residential districts in the
Town.
(b) Permit higher-density type multiple-family residential
development in a manner that is consistent with the provision
of a high-quality suburban community character as set forth in
the Town of Grand Chute Comprehensive Plan and components
thereof.197
(c) Be served by public sanitary sewer and water supply facilities.
(d) Be used as a transitional district between the less dense
residential districts and commercial and industrial districts.
(2) Areas of open space may also be provided in this district in order to
maintain this character. The options in this district promote open
space and natural resource base protection. The requirements for
the various options available under the provisions of this district
are intended to reinforce the open nature of the Town's suburban
environment.
B. Development standards. The R-4 District requires development
standards as set forth in Subsection J of this section.
C. Permitted principal uses and structures.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Public and semipublic nonprofit institutional uses, including
churches, schools, libraries and the like, provided that principal
access shall be directly onto a collector or arterial street.
197. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-28 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-29
1:582
(3) Parks, playgrounds, golf courses and community centers.
(4) Community living arrangements subject to the provisions and
limitations of § 59.69(15), Wis. Stats.
(5) Day care (family).
(6) Two-family dwellings served by a public sewer system.
(7) Single-family attached dwellings.
(8) Multiple-family dwellings, provided that the building does not
exceed three stories in height.
D. Permitted accessory uses and structures.
(1) Uses and structures customarily accessory and clearly incidental to
permissible principal uses and structures.
(2) Temporary structures in connection with the construction of
principal structures, provided that such structures are not used for
living purposes. Temporary structures shall not remain over 90
days after construction of the principal structure is substantially
complete.
(3) Home occupations.
(4) Public utility installations.
E. Special exception uses and structures.
(1) Convalescent homes and nursing homes.
F. Architectural standards. The R-4 District requires the following
architectural standards for principal and accessory structures.
(1) At least 80% of all exterior walls shall be faced with a brick, block,
fieldstone or other masonry surface.
(2) No flat walls exceeding 25 feet in length shall be permitted for any
structure; wall offsets, architectural details and wall facing shall be
used to meet this requirement.
(3) A colored perspective drawing of the following shall be submitted
to the Plan Commission:
(a) The typical structures.
(b) The overall site plan for the entrance.
(c) The overall site plan from any adjoining RSF District.
[Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
§ 535-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-29
1:583
G. Landscape and screening standards. The R-4 District requires the
following landscape standards: [Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-09]
(1) Landscaping other than turf or grass shall equal at least 30% of the
perimeter front, side and rear yards. The landscaping shall consist
of a mixture of trees, bushes and evergreens suited to the location
and providing year-round foliage.
(2) All other landscape and screening standards are set forth in
§ 535-52 of this chapter.
H. Lighting. No direct lighting shall be visible off the property. Light poles
shall not exceed 25 feet.
I. Planned unit development agreement. The applicant and Town shall
execute an agreement that addresses the following items:
(1) Building maintenance code.
(2) Common area and grounds maintenance code.
(3) On-site management.
J. District standards. [Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
(1) Maximum density.
(a) Net density (ND): less than or equal to 10 units per acre.
(2) Lot dimensional requirements.
(a) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(b) Minimum front yard.
[1] Principal building: 30 feet.
[2] Accessory building: 25 feet.
(c) Minimum side yard.
[1] Principal building: 30 feet.
[2] Accessory building: 25 feet.
(d) Minimum rear yard.
[1] Principal building: 25 feet.
[2] Accessory building: 25 feet.
(e) Minimum front yard from private road: 25 feet.
(f) Maximum lot coverage (maximum percentage of lot area):
40%.
§ 535-29 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-29
1:584
§ 535-30. R-5 Multifamily Residence District. [Added 1-4-2000]
(g) Minimum side yard to RSF, RTF and R-2 Districts: see § 535-52.
(h) Minimum rear yard to RSF, RTF and R-2 Districts: see
§ 535-52.
(i) Minimum distance between principal buildings: 50 feet, unless
in a PUD (see § 535-59).
(j) Minimum side and rear yard for parking lots adjacent to RSF,
RTF and R-2 Districts: see § 535-52.
(3) Maximum building height.
(a) Principal structure: 2.5 stories; 40 feet.
(b) Accessory structure: 1.0 story; 16 feet.
A. District intent.
(1) The R-5 District is intended to:
(a) Preserve preexisting multiple residential districts in the Town.
(b) Permit highest-density type multiple-family residential
development for infill or redevelopment projects in a manner
that is consistent with the provision of a high-quality suburban
community character as set forth in the Town of Grand Chute
Comprehensive Plan and components thereof.198
(c) Be served by public sanitary sewer and water supply facilities.
(d) Be used as a transitional district between the less dense
residential districts and commercial and industrial districts.
(2) Areas of open space may also be provided in this district in order to
maintain this character. The options in this district promote open
space and natural resource base protection. The requirements for
the various options available under the provisions of this district
are intended to reinforce the open nature of the Town's suburban
environment.
B. Development standards. R-5 District requires development standards
as set forth in Subsection J of this section.
C. Permitted principal uses and structures.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
198. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-30
1:585
(2) Public and semipublic nonprofit institutional uses, including
churches, schools, libraries and the like, provided that principal
access shall be directly onto a collector or arterial street.
(3) Parks, playgrounds, golf courses and community centers.
(4) Community living arrangements subject to the provisions and
limitations of § 59.69(15), Wis. Stats.
(5) Day care (family).
(6) Two-family dwellings served by a public sewer system.
(7) Single-family attached dwellings.
(8) Multiple-family dwellings providing enclosed or underground
parking.
D. Permitted accessory uses and structures.
(1) Uses and structures customarily accessory and clearly incidental to
permissible principal uses and structures.
(2) Temporary structures in connection with the construction of
principal structures, provided that such structures are not used for
living purposes. Temporary structures shall not remain over 90
days after construction of the principal structure is substantially
complete.
(3) Home occupations.
(4) Public utility installations.
E. Special exception uses and structures.
(1) Convalescent homes and nursing homes.
F. Architectural standards. The R-5 District requires the following
architectural standards for principal and accessory structures:
(1) At least 80% of all exterior walls shall be faced with a brick, block,
fieldstone or other masonry surface.
(2) No flat walls exceeding 25 feet in length shall be permitted for any
structure; wall offsets, architectural details and wall facing shall be
used to meet this requirement.
(3) A colored perspective drawing of the following shall be submitted
to the Plan Commission: [Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-09]
(a) The typical structures.
(b) The overall site plan for the entrance.
§ 535-30 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-30
1:586
(c) The overall site plan from any adjoining RSF District.
G. Landscape and screening standards. The R-5 District requires the
following landscape standards: [Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-09]
(1) Landscaping other than turf or grass shall equal at least 20% of the
perimeter front, side and rear yards. The landscaping shall consist
of a mixture of trees, bushes and evergreens suited to the location
and providing year-round foliage.
(2) All other landscape and screening standards are set forth in
§ 535-52 of this chapter.
H. Lighting. No direct lighting shall be visible off the property. Light poles
shall not exceed 25 feet.
I. Planned unit development agreement. The applicant and Town shall
execute an agreement that addresses the following items:
(1) Building maintenance code.
(2) Common area and grounds maintenance code.
(3) On-site management.
J. District standards. [Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
(1) Maximum density.
(a) Net density (ND): less than or equal to 20 units per acre.
(2) Lot dimensional requirements.
(a) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(b) Minimum front yard: 35 feet.
(c) Minimum side yard: 10 feet.
(d) Minimum rear yard: 35 feet.
(e) Maximum lot coverage (maximum percentage of lot area):
70%.
(f) Minimum side yard to RSF, RTF and R-2 Districts: see § 535-52.
(g) Minimum rear yard to RSF, RTF and R-2 Districts: see
§ 535-52.
(h) Minimum front yard from private road: 25 feet.
(i) Minimum distance between principal buildings: 50 feet, unless
in a PUD (see § 535-59).
§ 535-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-30
1:587
§ 535-31. RMF Multifamily Residential District. [Added 1-4-2000]
(j) Minimum side and rear yard for parking lots adjacent to RSF,
RTF and R-2 Districts: see § 535-52.
(3) Maximum building height.
(a) Principal structure: 4.5 stories; 45 feet.
(b) Accessory structure: 1.0 story; 16 feet.
A. Purpose. This district is intended to provide for medium- to high-density
residential areas with emphasis on multifamily or apartment
development. This district requires access to public sewer.
B. Permitted principal uses and structures.
(1) Permitted principal uses and structures in § 535-25B(1) through (4)
in the RSF District.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Single-family attached dwellings.
(4) Multiple-family dwellings, provided that the building does not
exceed three stories in height.
C. Permitted accessory uses and structures. Permitted accessory uses and
structures in § 535-25C(1) through (4) in the RSF District.
D. Special exception uses and structures.
(1) Special exception uses and structures in § 535-25D(1) through (5)
in the RSF District.
(2) Multiple-family dwellings in buildings exceeding three stories in
height.
E. Dimensional requirements.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings. Dimensional requirements as
provided in the RSF District.
(2) Two-family dwellings. Dimensional requirements as provided in the
RTF District.
(3) Single-family attached dwellings. Dimensional requirements as
provided in the RTF District.
(4) Multiple-family dwellings. [Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-09]
(a) Not exceeding three stories or 45 feet in height, minimum
dimensions as follows: lot area: 10,000 square feet; lot width:
90 feet; front and rear yard: 25 feet; side yards: eight feet
§ 535-30 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-31
1:588
§ 535-32. C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District.
each; maximum density: 20 dwelling units per net acre; lot
coverage 30%. If more than one building is located on the
parcel, they may be no closer than 50 feet to each other, unless
in a PUD (see § 535-59). Buildings shall be set back 20 feet
from internal drives or parking areas. The Plan Commission
may approve variations to the required internal setbacks if
provisions have been made to provide acceptable alternatives
to separate buildings from automobiles or when additional
green space is provided to minimize crowding of buildings.
Not less than 30% of the total site area shall be landscaped in
lawns, gardens, decorative plantings or wooded areas. A site
plan under Article X is required.
(b) Exceeding three stories or 45 feet in height, minimum
dimensions as follows: lot area: 20,000 square feet; lot width:
100 feet; side yards: eight feet each; front and rear yards: 25
feet; maximum density: 20 dwelling units per net acre; lot
coverage: 30%. If more than one building is located on the
parcel, then they may be no closer than 50 feet to each other,
unless in a PUD (see § 535-59). Buildings shall be set back 20
feet from internal drives or parking areas. Not less than 30% of
the total site area shall be landscaped in lawns, gardens,
decorative plantings or wooded areas. A site plan under Article
X is required.
(5) Other permitted or permissible uses and structures. Same
dimensional requirements as specified in the RSF District.
[Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
F. Permitted accessory signs. As stipulated in Article XV, Signs and
Billboards.199
G. Off-street parking requirements. As stipulated in § 535-49.
H. Landscape and screening standards. As set forth in § 535-52 of this
chapter. [Added 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
A. Purpose. This district is intended to provide for the convenience of
persons residing in nearby residential areas and accommodates the
basic day-to-day shopping and service needs of the residents living in
the adjacent areas. The design and function of this commercial district
must minimize any potential negative impact on the adjacent
residential areas.
B. Site plan review.
199. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-32
1:589
(1) All uses and projects shall obtain site plan approval from the Plan
Commission, in accordance with Article X of this chapter, prior to
issuance of a building permit, excepting those uses and projects
noted in Subsection B(2) below. [Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-09]
(2) The following uses and projects shall obtain site plan approval from
the Zoning Administrator, in accordance with Article X of this
chapter, prior to issuance of a building permit.
(a) The proposed building or structure is less than 10,000 square
feet.
(b) Parking lot, driveway, gravel or soil stripping or any other
impervious surface creation or alteration.
(3) The Plan Commission and Zoning Administrator shall review site
plans in accordance with all requirements of Article X.
C. Principal permitted uses. None.
D. Permitted accessory uses and structures.
(1) Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly
incidental and subordinate to permissible principal uses and
structures when they are located on the same lot or a lot
contiguous with the principal use or structure.
(2) Public utility installations.
E. Special exceptions.
(1) Art gallery, museum, library, community center or other publicly
owned and operated facility.
(2) Automobile service.
(3) Automobile filling station.
(4) Convenience store.
(5) Group day-care facilities.
(6) Professional or business offices.
(7) Service establishments, including barbershops or beauty shops,
laundry or dry cleaner and uses of a similar nature.
(8) Places of worship.
F. District standards. [Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
(1) Landscape surface ratio/impervious surface area.
(a) Minimum landscape surface: 25%.
§ 535-32 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-32
1:590
(b) Maximum impervious surface: 75%.
(2) Lot dimensional requirements.
(a) Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width at setback line: 90 feet.
(c) Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
(d) Minimum side yard: 10 feet.
(e) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
(f) Minimum yard to residential districts: see § 535-52.
(g) Minimum yard setback for parking lots and driveways adjacent
to residential districts: see § 535-52.
(3) Maximum building height.
(a) Principal structure: 2.0 stories; 36 feet.
(b) Accessory structure: 1.0 story; 25 feet.
G. Permitted accessory signs. As stipulated in Article XV, Signs and
Billboards. [Added 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
H. Off-street parking requirements. As stipulated in § 535-49. [Added
4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
I. Architectural standards. The C-1 District requires the following
architectural standards for principal and accessory structures:
(1) At least 80% of all exterior walls shall be faced with a brick, block,
fieldstone or other masonry surface toward a residential zone or
public street.
(2) No flat wall exceeding 25 feet in length shall be permitted for any
structure; wall offsets, architectural details and wall facing shall be
used to meet this requirement.
J. Landscape and screening standards. The C-1 District requires the
following landscaping standards: [Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-09]
(1) Landscaping other than turf or grass shall equal at least 15% of the
perimeter front, side and rear yards. The landscaping shall consist
of a mixture of trees, bushes and evergreens suited to the location
and providing year-round foliage.
(2) All other landscape and screening standards are set forth in
§ 535-52 of this chapter.
K. Performance standards. See § 535-39G.200
§ 535-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-33
1:591
§ 535-33. C-2 Office Commercial District. [Added 2-22-2001]
A. Purpose. This district is intended to provide a buffer between
residential and commercial and/or industrial uses by permitting
professional and business offices. To serve as a buffer, landscaping,
parking lot, architectural and other requirements are required to create
a visual barrier and protector of the residential uses.
B. Site plan review.
(1) The following uses and projects shall obtain site plan approval from
the Plan Commission, in accordance with Article X of this chapter,
prior to issuance of a building permit: [Amended 4-7-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-09]
(a) The proposed building or structure is greater than or equal to
10,000 square feet.
(b) The site adjoins a residential district boundary.
(c) The site adjoins a federal, state or county highway.
(d) Proposed sign height is greater than or equal to 25 feet.
(2) The following uses and projects shall obtain site plan approval from
the Zoning Administrator, in accordance with Article X of this
chapter, prior to issuance of a building permit:
(a) The proposed building or structure is less than 10,000 square
feet.
(b) Parking lot, driveway, gravel or soil stripping or any other
impervious surface creation or alteration.
(3) The Plan Commission and Zoning Administrator shall review site
plans in accordance with all requirements of Article X.
C. Principal permitted uses.
(1) Professional and business offices, including:
(a) Architectural, engineering and other design offices.
(b) Attorney and other legal offices.
(c) Financial, insurance and real estate offices.
(d) Government offices.
(e) Medical and dental offices.
D. Permitted accessory uses and structures.
200. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 535-33 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-33
1:592
(1) Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly
incidental and subordinate to permissible principal uses and
structures when they are located on the same lot or a lot
contiguous with the principal use or structure.
(2) Public utility installations.
E. Special exceptions.
(1) Financial institutions.
(2) Clubs and organization, profit and nonprofit.
(3) Convalescent homes, nursing homes and day care (family or
group).
(4) Veterinary offices.
(5) Places of worship.
(6) School, public or private.
(7) Hospitals, health centers, nursing homes and convalescent homes.
(8) Vocational, trade or business schools.
F. District standards. [Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
(1) Landscape surface ratio/impervious surface area.
(a) Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR): 25%.
(b) Maximum impervious surface: 75%.
(2) Lot dimensional requirements.
(a) Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width at setback line: 90 feet.
(c) Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
(d) Minimum side yard: 10 feet.
(e) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
(f) Minimum yard to residential districts: see § 535-52.
(g) Minimum yard setback for parking lots and driveways adjacent
to residential districts: see § 535-52.
(3) Maximum building height.
(a) Principal structure: 2.0 stories; 36 feet.
(b) Accessory structure: 1.0 story; 25 feet.
§ 535-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-33
1:593
§ 535-34. (Reserved)202
§ 535-35. (Reserved)203
§ 535-36. CL Local Commercial District. [Amended 2-22-2001;
5-21-2002; 9-7-2004]
G. Permitted accessory signs. As stipulated in Article XV, Signs and
Billboards. [Added 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
H. Off-street parking requirements. As stipulated in § 535-49. [Added
4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
I. Architectural standards. The C-2 District requires the following
architectural standards for principal and accessory structures:
(1) At least 80% of all exterior walls shall be faced with a brick, block,
fieldstone or other masonry surface.
(2) No flat wall exceeding 25 feet in length shall be permitted for any
structure; wall offsets, architectural details and wall facing shall be
used to meet this requirement.
J. Landscape and screening standards. The C-2 District requires the
following landscaping standards: [Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-09]
(1) Landscaping other than turf or grass shall equal at least 15% of the
perimeter front, side and rear yards. The landscaping shall consist
of a mixture of trees, bushes and evergreens suited to the location
and providing year-round foliage.
(2) All other landscape and screening standards are set forth in
§ 535-52 of this chapter.
K. Performance standards. See § 535-39G.201
A. Purpose. This district is intended to apply to commercial establishments
located to serve primarily localized commercial markets throughout the
Town. It is the intent of this district to encourage grouping of such
commercial establishments. The district is not intended to apply to
major or large-scale commercial establishments of a regional character.
B. Site plan review.
201. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
202. Editor's Note: Original § 27.05(5)(C), C-3 Small-Scale Commercial District, added
2-22-2001 and amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09, was repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
203. Editor's Note: Original § 27.05(5)(D), C-4 Large-Scale Commercial District, added
2-22-2001 and amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09, was repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 535-33 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-36
1:594
(1) The following uses and projects shall obtain site plan approval from
the Plan Commission, in accordance with Article X of this chapter,
prior to issuance of a building permit: [Amended 4-7-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-09]
(a) The proposed building or structure is greater than or equal to
10,000 square feet.
(b) All special exception uses, including convenience stores and
other auto-related businesses.
(c) The site adjoins a residential district boundary.
(d) The site adjoins a federal, state or county highway.
(e) Taverns or restaurants.
(f) Proposed sign height is greater than or equal to 25 feet.
(2) The following uses and projects shall obtain site plan approval from
the Zoning Administrator, in accordance with Article X of this
chapter, prior to issuance of a building permit:
(a) The proposed building or structure is less than 10,000 square
feet.
(b) Parking lot, driveway, gravel or soil stripping or any other
impervious surface creation or alteration.
(3) The Plan Commission and Zoning Administrator shall review site
plans in accordance with all requirements of Article X.
C. Permitted principal uses and structures.
(1) Retail outlets, including the sale of food, liquor, wearing apparel,
art or photographic supplies, printing, books or stationery, sundries
or notions, jewelry, luggage, florist or gifts, drugs, pets, home
furnishings and appliances, sporting goods or hobbies, automotive
parts, hardware and building supply establishments and uses of a
similar nature.
(2) Service establishments, including barbershop or beauty shop, shoe
repair, laundry or dry cleaner, appliance repair, photographic or
dance studio and uses of a similar nature.
(3) Business and professional offices, including banks and other
financial institutions, insurance and real estate, travel agency,
medical or dental clinic, attorney's office, engineering office and
uses of a similar nature.
(4) Taverns and restaurants.
(5) Hotels and motels.
§ 535-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-36
1:595
(6) Vocational, business, and technical schools, clubs and
organizations, profit and nonprofit.
(7) Indoor commercial recreational establishments conducted entirely
within a building(s) less than or equal to 40,000 square feet,
including motion-picture theaters, billiard parlors, arcades,
bowling alleys, rinks, and uses of a similar nature.
(8) Convalescent homes and nursing homes and day care (family).204
(9) Office equipment and supplies.
(10) Garden center, plant nursery or landscape contractor.
(11) Veterinary offices.
(12) Mortuaries.
(13) Equipment rental.
(14) Existing dwellings.
(15) Storage establishments.
D. Permitted accessory uses and structures.
(1) Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly
incidental and subordinate to permissible principal uses and
structures when they are located on the same lot or a lot
contiguous with the principal use or structure.
(2) Public utility installations.
E. Special exception uses and structures.
(1) Automobile filling stations and car washes.
(2) Automobile, boat, motorcycle, construction equipment and farm
implement sales, service and repair.
(3) Wholesale and warehouse establishments.
(4) Printing and publishing establishments.
(5) Outdoor recreational establishments, including archery ranges,
miniature golf and amusements, motorized cart and motorcycle
tracks, campgrounds, stadiums, shooting ranges and uses of a
similar nature.
(6) Light manufacturing uses and structures, such as packaging,
bottling, storage facilities and laboratories, provided that all
activities are conducted within completely enclosed buildings not
204. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-36 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-36
1:596
involving odor, noise, smoke or other noxious effects detectable to
normal senses from off the premises.
(7) Radio stations - transmitter tower.
(8) Dog kennel.
(9) Day care (group).205
(10) Building trades contractor with storage yard for material and
equipment on the premises, provided that all materials and
equipment are effectively screened from view from any residential
lot or public highway.
(11) Agricultural-related uses and structures such as feed mills and coops.
(12)Woodworking and cabinetry.
(13) Billboards.
(14) Adult establishments.
(15) Churches. [Added 6-19-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-04]
(16) Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers. [Added 2-3-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-03; amended 2-19-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-07]
(17) Establishment that obtains a liquor license that includes licensing
any area outdoor or exterior to the principal building. [Added
3-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-10]
(18) Antennas and towers in accordance with Article XVI of this
chapter.206
F. Traffic impact. The Plan Commission may require a traffic impact
analysis for any use or structure proposed for construction in this
district. [Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
G. District standards. [Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
(1) Landscape surface ratio/impervious surface area.
(a) Minimum landscape surface ratio: 20%.
(b) Maximum impervious surface: 80%.
(c) Maximum lot coverage, building only: 35%.
(2) Lot dimensional requirements.
(a) Minimum lot area: 12,000 square feet.
205. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
206. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 535-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-36
1:597
§ 535-37. CR Regional Commercial District. [Amended 7-6-2000;
2-22-2001; 5-21-2002]
(b) Minimum lot width at setback line: 100 feet.
(c) Minimum front yard: 35 feet.
(d) Minimum side yard: 10 feet.
(e) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
(f) Minimum yard to residential districts: see § 535-52.
(g) Minimum yard setback for parking lots and driveways adjacent
to residential districts: see § 535-52.
(3) Maximum building height.
(a) Principal structure: 3.0 stories; 45 feet.
(b) Accessory structure: 1.0 story; 25 feet.
H. Permitted accessory signs. As stipulated in Article XV, Signs and
Billboards.
I. Off-street parking requirements. As stipulated in § 535-49.
J. Architectural standards. The CL District requires the following
architectural standards for principal and accessory structures:
(1) At least 35% of all exterior walls visible from a residential district
or a public street shall be faced with a brick, fieldstone or other
masonry surface.
(2) All walls shall use colors, finishes, materials, wall offset and other
architectural details to prevent flat, blank walls.
K. Landscape and screening standards. The CL District requires the
following landscaping standards: [Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-09]
(1) Landscaping other than turf or grass shall equal at least 25% of the
perimeter front yards. The landscaping shall consist of a mixture of
trees, bushes and evergreens suited to the location and providing
year-round foliage.
(2) All other landscape and screening standards are set forth in
§ 535-52 of this chapter.
L. Performance standards. See § 535-39G.207
207. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 535-36 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-37
1:598
A. Purpose. This district is intended to apply to areas which are now
intensely developed or are expected to be intensely developed for
commercial uses serving a regional commercial market.
B. Site plan review.
(1) The following uses and projects shall obtain site plan approval from
the Plan Commission, in accordance with Article X of this chapter,
prior to issuance of a building permit: [Amended 4-7-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-09]
(a) The proposed building or structure is greater than or equal to
10,000 square feet.
(b) All special exception uses, including convenience stores and
other auto-related business.
(c) The site adjoins a residential district boundary.
(d) The site adjoins a federal, state or county highway.
(e) Taverns and restaurants.
(f) Proposed sign height is greater than or equal to 25 feet.
(2) The following uses and projects shall obtain site plan approval from
the Zoning Administrator, in accordance with Article X of this
chapter, prior to issuance of a building permit:
(a) The proposed building or structure is less than 10,000 square
feet.
(b) Parking lot, driveway, gravel or soil stripping or any other
impervious surface creation or alteration.
(3) The Plan Commission and Zoning Administrator shall review site
plans in accordance to all requirements of Article X.
C. Permitted principal uses and structures.
(1) Permitted principal uses and structures in § 535-36C(1) through (3)
in the CL District where the building or structure does not exceed
40,000 square feet of floor area. The front of all buildings shall be
faced with decorative masonry or other materials of suitable
aesthetic, safety and durability value.
(2) Permitted principal uses and structures in § 535-36C(4) through
(14) in the CL District. Building fronts shall meet the requirements
of Subsection C(1) above.
D. Permitted accessory uses and structures. Permitted accessory uses and
structures in the CL District.
E. Special exception uses and structures.
§ 535-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-37
1:599
(1) Retail, service and office uses and structures where the building or
structure exceeds 40,000 square feet of floor area.
(2) Special exception uses and structures in § 535-36E(1) through (9)
in the CL District.
(3) Indoor commercial recreational establishments conducted entirely
within a building(s) greater than 40,000 square feet, including an
arena, assembly hall, auditorium, amusement rides, water slides
and pools and uses of a similar nature.
(4) Churches. [Added 6-19-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-04]
(5) Establishment that obtains a liquor license that includes licensing
any area outdoor or exterior to the principal building. [Added
3-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-10]
(6) Antennas and towers in accordance with Article XVI of this
chapter.208
F. Traffic impact. The Plan Commission may require a traffic impact
analysis for any use or structure proposed for construction in this
district. [Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
G. District standards. [Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
(1) Landscape surface ratio/impervious surface area.
(a) Minimum landscape surface ratio: 20%.
(b) Maximum impervious surface: 80%.
(c) Maximum lot coverage, building only: 35%.
(2) Lot dimensional requirements.
(a) Minimum lot area: 12,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width at setback line: 100 feet.
(c) Minimum front yard: 35 feet.
(d) Minimum side yard: 10 feet.
(e) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
(f) Minimum yard to residential districts: see § 535-52.
(g) Minimum yard setback for parking lots and driveways adjacent
to residential districts: see § 535-52.
(3) Maximum building height.
(a) Principal structure: none.
208. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 535-37 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-37
1:600
§ 535-38. CP Planned Commercial District. [Amended 7-6-2000;
2-22-2001]
(b) Accessory structure: 1.0 story; 25 feet.
H. Permitted accessory signs. As stipulated in Article XV, Signs and
Billboards.
I. Off-street parking requirements. As stipulated in § 535-49.
J. Architectural standards. The CR District requires the following
architectural standards for principal and accessory structures:
(1) At least 35% of all exterior walls visible from a residential district
or a public street shall be faced with a brick, block, fieldstone or
other masonry surface.
(2) All walls shall use colors, finishes, materials, wall offset and other
architectural details to prevent flat, blank walls.
K. Landscape and screening standards. The CR District requires the
following landscaping standards: [Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-09]
(1) Landscaping other than turf or grass shall equal at least 25% of the
perimeter front yards. The landscaping shall consist of a mixture of
trees, bushes and evergreens suited to the location and providing
year-round foliage.
(2) All other landscape and screening standards are set forth in
§ 535-52 of this chapter.
L. Performance standards. See § 535-39G.209
A. Purpose. This district is intended to apply to large-scale commercial
developments with either single or multiple buildings on a single lot or
parcel designed and managed as a single entity. This district should be
located such that there is direct access to major arterial streets and
highways.
B. Permitted principal uses and structures. [Amended 11-18-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-11]
(1) Business and professional offices.
C. Permitted accessory uses and structures.
(1) Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly
incidental and subordinate to permissible principal uses and
structures.
(2) Public utility installations.
209. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 535-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-38
1:601
D. Special exception uses and structures. [Amended 11-18-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-11]
(1) Group day-care facilities.
(2) Facilities defined by Chs. DOC 348 and 350, Wis. Adm. Code.
(3) Art gallery, museum, library, community center, and publicly owned
and operated recreational facilities.
(4) Hotels and restaurants.
(5) Clubs and organizations.
(6) Retail shopping centers, provided that all sales and storage are
conducted within a completely enclosed building.
(7) Hospitals, health centers, nursing homes and convalescent homes.
(8) Vocational, trade or business schools.
(9) Publicly owned auditoriums or convention centers.
(10) Wholesale and warehouse establishments.
(11) Printing and publishing establishments.
(12) Light manufacturing uses and structures, such as packaging,
bottling, and storage facilities and laboratories, provided that all
activities are conducted within completely enclosed buildings, not
involving odor, noise, smoke or other noxious effects detectable to
normal senses from off the premises.
(13) Establishment that obtains a liquor license that includes licensing
any area outdoor or exterior to the principal building. [Added
3-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-10]
E. District standards. [Amended 9-16-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-08;
4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
(1) All permissible principal uses and structures. Minimum
dimensions: maximum lot coverage: 35%. This district
contemplates more than one principal building on a lot. There are
no minimum lot area requirements per building. However, no
building shall be located within 25 feet of another building or
exterior property line. There are no maximum height requirements
except that for every two feet in height above four stories or 50 feet
the width or depth of yards adjacent to exterior lot lines shall be
increased one foot. A site plan under Article X is required.
(2) Minimum setbacks to residential districts.
(a) Office use: see § 535-52.
(b) Commercial/retail use: see § 535-52.
§ 535-38 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-38
1:602
§ 535-39. IND Industrial District. [Amended 2-22-2001; 3-5-2002;
5-21-2002]
(c) Industrial/warehouse use: see § 535-52.
(d) Parking lot/driveway: see § 535-52.
F. Traffic impact. The Plan Commission may require a traffic impact
analysis for any use or structure proposed for construction in this
district. [Added 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
G. Permitted accessory signs. As stipulated in Article XV, Signs and
Billboards.
H. Off-street parking requirements. As stipulated in § 535-49.
I. Landscape and screening standards. As stipulated in § 535-52 of this
chapter. [Added 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
J. Performance standards. See § 535-39G.210
A. Purpose. This district is intended primarily for manufacturing and
closely related uses. It is intended to preserve such lands for the
functions of industrial activity, wholesaling, warehousing and
distribution. To allow maximum latitude for operations, performance
standards are applied at district boundaries. It is further the intent of
this district that it be so located in relation to major thoroughfares that
resulting traffic generated by industrial activity will not be channeled
through residential areas.
B. Site plan review.
(1) The following uses and projects shall obtain site plan approval from
the Plan Commission, in accordance with Article X of this chapter,
prior to issuance of a building permit: [Amended 4-7-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-09]
(a) The proposed building or structure is greater than or equal to
10,000 square feet.
(b) All special exception uses, including convenience stores and
other auto-related businesses.
(c) The site adjoins a residential district boundary.
(d) The site adjoins a federal, state or county highway.
(e) Taverns or restaurants.
(f) Proposed sign height is greater than or equal to 25 feet.
210. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 535-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-39
1:603
(2) The following uses and projects shall obtain site plan approval from
the Zoning Administrator, in accordance with Article X of this
chapter, prior to issuance of a building permit:
(a) The proposed building or structure is less than 10,000 square
feet.
(b) Parking lot, driveway, gravel or soil stripping or any other
impervious surface creation or alteration.
(3) The Plan Commission and Zoning Administrator shall review site
plans in accordance with all requirements of Article X.
C. Permitted principal uses and structures.
(1) Wholesaling, warehouse, storage or distribution establishments
(except bulk storage of flammable liquids) and uses of a similar
nature.
(2) Printing and publishing.
(3) Service establishments catering to commercial and industrial uses,
including business machine services, linen supply, freight movers,
communication services, canteen services and uses of a similar
nature.
(4) Light manufacturing uses, including bottling, packaging,
laboratories and uses of a similar nature.
(5) Manufacturing uses, including production, processing, cleaning,
testing and the distribution of materials and goods, except
wrecking yards, fertilizer and chemical manufacture and canneries
or slaughterhouses. All manufacturing uses are subject to the
provisions of Subsection G.
(6) Building contractor with storage yard.
(7) Transportation terminals.
D. Permitted accessory uses and structures.
(1) Uses and structures customarily accessory and clearly incidental to
permissible principal uses and structures.
(2) Outside storage of materials and products, provided that such
storage shall not be closer than 25 feet to the street line or 10 feet
to any lot line. Storage areas shall be enclosed by fencing material
and/or landscaping to be 75% or more opaque between two and six
feet above average ground level. All storage areas shall be surfaced
with gravel or hard surface materials. Storage materials shall not
be piled or stacked to a height beyond the principal building.
§ 535-39 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-39
1:604
(3) Temporary storage of waste materials and trash, provided that
such materials/trash shall be enclosed by a fence of solid material
not less than six feet in height.
(4) Public utility installations.
E. Special exception uses and structures.
(1) Automobile, boat, construction and farm implement sales, service
and repair.
(2) Bulk storage of flammable liquids.
(3) Agricultural-related uses, including feed mills and co-ops.
(4) Fertilizer and chemical manufacture subject to the provisions of
Subsection G.
(5) Canneries and slaughterhouses subject to the provisions of
Subsection G.
(6) Automobile wrecking or salvage yards and junkyards, provided that
such use shall not be located closer than 250 feet to any property
zoned residential, and no portion of the lot within 25 feet of a public
street or highway shall be used for any purpose other than offstreet
parking for employees or patrons. All activities and storage
shall be completely enclosed pursuant to the landscaped buffer
requirements of § 535-52.
(7) Sanitary landfills and energy recovery systems.
(8) Group day-care facilities.
(9) Cellular, radio-telephone towers.
(10) Filling stations and convenience stores.
(11) Antennas and towers in accordance with Article XVI of this
chapter.211
F. District standards. [Amended 9-16-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-08;
4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
(1) Minimum lot area: 12,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width at setback line: 100 feet.
(3) Minimum front yard: 35 feet.
(4) Minimum side yard: 10 feet.
(5) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
(6) Minimum yard to residential districts: see § 535-52.
211. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 535-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-39
1:605
(7) Minimum yard setback for parking lot/driveway adjacent to
residential district: see § 535-52.
G. Industrial and commercial district performance standards.
(1) Intent. It is the intent of this chapter to use performance standards
for the regulation of all industrial and commercial districts to
facilitate a more objective and equitable basis for control and to
ensure that the community is adequately protected from potential
hazardous and nuisance-like effects.
(2) Standards of operation.
(a) Noise and vibration. No operation or activity shall transmit any
noise or vibration that is above the vibration perception
threshold of an individual at or beyond the industrial or
commercial district boundaries. "Vibration perception
threshold" means the minimum ground- or structure-borne
vibrational motion necessary to cause a normal person to be
aware of the vibration by such direct means as, but not limited
to, sensation by touch or visual observation of moving objects.
Vibrations not directly under the control of the property user
and vibrations from temporary construction or maintenance
activities shall be exempt from the above standard.
(b) External lighting. No operation or activity shall produce any
intense glare or lighting with the source directly visible beyond
the parallel boundary towards a public street or a residential
district.
(c) Odor. No operation or activity shall emit any substance or
combination of substances in such quantities that create an
objectionable odor as defined in Ch. NR 429, Wis. Adm. Code.
(d) Particulate emissions. No operation or activity shall emit any
particulate matter into the ambient air which exceeds the
limitations as established in Ch. NR 415, Wis. Adm. Code.
(e) Visible emissions. No operation or activity shall emit into the
ambient air from any direct or portable source any matter that
will affect visibility in excess of the limitations established in
Ch. NR 431, Wis. Adm. Code.
(f) Hazardous pollutants. No operation or activity shall emit any
hazardous substances in such a quantity, concentration or
duration as to be injurious to human health or property, and all
emissions of hazardous substances shall not exceed the
limitations established in Ch. NR 445, Wis. Adm. Code.
(g) Outdoor storage. No operation shall store any component, part
or raw material outdoors unless screened by an opaque fence
§ 535-39 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-39
1:606
§ 535-40. PDD Planned Development District. [Added 1-18-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-03]
or landscape buffer from a public street or a residential
district.
(3) Administration. Determinations necessary for the administration
and enforcement of these standards range from those which can be
made by a reasonable person using normal senses and no
mechanical equipment to those requiring substantial technical
competence and complex equipment. It is the intent of this chapter
that the methods to be used in determining compliance shall be the
responsibility of the Building Inspector and Administrator subject
to the following procedure:
(a) Approval of building permits. Prior to approving a building
permit for any industrial use or any change thereof, the
Building Inspector and Administrator shall have received from
the applicant evidence or assurance that the proposed use or
changing use will satisfy all the standards of this chapter.212
(b) Violation of standards. Whenever the Building Inspector or
Administrator has reason to believe the air quality, vibration
and exterior lighting standards of this chapter have been
violated, written notice shall be made by certified mail to the
person or persons responsible for the alleged violation. Such
notice shall describe the alleged violation and shall require an
answer or correction of the alleged violation within 30 days.
Failure to reply or correct the alleged violation within 30 days
may cause lawful action to be taken to cause correction as
provided in this chapter or referral of the alleged violation to
the appropriate authorities.
H. Permitted accessory signs. As stipulated in Article XV, Signs and
Billboards.
I. Off-street parking requirements. As stipulated in § 535-49.
J. Landscape and screening standards. As set forth in § 535-52 of this
chapter. [Added 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
A. Purpose. This district is intended to promote large-scale commercial,
industrial, institutional, and mixed-use development that may be built
out in multiple phases in accordance with a master development plan. It
is the intent of this district to assure that development is planned and
accomplished within the Town's goals for the surrounding
neighborhood and the community as a whole; promote flexibility in
design and efficient use of land; provide for architectural unity and
design harmony; preserve, to the greatest extent feasible, existing
212. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-40
1:607
landscape features and natural amenities; enhance the natural setting
through planned placement of man-made facilities and plant materials;
and provide more usable common and open space areas than would
otherwise be possible under conventional land development practices.
B. Interpretation. Development shall be planned, reviewed and carried out
in conformance with all municipal, state, and other laws and
regulations. However, in interpreting and applying the provisions of this
section, it shall take precedence and be controlling when there is
conflict between its provisions and those contained elsewhere in this
chapter.
C. Approval procedure. To develop land under this district classification
requires a two-step approval procedure, as described in this section.
The initial step requires the approval by the Town of a master
development plan for the area to be developed and the approval of the
rezoning of said area to PDD Planned Development District. The second
step requires project plan approval, by Town ordinance, before any
phase of development commences within the area zoned PDD Planned
Development District.
D. Permitted uses.
(1) No structure or building shall be erected that is arranged,
intended, or designed to be used for other than those uses that are
specifically approved by the Town in the ordinance authorizing
project approval. In accordance with the adopted master
development plan and the Town's Comprehensive Plan, the Town
Board may allow as permitted uses those principal, accessory, or
special exception uses allowed in the RSF, RTF, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5,
RMF, C-1, C-2, CL, CR, CP, and IND District classifications as cited
in this chapter.213
(2) Notwithstanding any other provisions in this chapter, all lawful
uses existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this
section is derived may be continued until a project approval
ordinance is adopted that would allow additional or different uses.
No such lawful uses shall be expanded or exchanged, except as
provided for in a project approval ordinance.
E. Use standards. Permitted uses, all of which are subject to project
approval, shall be governed by performance standards that relate to the
total concept of the master development plan. Such standards shall be
consistent with the criteria set forth in this section and with generally
accepted standards necessary to ensure the protection of the public
health, safety, and welfare. All use standards and requirements shall be
established as conditions in the ordinance(s) authorizing project
approval.
213. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-40 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-40
1:608
(1) Tract size. The minimum size of any area in the Planned
Development District shall be two acres.
(2) Setbacks. Setbacks for structures and parking areas shall be
established so as to ensure compatibility both within the district
and with adjoining developments, uses, and zoning districts. In
establishing setbacks, the Plan Commission and Town Board shall
consider suitable distances based on the proposed heights of
structures, to ensure adequate separation of uses.
(3) Height limitations. Heights of structures shall be regulated to the
extent that they relate to the proposed development and to the
general area within which the development is proposed to be
located.
(4) Density. The maximum lot coverage for commercial and
institutional structures and buildings shall be 35%. The Plan
Commission, upon review, may increase the maximum lot coverage
for commercial and institutional structures and buildings to 40%.
The maximum lot coverage for industrial structures and buildings
shall be 60%. The maximum dwelling unit density shall be 20 units
per net acre with maximum lot coverage of 70%.
(5) Landscape and open space. Landscaping shall be regulated to the
extent that it relates to the proposed development and to the
general area within which the development is proposed to be
located. At a minimum, all uses must meet the landscape standards
set forth in Article VI of this chapter.
(6) Signs. Specific sign regulations shall be contained in each project
approval ordinance; however, in no case shall they be less
restrictive than those required for signs in the CL and CR
Commercial Districts.
(7) Off-street parking. All off-street parking must meet the
requirements set forth in Article VI of this chapter.
(8) Design considerations. Design standards and requirements
outlined below will be utilized by the Plan Commission in
determining the adequacy of all development plans in the district.
(a) Consideration shall be given to the master development plan
for the district, to ensure compatibility with established goals
and priorities.
(b) The development shall take into account relevant features of
adjacent existing development.
(c) Overall design shall provide for the appearance of external
unity throughout the development. Variations in building
elevations and materials used therein shall be encouraged
insofar as they reinforce rather than hamper design harmony.
§ 535-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-40
1:609
(d) Physical layout and form of all development shall be designed
with regard to the topography and natural features of the site.
(e) The site shall be planned to provide a desirable transition from
the adjoining streetscape and to provide for adequate
landscaping, parking areas and pedestrian and bike facilities.
(f) Plant material shall be selected for interest in structure,
texture, color, and ultimate appearance upon full maturity.
Native plant materials shall be employed as feasible. Existing
trees shall be preserved whenever possible.
(g) Sidewalks and/or trails shall be provided on the site as deemed
necessary for safe and convenient movement to and from
peripheries of the district and for internal flow within the
development area. Sidewalk/trail widths shall be designed with
regard to their anticipated function and usage. Natural
features of the area to be traversed and lighting suitable in
scale with the project shall also be considered.
(h) Parking areas shall be screened from adjacent properties and
roads with hedges, dense plantings, earth berms, changes in
grade, fences, or walls. In addition, all parking lots shall be
designed to accommodate tree and/or shrub plantings along
internal islands, at levels determined appropriate with each
project approval ordinance.
F. Zoning and master plan approval procedure. The procedure required to
rezone property to PDD Planned Development District shall follow the
requirements set forth in Article XIII of this chapter, except that a
rezoning application must be accompanied by a master development
plan that meets the following requirements:
(1) Preapplication consultation. This meeting is intended to inform the
Town of the proposed project and to inform the applicant of the
code standards and regulations that will impact the project. The
applicant will meet with the Department of Community
Development and other departments of the Town, as required, in
preparation for submitting a rezoning application.
(a) Areas of discussion will include but not be limited to the
following topics:
[1] Scope and size of the development and proposed land
uses.
[2] Parking and open space considerations.
[3] Infrastructure needs and traffic impacts.
[4] Conformance with the Town's Comprehensive Plan.
§ 535-40 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-40
1:610
(b) Town staff will offer advice to the applicant regarding the
proposed plan. No oral, written or schematically illustrated
statement made during the course of the consultation shall be
held as legally binding by any party.
(2) Application for zoning and master plan approval. Applications for
approval shall be filed with the Department of Community
Development. Necessary supporting documents and maps, as
specified herein, along with the required filing fee, shall
accompany the application. The submitted master development
plan shall include:
(a) The names, postal and e-mail addresses, and telephone
numbers of the owner, developer, and site planner/designer.
(b) A legal description of the site, the dimensions and bearings of
exterior boundaries, and a description of easements or other
restrictions impacting the site.
(c) A statement describing the general character of the proposed
development, its conformance with neighborhood and
community goals, timing of the development, and appropriate
data, including total acreage, land use types, development
densities, and, if appropriate, the number and type of dwelling
units.
(d) A general outline describing the owner-developer relationship,
anticipated deed restrictions, and prospective private
provision of common services, if any.
(e) Existing site conditions, including topography at intervals no
greater than two feet, existing improvements, along with an
indication as to whether they will be retained or removed,
drainage patterns, and wooded, wetland, or other natural
features.
(f) The pattern of proposed land uses, including the shape, size
and arrangement of use areas, and their relationship to
adjoining uses, as well as a graphic outline showing proposed
staging and development time lines.
(g) The pattern of public and private streets.
(h) A preliminary utility feasibility plan.
(i) The location and description of any land areas to be dedicated
to the public.
(3) Review and approval of zoning and master plan. Approval of the
rezoning to PDD Planned Development District shall constitute
approval of the related master development plan. Said plan shall be
considered an integral component of the district regulations for the
§ 535-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-40
1:611
area being rezoned and shall establish the basic rights of use for
the area.
G. Project plan approval procedure. No development, construction,
reconstruction, or alteration affecting approved uses may occur in an
area zoned PDD Planned Development District until project plan
approval has been granted by the Plan Commission and Town Board. In
the case of a development that is built out in multiple phases, a separate
project plan approval is required for each phase. The procedure for
project plan approval is as follows:
(1) Application for project plan approval. Applications for project plan
approval shall be filed with the Department of Community
Development. Necessary supporting documents and maps, as
specified herein, along with the required filing fee, shall
accompany the application. The submitted project plan approval
application shall include:
(a) Certified topographic survey, showing:
[1] Legal description of the site being developed, names of all
property owners, and seal of the registered surveyor
making the survey/map.
[2] Dimensions and bearings of external property boundaries.
[3] The location of all existing structures, easements, utilities,
streets, sidewalks, trees, parking areas, curb openings,
floodplain and wetlands areas, navigable streams, on-site
stormwater management controls, and public dedication
areas, either contained upon or adjacent to the site.
[4] Contour intervals of not more than two feet.
(b) Project site plan, showing:
[1] Areas to be developed for buildings, parking, landscaping/
open space, stormwater management control, pedestrian
and vehicular circulation, points of ingress/egress,
finished topography/grade elevations, and locations of all
existing and proposed public and private utilities.
[2] The names, right-of way and roadway widths, approximate
radii curves, and tangent lengths of all proposed public
and private streets.
[3] Detailed lot layout and subdivision plan, where required.
[4] Representative floor plans and exterior elevations of
proposed structures and buildings, showing exterior
building materials, and drawn in relation to existing and
proposed final elevations.
§ 535-40 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-40
1:612
[5] Grading plan.
[6] Drainage and stormwater management plan.
[7] Erosion control plan.
[8] Landscape plan, in conformance with the standards set
forth in Article VI of this chapter.
[9] Signage and site lighting plan.
(c) Copies of agreements, bylaws, deed restrictions, covenants or
other provisions governing the organizational structure of the
owner(s) and/or the use, maintenance and enjoyment of the
site and any of its common services, common open areas, or
other facilities.
(d) Narrative statements explaining:
[1] The proposed development, including the nature of the
project, proposed land uses, building types, time line for
full build-out, and acknowledgement that the project for
which approval is requested is in conformance with the
master development plan for the area.
[2] Quantitative data, including total number, type, size, and
height of proposed structures and buildings, individual
parcel sizes, if any, lot coverage, number and type of
landscape materials to be used, and total off-street parking
stalls to be provided in comparison to the requirements set
forth in Article VI of this chapter.
[3] A use analysis report detailing projected job impact,
approximate utility needs and effect upon capacity of
existing public and private infrastructure that will serve
the area, possible nuisance factors, either constructionrelated
or permanent, and the proposed means to mitigate
them.
H. Project plan review and approval. At its next regularly scheduled
meeting, the Plan Commission shall initiate review and action on the
proposed project. The Plan Commission shall, within 45 days from its
initial review meeting, determine the appropriateness of the proposed
project and its conformance with the master development plan for the
district as well as the requirements of this section. The Plan
Commission shall recommend to the Town Board that the project be
approved, approved with conditions and/or modifications, or denied. If
denied, the Plan Commission shall enumerate the reasons for such
recommendation. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Plan
Commission, the Town Board shall deliberate over the proposed project
and, by ordinance, vote to approve or deny the project.
§ 535-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-40
1:613
§ 535-41. Selected special exception standards and regulations.
[Amended 7-6-2000; 2-22-2001; 4-20-2004; 1-18-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-02]
I. Changes in approved project. Modifications to an approved project that
will cause a change in the use, character or arrangement of the
development, or a change in approved open space, lot coverage of
structures and buildings, traffic circulation and public utilities, or a
change in off-street parking areas, pavement widths, or signage, shall
be authorized by the Town Board upon recommendation of the Plan
Commission. Any approved changes shall be in ordinance form as
amendments to the previously granted project plan approval. Minor
changes in location and elevation of buildings, driving and parking
areas, and site landscaping may be authorized by the Community
Development Director, if such changes are required by engineering or
other circumstances that could not have been foreseen at the time
project approval was granted.
J. Expiration of approval. If after 12 months from the project approval
date required building and mechanical permits have not been issued
and/or all subsurface construction to grade level has not been
completed and/or no use as established by the approval ordinance is
operating, said approval shall lapse and be of no further effect. If a
project approval ordinance lapses under the provisions of this section,
the zoning regulations applicable to the PDD Planned Development
District shall be in effect.
A. Adult establishments. Adult establishments include bookstores, motionpicture
theaters, mini motion-picture theaters, bathhouses, massage
parlors, modeling studios, body painting studios and cabarets. Adult
establishments shall meet the following requirements: [Amended
4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
(1) Definitions. As used in this Subsection A, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
ADULT BATHHOUSE — An establishment or business which
provides the service of baths of all kinds, including all forms and
methods of hydrotherapy, that is not operated by a medical
practitioner or a professional physical therapist licensed by the
State of Wisconsin and which establishment provides to its patrons
an opportunity for engaging in specified sexual activities as defined
in this subsection.
ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIO — An establishment or business
wherein patrons are afforded an opportunity to paint images on
a body which is wholly or partially nude. For purposes of this
subsection, "adult body painting studio" shall not be deemed to
include a tattoo parlor.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a substantial
or significant portion of its stock and trade in books, magazines or
§ 535-40 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-41
1:614
other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined herein or
an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or
display of such material.
ADULT CABARET — An establishment or business which features
male and/or female topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go
dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, burlesque shows, male or
female impersonators, or similar entertainers.
ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR — An establishment or business with
or without sleeping accommodations which provides the services of
massage and body manipulation, including exercises, heat and light
treatments of the body and all forms and methods of physiotherapy,
not operated by a medical practitioner or professional physical
therapist licensed by the State of Wisconsin and which
establishment provides for its patrons the opportunity to engage in
specified sexual activities as defined in this subsection.
ADULT MINI MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building
with a capacity for fewer than 50 persons used for presenting
materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas as defined herein for observation by
patrons therein.
ADULT MODELING STUDIO — An establishment or business which
provides the services of modeling for the purpose of reproducing
the human body wholly or partially in the nude by means of
photography, painting, sketching, drawing or otherwise.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with
a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas as defined herein for observation by patrons
therein.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER (OUTDOOR) — A parcel of
land from which individuals may view a motion picture presented
outdoors which presents material distinguishably characterized by
an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT NOVELTY SHOP — An establishment or business having as
a substantial or significant portion of its stock and trade in novelty
or other items which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on, or designed for, specified sexual activities as defined
herein or stimulating such activity.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — 214
214. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 535-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-41
1:615
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — 215
The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered; or
(a)
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals,
pubic region, vulva, anus or the nipple and areola of the human
female breast.
(b)
The fondling of another person's genitals, pubic region, anus,
or female breasts;
(a)
Actual sex acts, normal or perverted, including intercourse,
oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or
(b)
Excretory functions as part of, or in connection with, any of the
activities set forth in Subsections (a) and (b) above.
(c)
(2) General standards.216
(a) Adult establishments as defined in this Subsection A are
special exception uses in the CL District.
(b) No more than one of the above adult establishments may be
established on any one parcel, and the establishment of any
one of the above adult establishments shall be at least 1,500
feet from the establishment of any other adult establishment.
No adult establishment shall be permitted within 2,000 feet of
any land used or zoned for residential purposes or within 2,000
feet of any church or school.
(c) Signs advertising any of the aforementioned adult
establishments shall conform to Article XV of this chapter, with
the exception, however, that no tower or portable signs or
billboards shall be permitted on the premises and with the
further exception that signs will not depict specified sexual
activities and/or specified anatomical areas as defined in this
Subsection A and provided further that there shall be no
flashing or traveling lights located outside the building.
(d) Adequate parking shall be provided in a lighted area.
(e) There shall be no display windows on the premises.
(f) The owner and/or operator of the adult establishment shall
agree to comply with all state, federal and local laws and
ordinances, including obscenity, liquor and cabaret laws, and
shall further ensure that minors are not permitted on the
premises. Solicitation for purposes of prostitution shall be
strictly prohibited.
215. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
216. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-41 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-41
1:616
(g) In the case of adult cabarets, there shall be compliance with
§ 535-39G(2)(a) of this chapter relating to noise, and the hours
of operation of such establishments shall be limited to the
same hours of operation for bars and taverns within the
community within which the district is located.
(h) The owner of the parcel upon which the adult establishment is
to be established and the operator of the establishment and
owner of the establishment shall appear in person before the
Plan Commission.
B. Convenience stores. [Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
(1) Direct access to arterial streets required. All convenience stores
shall have direct access to an arterial street which is a federal,
state, or county designated highway, except where it is part of a
nonresidential development where access is provided by a parallel
access road, or reverse frontage road, where nonresidential uses
will be on both sides of the street.
(2) Architectural design. All convenience stores adjoining residential
uses and zoning districts shall have pitched roofs matching the
rooflines of adjoining residential structures. Each convenience
store building shall use the same architectural materials on all
sides of the building.
(3) Fuel pump location. Any fuel pump, underground fuel storage tanks
and islands shall be at least 50 feet from any street or abutting lot
line and meet all other State of Wisconsin regulations.
(4) Canopies. The canopies provided over the pump islands of
convenience stores with gas pumps shall meet the yard
requirements of a principal structure. In addition:
(a) Obstruction of visibility at rights-of-way prohibited. The canopy
shall not block visibility at intersections of rights-of-way or
drives.
(b) Zoning district front yard requirements shall be met. All pump
islands, their surrounding structures and the canopy overhang
shall meet the zoning district's front yard requirement.
(c) Maximum height. Under no circumstances shall the canopy be
higher than 25 feet.
(d) Signs not permitted. No signs shall be permitted on canopy
roofs.
(5) Lighting. The off-street parking and fueling area may be
illuminated. Total cutoff of light shall be at an angle of less than 90°
and shall be located so that the bare light bulb, lamp or light source
is completely shielded from the direct view of an observer five feet
above the ground at the point where the cutoff angle intersects the
§ 535-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-41
1:617
ground and so that no light can be viewed from any abutting
residential zoning districts.
(6) Hours of operation. Hours of operation shall be established by the
Plan Commission.
(7) Outdoor display.
(a) Products shall be sold by the principal business or agricultural
products sold by the producer.
(b) The principal business sales display shall be placed under or
attached to permitted structures only. No display or outdoor
sales shall be placed in or sold out of a truck, van or other
vehicle or a temporary structure.
(c) All private sidewalks serving the site shall keep a minimum of
36 inches clear of all obstructions or display items.
C. Vehicle repair facilities and gas stations with repair facilities. Gas
stations, gas stations with vehicle repair facilities and vehicle repair
facilities shall meet the following requirements: [Amended 4-7-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-09]
(1) Direct access to arterial streets required. All vehicle repair
facilities and gas stations shall have direct access to an arterial
street which is a federal, state or county designated highway,
except where it is part of a nonresidential development where
access is provided by a parallel access road or reverse frontage
road where nonresidential uses will be on both sides of the street.
(2) Architectural design. All vehicle repair facilities and gas stations
adjoining residential uses and zoning districts shall have pitched
roofs matching the rooflines of adjoining residential structures. The
buildings shall use the same architectural materials on all sides of
the building.
(3) Lighting. The off-street parking and fueling area may be
illuminated. Total cutoff of light shall be at an angle of less than 90°
and shall be located so that the bare light bulb, lamp or light source
is completely shielded from the direct view of an observer five feet
above the ground at the point where the cutoff angle intersects the
ground and so that no light can be viewed from any abutting
residential zoning districts.
(4) Repair services. All repair services shall be performed within a
completely enclosed building and shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) All storage of vehicles awaiting needed parts shall be within
the building or in an enclosed or screened-in yard.
§ 535-41 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-41
1:618
(b) All damaged or nonoperable parts shall be stored indoors until
removed from the premises.
(c) An automotive repair facility shall store all vehicle parts within
a completely enclosed building.
(d) The maximum allowable number of tow trucks which can be
parked at the site shall be determined by the Plan Commission
as a condition of approval of the special exception permit.
(5) Hours of operation. Hours of operation shall be established by the
Plan Commission.
D. Mini warehouses. Mini warehouse facilities shall meet the following
requirements:
(1) Limitations on use of facilities. Such facilities shall be used only for
the storage of materials or articles and shall not be used for
assembly, fabrication, processing or repair.
(2) Services and sales activities prohibited. No services or sales shall
be conducted from any storage unit. Garage sales and/or flea
market type activities are prohibited.
(3) Practice rooms, meeting rooms and residences prohibited.
Facilities shall not be used for practice rooms, meeting rooms or
residences.
(4) Outdoor storage prohibited. No outdoor storage shall be permitted.
(5) Storage of explosive or highly flammable material prohibited.
Storage of explosive or highly flammable material shall be
prohibited.
§ 535-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-41
1:619

ARTICLE VI
Supplementary District Regulations
§ 535-42. General application.
The regulations set forth herein shall supplement or modify the regulations
set forth in Article V, Schedule of District Regulations.
§ 535-43. Setbacks on federal, state and county highways.
[Amended 8-7-2001]
The front yard (setback) requirements enumerated in Article V are
applicable to local streets and highways. The front yard (setback)
requirement for federal, state and county highways is 55 feet with no sound
barrier installed along the right-of-way. The sound barrier shall be approved
and installed by a governing agency. If a sound barrier is installed along the
right-of-way, the setback requirements of the districts identified in Article V
are applicable.
§ 535-44. Lots and yards.
A. More than one building on a lot. In any district, more than one building
housing a principal use may be erected on a single lot, provided that
yard and other requirements of these regulations shall be met for each
building as though it were on an individual lot, unless otherwise
specified in Articles V and VII for planned commercial or residential
developments.
B. Through lots and corner lots. On through lots or lots with double
frontage, the required front yard shall be provided on each street. On
corner lots the street side yard shall equal the required front yard for
lots fronting on that street.
C. Development in mapped streets. Where an official line has been
established for the future widening or opening of a street, the depth of a
front yard or the width of a side yard shall be measured from such
official line to the nearest line of the building.
D. Access. Every building housing a principal use hereafter erected or
moved shall be on a lot with access to a public street, and all such
buildings shall be so located as to provide safe and convenient access
for servicing and off-street parking, unless otherwise specified in
Articles V and VII.
E. Building groups. In any nonresidential district, a group or buildings
separated only by common or party walls shall be considered as one
building.
F. Yard encroachments. Every part of every required front and side yard
shall be open and unobstructed by structures from 30 inches above the
general ground level of the graded lot upward to the sky except as
hereinafter provided or as otherwise permitted in these regulations:
§ 535-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-44
1:621
§ 535-45. Accessory uses and structures in RSF, RTF and R-2
Districts.
(1) Roof eaves may project into a required side yard not more than
three feet where the required side yard is eight feet or more in
width. Roof eaves may project into a required side yard not more
than two feet where the required side yard is less than eight feet.
(2) Sills, belt courses, cornices, vertical solar screens and other
ornamental features may project not over one foot into a required
yard.
(3) Fire escapes, stairways and balconies, whether unroofed, open and
unenclosed or enclosed, shall not intrude into required yards.
(4) Solar collectors which are part of the principal building may extend
into a required rear yard for a distance not to exceed 10 feet, and
solar collectors may extend into a required side yard, provided that
they have a minimum seven-foot clearance from grade and
provided further that such extension shall be at least five feet
distant from the adjacent lot line and shall not extend more than
three feet from the building.
G. Street widening. When a structure becomes nonconforming as to
setback from a street or highway because the street or highway was
widened or relocated, such structure shall not be considered a
nonconforming structure under this section. However, no such
structure shall thereafter be added to or rebuilt in such a manner that it
will be closer to the right-of-way of the street or highway. [Amended
12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30]
A. Number of accessory buildings. A detached garage and one additional
accessory building may be placed on a lot. An attached garage shall be
considered part of the principal building. No accessory building shall be
built on a lot without a principal building. [Amended 8-21-2001]
B. Location of detached accessory buildings. No detached accessory
building shall occupy any portion of the front yard or be located within
10 feet of any principal building. [Amended 8-21-2001]
C. Size of accessory buildings.
(1) No detached garage shall exceed 36 feet by 24 feet (864 square
feet) when located on a lot with a second accessory building. No
second accessory building shall exceed 10 feet by 20 feet (200
square feet). No accessory building shall exceed 16 feet or the
height of the highway noise barrier, whichever is less.
(2) Additionally, no detached accessory building shall exceed 1,000
square feet or 30% of the rear yard, whichever is less, unless
granted a special exception. [Amended 8-21-2001; 4-7-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-09]
§ 535-44 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-45
1:622
§ 535-46. Height exceptions.
The height limitations in Article V, Schedule of District Regulations, do
not apply to belfries, cupolas, antennas, water tanks, elevator bulkheads,
chimneys, spires, flagpoles or other appurtenances usually required to be
placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy.
§ 535-47. Traffic visibility and access.
D. Accessory structures. Notwithstanding fences, residential driveways
and parking lots, no accessory structure shall be located within 10 feet
of a principal building or three feet of any lot line. [Amended
8-21-2001]
(1) Exception. Decks and patios are permitted within 10 feet of a
principal building, provided that they are six feet from any lot line.
A. Traffic visibility. [Amended 3-5-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08]
(1) No obstruction permitted within vision triangle area. No visual
obstructions, such as but not limited to structures, parking, fencing
or vegetation, shall be permitted in any district between the
heights of 2 1/2 feet and 10 feet above the plane through the mean
edge of pavement elevation within the limits of a triangular space
formed by any two existing or proposed intersecting street or alley
right-of-way lines and a line joining points on such lines located a
minimum of 25 feet from their intersection. See the illustration.
(2) Vision triangle distances for intersections with arterial and/or
collector streets. In the case of arterial and/or collector streets
intersecting with other arterial and/or collector streets or minor
streets, the vision triangle distance on the arterial/collector street
shall be as required by § 475-21B(5)(d).
B. Highway access. No direct private access shall be permitted to the
existing or proposed rights-of-way of expressways or to any controlled
access arterial street without permission of the highway agency that
has access control jurisdiction.
C. Additional transportation modes. The Town may require additional
access points and improvements, including but not limited to bike and
pedestrian paths, sidewalks, transit stops and railroad spurs.
§ 535-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-47
1:623
§ 535-48. Driveways and private roadways.
§ 535-49. Off-street parking. [Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-09; 6-21-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-19]
D. Land dedication. The Town may require the applicant to dedicate land
to be used as right-of-way, access or utility as identified in the Town
Comprehensive Plan as a condition of site plan approval.
A. All driveways installed, altered, changed, replaced or extended after
the effective date of this chapter shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Islands. Islands between driveway openings shall be provided with
a minimum of 50 feet between all driveways and six feet from all lot
lines.
(2) Openings. Openings for vehicular ingress and egress shall not
exceed 36 feet at the street right-of-way line unless a greater
distance is approved by the Plan Commission.
(3) Vehicular entrances and exits. Commercial and industrial vehicular
entrances and exits shall not be less than 200 feet from any
adjoining residential district. A vehicular entrance or exit shall not
be less than 50 feet from a street intersection or 100 feet from a
collector street intersection, and from an arterial intersection it
shall be not less than 150 feet.
(4) Vehicular entrances. One vehicular entrance is permitted per lot
frontage unless a greater number is approved by the Plan
Commission.
(5) Driveway intersections. Driveway intersections and streetdriveway
intersections shall have corners with a minimum curve
radius of 25 feet.
B. Private roadways.
(1) Cul-de-sac driveways or approved private roadways shall have a
turnaround area with diameter of not less than 90 feet.
(2) All driveways or roadways within a project shall have curbing to
define their limits.
(3) When roadways exit to adjacent property rather than directly to a
public street, permanent cross easement agreements shall be
recorded which adequately guarantee that such exit may not be
closed and that such roadways will not become a future liability for
the Town.
(4) When more than one building is located on a parcel, no building
may be more than 200 feet from a dedicated public street or
approved twenty-four-foot wide private roadway, and driveway
access to the building must be at least 24 feet wide.
§ 535-47 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-49
1:624
A. Intent and purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the
general safety and welfare of the public by establishing minimum
regulations and standards for off-street parking according to the use of
the property and by requiring that parking areas be designed and
constructed in a manner that ensures visibility, accessibility and safety.
B. Applicability. Off-street parking regulations described herein shall be
applied to all developments and uses hereafter established, expanded,
or changed, based on the zoning classification of property.
(1) Residential property. At property zoned and used as RSF, RTF, or
R-2, or a property zoned AGD that is used for a single-family
detached residence unrelated to farm operations, the following
regulations shall be met:
(a) All automobiles or recreational/utility vehicles parked or
stored outside must be parked or stored on a gravel or paved
surface if located in the front yard or side yard of a property.
Parking on grass or bare soil surfaces is prohibited. No more
than four vehicles shall be parked or stored in the front yard, of
which no more than one may be a recreational/utility vehicle.
(b) All automobiles or motorized commercial and recreational/
utility vehicles parked or stored outside in the rear yard of a
property must be parked or stored on a gravel or paved
surface.
(c) No commercial vehicle with an actual weight in excess of 8,000
pounds, or over 20 feet in length, or having a height of more
than eight feet, shall be parked or stored, except when
rendering a service at the property on which it is parked. Any
commercial vehicle must be parked or stored on a gravel or
paved surface. A commercial vehicle parked or stored in the
front yard would be counted toward the maximum limit of four
vehicles being allowed.
(d) No person may offer any motor vehicles for sale on a recurrent
basis in any residential district.
(2) Multifamily, commercial, industrial, or institutional property. At
property zoned and used as R-3, R-4, R-5, RMF, C-1, C-2, CL, CR,
CP, IND, or PDD, the following regulations shall be met:217
(a) Changes in buildings or use. Whenever a building or use is
changed, structurally altered or enlarged to create a need for
an increase of 25% or more in the number of existing parking
spaces, such spaces shall be provided on the basis of the
enlargement or change. Whenever a building or use is
enlarged to the extent of 50% or more in the floor area, said
217. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-49
1:625
building or use shall then comply with the parking
requirements set forth in the district in which it is located.
(b) Alteration to existing surfaces. Whenever existing parking
surfaces are altered either by adding asphalt or concrete to a
gravel lot or parking space or by removing existing asphalt or
concrete from a parking lot or parking space and exposing the
gravel course base and then repaving such area, the
regulations and standards set forth in this section shall be met.
(c) Design standards. All off-street parking development or
expansion/alteration of existing parking lots or parking spaces,
in accordance with Subsection B(2)(b), shall be subject to the
following site plan design standards:
[1] Each required off-street parking space shall have a stall
width of at least nine feet and a stall length of at least 18
feet.
[2] Minimum width of aisles providing access to parking
spaces for one-way traffic shall be 11 feet for thirty-degree
parking and 20 feet for ninety-degree parking.
[3] Minimum width of aisles providing access to parking
spaces for two-way traffic shall be 24 feet.
[4] No parking area shall be designed so as to require any
vehicle to back into a public street.
[5] All open, off-street loading and parking spaces shall be
improved with either asphalt or concrete pavement and
stormwater drainage facilities, as approved by the Town.
[6] Concrete curb and gutter shall be installed surrounding all
new driveways, parking lots and landscape islands. This
provision may be waived by the Plan Commission for
additions to existing structures located in areas without a
predominance of curb and gutter, when curb and gutter is
not installed on the adjacent street right-of-way or is not
anticipated to be constructed on the street right-of-way in
a reasonable period of time in the future.
[7] Required concrete curb and gutter for off-street parking
areas shall be installed a minimum of five feet from a
property line (as measured from the back of curb) so as to
prevent parked vehicles from extending over any lot lines.
[8] All driveways shall be a minimum width of 24 feet
measured between face of curbs.
[9] Setbacks for driveways and parking lots from adjoining
property lines shall conform to the standards as set forth
in § 535-52 of this chapter.
§ 535-49 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-49
1:626
[10]Off-street parking spaces shall be marked by painted lines
or other approved material and shall be maintained so as
to be legible at all times.
[11] Street and driveway intersections shall have corners with
a minimum curve radius of 25 feet. The fire truck turning
radius for private roads and parking lots shall be a
minimum of 40 feet. Cul-de-sac driveways or approved
private roadways shall have a turnaround area with
diameter of not less than 90 feet. All driveways or
roadways within a project shall have curbing to define
their limits. When roadways exit to adjacent property
rather than directly to a public street, permanent crosseasement
agreements shall be recorded which adequately
guarantee that such exits may not be closed and that such
roadways will not become a future liability for the Town.
When more than one building is located on a parcel, no
building may be more than 200 feet from a dedicated
public street or approved twenty-six-foot-wide private
roadway, and driveway access to the building must be at
least 24 feet wide.
[12] Stormwater management drainage plans shall provide for
water to be collected and retained on the site, with
controlled discharge into the public drainage system to
minimize flooding.
(d) Mixed uses. In the case of mixed uses on the same property, the
number of parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the
spaces if computed separately for each use.
(e) Joint use. Two or more uses on the same property may provide
parking spaces in an amount less than the sum of the spaces
required for each separate use, provided that such uses are not
operated during the same hours. A written agreement shall
accompany any joint use arrangement.
(f) Off-lot parking. Required off-street parking spaces shall be
developed on the same lot on which the principal use is located
or on a contiguous lot. Parking within 300 feet from the
principal use or building may be approved by the Director of
Community Development upon receiving written
documentation that confirms the off-lot parking property is
held in common ownership with the lot containing the principal
use or building or that the right to use the off-lot parking
property is granted through a written lease or parking
easement.
C. Required parking spaces for specific uses. The table that follows
identifies the minimum number of parking spaces to be provided for the
uses listed. In no case shall the minimum number of spaces be fewer
§ 535-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-49
1:627
than four, regardless of use, with the exception of property zoned and
used as RSF, RTF, or R-2, or a property zoned AGD that is used for a
single-family detached residence unrelated to farm operations. Unless
otherwise indicated, the minimum number of spaces for each use is the
number needed per 1,000 square feet of floor area.
Use Type Spaces Required
Automobile service station 1 per employee plus 2 per service stall
Bank 5
Barbershop 1 per chair plus 1 per employee
Boardinghouse 2 plus 1 per 3 persons for whom
accommodations are provided
Bowling alley 6
Bus depot 5
Business/professional office 4
Church/synagogue 1 per 4 to 5 seats
Clothing store 5
Community living
arrangement/group home
1 per employee plus 1 per 3 licensed
beds
Department store/
supermarket
5
Drugstore 4
Food store 5
Funeral home/mortuary 10 per chapel plus 1 per vehicle kept
on premises, whichever is greater
Furniture/appliance store;
furniture/appliance repair
1 per 600 square feet floor area
Government office 3
Hospital 1 per 2 beds plus 1 per 4 employees
plus 1 per 2 doctors on staff
Hotel 1 per room or suite
Library; museum 4
Manufacturing, fabricating,
general industrial and
processing
2 per 3 employees
Medical/dental clinic 5
Motel 1 per unit
Motor vehicle sales 2
Private club/lodge 1 per 16 square feet of assembly area
or 1 per 2.5 seats
§ 535-49 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-49
1:628
Use Type Spaces Required
Public utility/service 1 per 3 employees plus additional
spaces as determined by the
Community Development Director
Recreational/community
center
30% of capacity
Residential single-family 1; maximum 4 in front yard
Residential two-family 1.5 per dwelling unit; maximum 4 in
front yard
Residential multifamily 1.5 per dwelling unit
Restaurant, carry-out only 10-vehicle stacking lane plus 1 per
employee
Restaurant, sit down 10
Retail sales (cameras, liquor,
jewelry, gifts, cigars) and
personal services
Minimum of 5 total
School 1 per faculty or full-time employee
plus additional as determined by the
Community Development Director
Tavern/nightclub or
recreation/amusement
establishment
10
Theater (indoor) 1 per 4 seats
Warehouse/storage freight
terminal
1 per 10,000 square feet floor area or
1 per employee, whichever is greater
D. Determination of required spaces. In computing the number of parking
spaces required by this section, the following shall apply:
(1) Where floor area is designated as the standard for determining
parking space requirements, floor area shall be the sum of the
gross leasable horizontal area inside exterior walls of all floors of a
nonresidential building.
(2) Where seating capacity is designated as the standard for
determining parking space requirements, the capacity shall mean
the number of seating units installed or indicated for, or for each 24
linear inches of seating facilities.
(3) Where the number of employees is designated as the standard for
determining parking space requirements, the number of employees
on the largest shift shall be used for calculation purposes.
(4) Fractional numbers shall be increased to the next highest whole
number.
§ 535-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-49
1:629
§ 535-50. Off-street loading.
Off-street loading spaces accessory to designated uses shall be provided as
follows:
(5) Parking space requirements for a use not specified in Subsection C
shall be determined by using the most similar and restrictive
parking space requirement, based on the intended use, the location
of the use, and the expected patronage/use by individuals operating
motor vehicles.
A. Location. All required loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as
the use served. No permitted or required loading space shall be located
within 40 feet of the nearest point of intersection of any two streets. All
loading spaces shall be screened as set forth in § 535-52 of this chapter.
[Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
B. Access. Each required off-street loading space shall be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner
which will least interfere with traffic movement. Loading spaces on lots
located adjacent to public ways shall be so situated as to enable the
vehicles to back into the loading dock from areas other than public
ways. The blocking of loading spaces by other loading spaces or
permanent or moveable structures of any type, including trash
receptacles or compactors, shall be prohibited.
C. Surfacing. All open off-street loading spaces shall be improved with
pavement and stormwater drainage facilities.
D. Computation. Where the total floor area of the use being served is less
than 2,000 square feet, the required off-street loading spaces may be
used to satisfy the requirements for any off-street parking spaces.
Employee parking maneuver areas may also be used for access to
loading docks and as truck standing areas.
E. Repair and service. No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind
shall be permitted in conjunction with loading facilities provided in any
residential or nonresidential zoning districts.
F. Maneuvering space required to service outdoor loading areas.
Adequate off-street truck maneuvering area shall be provided on site
and not within any public street right-of-way or other public lands.
G. Interference with fire exit or emergency access prohibited. Off-street
loading facilities shall be designed so as not to interfere with any fire
exits or emergency access facilities to either a building or site.
H. Loading space requirements. The loading space requirements specified
in the following table shall apply to all districts:
§ 535-49 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-50
1:630
§ 535-51. Common open space.
Use
Floor Area
(square feet)
Loading
Spaces
Retail, wholesale, warehouse,
service, manufacturing, and
industrial establishments
2,000 to 10,000
10,000 to 20,000
20,000 to 40,000
40,000 to 60,000
Each additional
50,000
1
2
3
4
1
Hotels, offices, hospitals, and
places of public assembly
5,000 to 10,000
10,000 to 50,000
50,000 to 100,000
Each additional
25,000
1
2
3
1
Funeral homes 2,500 to 4,000
4,000 to 6,000
Each additional
10,000
1
2
1
I. Multiple or mixed uses. Where a building is devoted to more than one
use or for different uses, and where the floor area for each use is below
the minimum required for a loading space but the aggregate floor area
of such uses is above such a minimum, then off-street loading space
shall be provided as if the entire building were devoted to that use in
the building for which the most loading spaces are required.218
J. Design standards. Each off-street loading space shall have a width of at
least 12 feet, a length of at least 45 feet, and a vertical clearance of at
least 14 feet. Dimensions for loading spaces in connection with funeral
homes shall be reduced to 10 feet in width, 25 feet in length, and eight
feet in vertical clearance. Every loading space shall be sufficiently
screened in the form of a solid fence or shrubbery to protect any
neighboring residence.
A. Nature. Common open space shall not include street rights-of-way,
driveways, parking areas or yards required in connection with any
building.
218. Editor's Note: Original § 27.06(9)(j), Location, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II). See Subsection A(1), Location.
§ 535-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-51
1:631
§ 535-52. Landscape and screening standards. [Amended 4-7-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-09]
B. Buildings and structures. Common open space areas may contain
complementary buildings and structures appropriate for the
recreational use and enjoyment of the residents of the development for
which it was established.
C. Reservation. When common open space or any portion thereof is to be
reserved for the exclusive use and enjoyment of the residents of the
development from which it was established, the developer shall
establish conditions as to the ownership, maintenance, and use of such
areas as deemed necessary to assure preservation of its intended
purposes. Land designated as common open space shall be restricted
by appropriate legal instrument as open space perpetually or for a
period of not less than 99 years. Such instrument shall be binding upon
the developer, his successors and assigns and shall constitute a
covenant running with the land and be recorded as a condition of
approval.
D. Maintenance. In the event that common open space is improperly
maintained, the Town department may serve written notice upon any
property owner or association setting forth the manner in which such
property owner or association has failed to maintain the common open
space and demand maintenance deficiencies to be corrected in 30 days.
If the deficiencies as originally set forth or subsequently modified are
not corrected within 30 days, the Town may enter upon such common
open space and correct maintenance deficiencies. The cost of such
maintenance shall be assessed ratably against the properties within the
development that have the right to use the area and shall become a tax
lien on said properties. The Town shall file notice of any liens in the
office of the Town Clerk.219
A. Intent and purpose. The purpose of this section is to:
(1) Enhance the appearance of the Town by improving the quality of
landscaping and screening at commercial, industrial and
institutional uses.
(2) Establish standards to ensure that building sites and off-street
parking areas are sufficiently landscaped and screened to minimize
or eliminate adverse impacts of noise, glare of headlights, dust,
litter, visual encroachment and other objectionable impacts to
adjoining properties or public roads.
B. Applicability. Landscape standards shall apply to any developments
allowed as a permitted use or as a special exception use in the R-3, R-4,
R-5, and RMF Residential Districts; the C-1, C-2, CL, CR, and CP
219. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-51 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-52
1:632
Commercial Districts; the IND Industrial District; and the PDD Planned
Development District. Additionally, the standards shall apply to any
commercial and institutional developments allowed as a permitted use
or as a special exception use in the AGD Agricultural District and
RSF, RTF, and R-2 Residential Districts. Any developments occurring on
vacant land shall be brought into full compliance with these standards.
Before an existing vacant development can be occupied, these
standards must be met, to the extent that all other standards and
requirements of this chapter can be maintained on the site.220
C. Exceptions and modifications. Existing occupied developments that do
not conform to these standards are not required to come into
compliance until such time that any of the following occur:
(1) Any change is made to the development or use of the property that
requires approval of a site plan, special exception permit, or zoning
change by the Plan Commission, necessitating compliance with the
frontage landscaping requirements;
(2) The gross floor area of the building at the development is increased
by more than 10% or 5,000 square feet, whichever is less,
necessitating compliance with the frontage landscaping standards
and, to the extent applicable, the buffer yard landscaping and
screening requirements; or
(3) Driving, parking or loading spaces at the development are
increased, necessitating compliance with the frontage landscaping,
perimeter landscaping, interior landscaping, buffer yard
landscaping and screening requirements, as applicable, to the area
where such impervious surface is increased.
D. Approval procedure. A landscape plan is required in conjunction with
site plans and as required for any development or use of property as
specified in Subsection B, Applicability, of this section. The landscape
plan shall be filed with the Community Development Department. A
building permit may only be issued after approval of the landscape plan.
For developments or uses of property that do not require Plan
Commission approval, the Community Development Department will
complete the review and approval of the landscape plan. In the event of
an unresolved dispute or in the case of an applicant feeling aggrieved
by a decision to disapprove a landscape plan, said plan shall be
forwarded to the Plan Commission for final action.
E. Landscape plan requirements. Landscape plans submitted for review
and approval shall include the name and address of the owner/
developer, the name of the landscape architect/designer, date of plan
preparation, date and description of all plan revisions, name of the
project or development scale of the plan, and North marker.
Additionally, the plan shall depict the following:
220. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-52
1:633
(1) The location of all lot lines and location of all existing and proposed
easements and rights-of-way.
(2) The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed
structures; building entrances; parking lots, parking spaces
(numbered) and driveways; sidewalks, trails and paths; groundmounted
signs; fences; refusal disposal areas; freestanding
electrical and other utility equipment; recreational facilities; and
other site improvements as deemed necessary by the Community
Development Director.
(3) The location, quantity, caliper size, and name (common and
botanical name) of all proposed plant materials and the location
and description of all ground cover and turf grasses.
(4) The location, caliper size, and type of existing plant materials and
the intended treatment (save, move, or remove).
(5) Existing and proposed grading of the site, including the location
and contours at one-foot intervals of proposed berms; spot
elevations for high and low points; the flow line of drainage swales
and grading features such as retaining walls; and cross-section
detail as determined to be necessary by the Community
Development Director.
(6) Elevations, including dimensions and materials, of all fences and
refuse storage areas proposed for construction on the site.
(7) A schedule of all new plant materials, including size (caliper,
height, container size, etc.), planned installation date, and common
and botanical names.
(8) A schedule itemizing the total square foot area of impervious
surface area in parking lots, the number and square foot area of
each planting island and planting peninsula, and the number of
trees to be planted in parking lots or within 10 feet of the periphery
of parking lots.
F. Landscape standards. Landscaping required under this section shall
consist of five types as specified below, including frontage landscaping,
perimeter landscaping, interior landscaping, buffer yard landscaping,
and screening requirements.
(1) Frontage landscaping. A minimum ten-foot-wide strip, extending
along and directly behind the property line adjacent to all road
right-of-way, shall be landscaped as described below. In designing
and installing frontage landscaping, consideration should be given
to providing safe and convenient pedestrian access to the property
from the road-right-of-way.
(a) Where off-street parking spaces are located between the
frontage landscaping strip and any buildings or structures on
§ 535-52 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-52
1:634
the site, one shade tree or two ornamental trees shall be
planted per 40 linear feet on center, plus a staggered row of
evergreen and/or deciduous shrubs shall be planted to provide
an opaque screen to a height of three feet across 80% of the
frontage of the parking lot, excluding driveways.
(b) Where there are no off-street parking spaces between the
frontage landscaping strip and any buildings or structures on
the site, one shade tree or two ornamental trees shall be
planted per 40 linear feet on center, excluding driveways.
(c) Where it is deemed appropriate or desirable to construct an
earthen berm in the frontage landscaping strip in lieu of a
staggered row of evergreen and/or deciduous shrubs, the Plan
Commission may approve this option. The maximum side slope
of any berm shall be three horizontal to one vertical. The berm
shall be planted with one ornamental tree and three evergreen
or deciduous shrubs per 40 linear feet on center, excluding
driveways, and it shall also be planted with adequate ground
cover to prevent erosion of the earth mound.
(2) Perimeter landscaping. All parking lots that are adjacent to a side
and/or rear property line shall provide a minimum five-foot-wide
perimeter landscape strip, extending along and directly behind the
property line. The perimeter landscape strip shall be planted with
one shade tree or two ornamental trees per 40 linear feet on center.
Trees can be provided in cooperation with adjacent property, as
deemed appropriate.
(a) The requirement to provide a perimeter landscaping strip may
be waived if a cross-access easement agreement between
adjoining property owners is recorded and provided to the
Community Development Director for review and approval.
(b) In those cases where a perimeter landscaping strip and a
buffer yard landscaping strip are required along the same
property line, the more restrictive buffer yard landscaping
requirements shall be met.
(3) Interior landscaping. All parking lots designed for more than 20
spaces shall be landscaped as described below. On smaller parking
lots with fewer than 20 spaces, interior landscaping shall be
provided as deemed practicable and appropriate by the Community
Development Director. In designing and installing interior
landscaping, consideration should be given to including these
green areas in the site drainage plan, to the extent practicable.
(a) Not less than 5% of the impervious surface area of the parking
lot shall be devoted to interior landscaping, to be provided
within planting islands, planting peninsulas, landscaped
boulevards, or within 10 feet of the periphery of the parking
lot.
§ 535-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-52
1:635
(b) The primary plant material for interior landscaping shall be
shade trees, with at least one shade tree planted for every 160
square feet of interior landscaping required.
(c) Planting islands and planting peninsulas shall be a minimum of
160 square feet in area and shall be dispersed throughout the
parking lot, as deemed practicable and appropriate by the
Community Development Director.
(d) One shade tree shall be planted in each parking island and
parking peninsula.
(4) Buffer yard landscaping. Wherever a commercial, industrial, farmrelated
commercial, institutional, multiple-family residential or
attached single-family residential use shares a common side yard
or rear yard lot line with a property zoned RSF, RTF, or R-2, or a
property zoned AGD that is used for a single-family detached
residence unrelated to farm operations, a buffer yard landscaping
strip shall be provided along the full length of the common lot line.
Required buffer yards shall be landscaped as described below.
(a) Buffer yards required for development on properties zoned CL,
CR, CP, IND, or PDD shall be a minimum 15 feet wide and shall
be planted with minimum five-foot-high evergreen trees
staggered to provide a dense, opaque screen within two years
after the date of planting.221
(b) Buffer yards required for development on properties zoned
R-3, R-4, R-5, RMF, C-1, or C-2, or for commercial, farm-related
commercial, or institutional uses on properties zoned AGD,
RSF, RTF, or R-2, shall be a minimum 10 feet wide and shall be
planted with minimum five-foot-high evergreen trees
staggered to provide a dense, opaque screen within two years
after the date of planting.
(c) As an alternative to these requirements, a property owner may
request a waiver from the Plan Commission to reduce the
minimum width of the buffer yard by 50% and to provide a sixfoot-
high, sight-tight, alternating board-on-board fence and to
plant five shrubs per 100 linear feet on center.
(5) Screening requirements. The intent of these requirements is to
provide a visual screen around loading, service, mechanical, utility,
storage, maintenance and refuse collection areas contained within
properties developed for commercial, industrial, institutional,
multiple-family residential, or attached single-family residential
use. All such uses of property shall be screened as described below.
221. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-52 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-52
1:636
(a) All loading areas that consist of two or more loading spaces,
loading docks, vehicular lanes providing access to the same,
and other service, storage, and maintenance areas shall be
screened from view to all adjacent properties and from all
adjacent public road right-of-way. The screening shall consist
of a six-foot-high, sight-tight, alternating board-on-board fence
or masonry wall designed and built to complement the exterior
of the principal structure.
(b) In addition to the screening requirements described in this
subsection, any loading area that is located in a side and/or
rear yard adjacent to a property zoned for residential use, or a
property zoned AGD that is used for a single-family detached
residence unrelated to farm operations, shall also be screened
with minimum five-foot-high evergreen trees staggered to
provide a dense, opaque screen over a minimum 30% of the
enclosed loading area's perimeter.
(c) All exterior storage of refuse and trash shall be located and
oriented to be screened from view to all adjacent properties
and from all adjacent road right-of-way. The screening shall
consist of a six-foot-high, sight-tight, alternating board-onboard
fence or masonry wall designed and built to complement
the exterior of the principal structure. Additionally, minimum
five-foot-high evergreen trees shall be planted in a staggered
pattern to provide a dense, opaque screen over a minimum
30% of the refuse enclosure's perimeter.
G. Planting specifications. Plant materials provided in conformance with
the requirements of this section shall be equal to or better in quality
than the standards of the American Association of Nurserymen. The
minimum size of plant materials that will satisfy the requirements of
this section are as follows:
(1) Shade tree: 2 1/2 inches in caliper, specimen grade with single
central leader.
(2) Ornamental tree: 1 1/2 inches in caliper.
(3) Evergreen tree: five feet in height.
(4) Deciduous or evergreen shrub: 18 inches to 24 inches in height or
spread.
H. Planting substitutions and modifications. To meet unique site conditions
or to overcome obstructions or conflicts at a development project, the
Community Development Director may approve planting substitutions
as described below.
(1) Two ornamental trees may be substituted in place of one shade
tree.
§ 535-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-52
1:637
§ 535-53. Fences and hedges. [Amended 10-5-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-11; 2-17-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-08]
(2) Two evergreen trees may be substituted in place of one shade tree.
(3) One evergreen tree may be substituted in place of five shrubs.
(4) One shade tree may be substituted in place of 10 shrubs.
I. Installation/certification. All landscaping, buffering and screening
improvements required under this section must be completed on a
schedule approved by the Community Development Department. Within
30 days of the installation of plant materials, the owner/developer shall
submit written certification to the Community Development
Department that healthy plant materials were properly installed in
accordance with the approved landscape plan.
J. Maintenance. The owner of the lot on which landscaping has been
provided shall be responsible for protecting, maintaining, and repairing
all landscaping materials and barriers, including fences and refuse
storage areas, to accepted nursery practices. Under the provisions of
this section, proper maintenance includes keeping all live plant
materials in a healthy and growing condition (including but not limited
to regularly scheduled watering, fertilizing, pruning, weeding, and
mowing) and keeping all landscaped areas free from debris, weeds, and
refuse. All dead or diseased plant materials shall be removed and
replaced during the next appropriate planting period. Once a
landscaped planting area has been approved by the Town of Grand
Chute and established by the owner, it may not be used, altered, or
disturbed for any other purpose without review and approval of a new
or amended landscape plan. Failure to properly maintain all
landscaping materials and barriers, as defined herein, shall constitute a
violation of the provisions of this section and shall be subject to penalty
provisions of the Town of Grand Chute Municipal Code.
A. Definition. For the purposes of this section, "fence" is herein defined as
any partition, wall, structure or gate consisting of vegetation, wood,
stone, plastic, or metal that is erected as a barrier, enclosure or divider
marker. For the purposes of this section, the term "fence" shall be
construed to include plantings such as hedges.
B. Permit required. No fence shall be built, enlarged, altered or replaced
within the Town unless a permit therefor is first obtained from the
Building Inspector.
C. Fence height.
(1) Any fence placed in the rear or side yard of a property shall not be
more than six feet in height, measured at ground level of the yard,
except that hedges may be permitted to grow to their natural
height.
§ 535-52 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-53
1:638
§ 535-54. Exterior lighting. [Amended 2-22-2001; 11-16-2004]
(2) Any fence placed in the actual front yard of the property or in the
first 25 feet from the street right-of-way, whichever is less, shall not
exceed 42 inches in height, measured at ground level of the yard.
On lots with double frontage, fences shall conform to the front yard
requirements for both streets, except where one street is officially
designated "No Access" or "Restricted Access."
(3) Fences and hedges shall comply with vision corner regulations as
defined in § 535-47A.
D. Materials.
(1) The finished side of the fence shall be erected to face the adjoining
property. The side of the fence with protruding support posts or
studs shall face the building on the lot responsible for the erection
of the fence.
(2) Barbed wire fences, electrical fences, and single-, double- and
triple-strand fences are prohibited, unless specifically permitted by
this section.
E. Exceptions. Protective security fences and boundary fences on
industrial sites, publicly owned lands, or semiprivate lands such as
places of worship, educational institutions, utility substations, etc., are
excluded from the provisions of this section, except that where such
fences incorporate the use of barbed wire, such barbed wire shall not
be less than seven feet above the ground level and shall not extend over
any roadway, sidewalk/trail, or adjoining property. In addition, such
fences otherwise excluded from the provisions of this section shall be a
minimum 2/3 open to vision, equally distributed throughout the fence
length, and shall maintain the height restrictions of this section when
located within the defined vision corner.
A. General. At the time any exterior light is installed or substantially
modified, an exterior lighting plan shall be submitted to the Town in
order to determine whether the requirements of this section have been
met and that adjoining property will not be adversely impacted by the
proposed lighting.
B. Lighting plan elements. A lighting plan submitted pursuant to this
section shall have, at a minimum, the following elements:
(1) A catalog page, cut sheet, or photograph of the luminaire, including
the mounting method.
(2) A photometric data test report of the proposed luminaire
graphically showing the lighting distribution at all angles vertically
and horizontally around the luminaire.
§ 535-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-54
1:639
§ 535-55. Storage of firewood in residential districts. [Amended
6-21-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-18]
No person shall store in the open more than three full cords of firewood in
any residential district. No firewood shall be stored in any residential front
yard or closer than two feet to any residential lot line.
(3) A plot plan, drawn to a recognized engineering or architectural
scale, indicating the location of the luminaire(s) proposed,
mounting and/or installation height in feet, the overall illumination
levels (in footcandles) and uniformity on the site and the
illumination levels (in footcandles) at the property boundary lines.
This may be accomplished by means of an isolux curve or computer
printout projecting the illumination levels.
(4) A graphic depiction of the luminaire lamp (or bulb) concealment
and light cutoff angles.
C. Requirements for total-cutoff-type luminaire. A total-cutoff-type
luminaire shall be used so that the bare light bulb, lamp or light source
is completely shielded from the direct view of an observer five feet
above the ground at the point where the cutoff angle intersects the
ground at the property line.
§ 535-54 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-55
1:640
ARTICLE VII
Special Provisions
§ 535-56. General application.
Requirements for uses and structures specified in this article shall apply
to such uses and structures whether permitted by right or permissible by
special exception.
§ 535-57. Accessory dwellings.
§ 535-58. Resource extraction.
A. Intent. It is the intent of the accessory dwelling provisions to provide for
housing options for the extended family and certain specified segments
of the population. These regulations are established to permit
modification of single-family dwellings to include an accessory dwelling
unit to be occupied by no more than two persons who are handicapped,
over the age of 60 years old, or related to the owner-occupant.
B. Mandatory owner occupancy. The owner of the single-family residence
must occupy either the principal residence or the accessory residence.
C. Nature and scale of accessory unit. An accessory dwelling may be a
separate, complete housekeeping unit; provided, however, that it is
substantially contained within the structure of the single-family
dwelling and clearly a subordinate part thereof. Permissible
modifications to the structure are a limited extension of the structure to
the rear and the creation of a separate entrance at the side or rear. The
accessory apartment shall not exceed 600 square feet of floor area or
25% of the entire floor area of the dwelling, whichever is greater. Any
external modification shall be done with a design and materials similar
in appearance to the principal structure such that, to the maximum
extent possible, the external appearance of the dwelling will remain as
a single-family dwelling.
D. Dimensional requirements. Maximum lot coverage and maximum
height requirements, as well as minimum yard requirements in the RSF
District, shall be met.
A. Intent. It is the intent of these regulations to permit resource extraction
uses in outlying areas as a temporary or transitional use with
assurances that later reuse for other permissible uses and structures is
possible.
B. Existing operations. The requirements of this section shall not apply to
existing operations only where more than 50% of the area (excluding
setbacks required herein) of a parcel of record has been excavated at
the time of adoption of this chapter. Where less than 50% of the area
has been excavated, any extension of operations within the parcel or on
§ 535-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-58
1:641
adjacent parcels shall comply with the requirements of this section,
including restoration for the entire parcel(s).
C. Uses and operations. Permitted uses or operations shall include the
removal for sale or processing of timber, natural vegetation, topsoil, fill,
sand, gravel, rock or any mineral. Processing may include crushing,
washing or refining. Storing or stockpiling of such materials on the site
is permissible. Permissible uses may also include concrete or asphalt
manufacturing.
D. Area and setback requirements. The parcel shall consist of a minimum
of five acres with dimensions sufficient to adequately accommodate the
proposed uses with minimum adverse affects on adjacent lands. No
operations shall be permitted within 100 feet of any exterior boundary
of the tract or within 250 feet of any building intended for human
occupancy existing at the time of permit application. For operations
involving blasting, processing or manufacturing, the Plan Commission
may increase required setbacks as a condition of approval.
E. Location. Location shall be appropriate to existing development and
development which may reasonably be expected within the time period
specified herein for permits. The site shall be so located as to make it
unnecessary to conduct trucking operations on any platted street in a
residential subdivision.
F. Plan of operation. Each application for a special exception shall be
accompanied by a plan of operation for the site including the following
information:
(1) Statement of ownership of the parcel and control of the operations.
(2) Extent of the area to be excavated.
(3) Location, width and grade of all easements or rights-of-way on or
abutting the parcel.
(4) Existing topography by five-foot contour intervals, existing
watercourses and drainageways, existing vegetation and soils,
depth to groundwater as indicated by at least four borings, and
existing buildings or structures.
(5) Cross section showing extent of sand or gravel deposits and the
water table.
(6) Estimated type and volume of excavation, method(s) of extracting
and processing, and the sequence of operations.
(7) Proposed equipment and proposed locations of equipment,
proposed areas for ponding, proposed drainage modifications,
proposed processing and storage areas, proposed interior roads
and ingress and egress to the site, and proposed areas for the
disposition of overburden or topsoil.
§ 535-58 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-58
1:642
§ 535-59. Planned unit development (PUD). [Amended 9-18-2001]
G. Plan of restoration. Each application for a special exception shall be
accompanied by a plan of restoration for the site including the following
information:
(1) A statement on the planned restoration, including phasing and
timing of the restoration process and reuse of the site.
(2) A plan showing fill methods and materials, final contours of the
site, proposed roads within the site, the location of any water
bodies or watercourses within the restored area, landscaping or
vegetative planting, and areas of cut and fill.
(3) The method of disposing of any materials, equipment or buildings
on the site.
H. Time limitations. No special exception permit shall be issued for a
period exceeding eight years consisting of not more than six years for
the operational phase and not more than two years for the restoration
phase. Upon expiration of the operational phase, the applicant may
request and receive extensions of this phase for three-year periods
unless changing conditions indicate the extension will be detrimental to
the public health, safety and welfare. Any extension shall require the
submission of a new plan of restoration if the operation is extended or
enlarged. If such extension is denied, the applicant shall complete the
restoration phase within the two-year time period specified.
I. Financial assurance. To insure completion of the restoration phase, as
proposed, within the two-year time period, each applicant shall submit
a performance bond or other financial guarantee sufficient in amount to
cover the restoration expense relative to the proposed operation or
extension thereto.
A. Intent. The intent of the planned unit development provisions is to
encourage quality and desirable development by allowing for greater
flexibility and design freedom than that permitted under basic
residential district regulations. These regulations are established to
permit and encourage diversification, variation and imagination in
layout of residential development; to encourage the preservation of
open space; and to encourage more rational, economic development
with respect to the provisions of public services.
B. Unified control. All land included for development as a PUD shall be
under the legal control of the applicant, whether that applicant is an
individual, partnership, or corporation or group of individuals,
partnerships or corporations. Applicants requesting approval of a PUD
shall present firm evidence of unified control of the entire area within
the proposed PUD together with evidence that the developer has the
unrestricted right to impose all of the covenants and conditions upon
the land as are contemplated by the provisions of these regulations. The
§ 535-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-59
1:643
applicant shall state agreement to proceed with the proposed
development according to the provisions of these zoning regulations
and such conditions as may be attached to the special exception for
PUD; provide agreements, contracts and deed restrictions necessary
for completion of the development according to the approved plans;
and bind his or its successors in title to any commitments made in the
approval process.
C. Permitted uses. Any use permitted in the residential multifamily (RMF,
R-3, R-4 and R-5), commercial and industrial districts.
D. General requirements. All permitted uses shall be subject to the
accessory use and structure, sign, height and parking requirements of
the district in which they are located.
E. Area and density requirements. A tract of land proposed for
development as a planned unit development shall contain a minimum
area of two acres and a maximum density equal to the underlying
zoning district.
F. Internal lots and frontage. Within the boundaries of the PUD, no
minimum lot size or minimum yards shall be required; provided,
however, that no structure shall be located closer to any peripheral
property line than a distance equal to the height of such structure.
G. Access. Every dwelling unit shall have access to a public street either
directly or via an approved private road, pedestrianway, court or other
area dedicated to public or private use or common element
guaranteeing access. Permitted uses are not required to front on a
dedicated public street. Access to buildings may be by approved private
streets in planned unit developments, provided that such streets are no
further than 200 feet from the building served. Private streets shall be a
minimum of 24 feet wide with curbs and internal drainage (an urban
section design) and pavements equal or better in quality to Town
minimum design standards.
H. Engineering design standards. Normal standards or operational policy
regarding right-of-way widths, provision for sidewalks, streetlighting
and similar environmental design criteria shall not be mandatory in a
planned unit development, but precise standards shall be made a part
of the approved plan and shall be enforceable as a part of this chapter.
I. Procedures for approving planned unit developments.
(1) Development plan. A development plan shall accompany the
application for a special exception permit and contain the following
information:
(a) Names of the owner and developer.
(b) Scale, date, and North arrow.
§ 535-59 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-59
1:644
§ 535-60. Cluster subdivision.
(c) Existing streets, buildings, watercourses, easements and
utility lines.
(d) Proposed pattern of public and private streets, accessways and
parking areas.
(e) Locations and arrangements of lots, buildings by dwelling
types, open space areas and recreational facilities, if any.
(f) Architectural drawings and sketches illustrating the design
and character of the various buildings proposed.
(g) Appropriate statistical data on the size of the development,
number of dwellings by type, percentage of open space and
other data pertinent to review.
(h) General outline of deed restrictions and other documents
pertaining to the development, operation and maintenance of
the project.
(2) Plan approval. Upon approval of a development plan, a special
exception permit shall be issued. All terms, conditions and
stipulations made at the time of approval shall be binding upon the
applicant or any successors in interest.
(3) Preliminary and final plans. Approval of a development plan for a
special exception does not constitute preliminary or final plat
approval. Preliminary and final plats shall be submitted and
processed in accordance with standard subdivision review
procedures.
(4) Changes in plan. Minor changes in plans shall be made by
application and follow procedures pursuant to Article X. Minor
changes shall not be considered a reapplication for special
exception permit. Substantial changes in plans shall be made by
application and processed as a new application for a special
exception permit.
(5) Deviations from approved plans. Deviations from approved plans or
failure to comply with any requirement, condition or safeguard
during approval or platting procedures shall constitute a violation
of these zoning regulations.
J. Building permits. Final approval does not constitute approval for the
construction of individual buildings or structures in the development.
Application for building permits shall be submitted and processed in
accordance with standard procedures.
A. Intent. The intent of the cluster subdivision provisions is to provide
voluntary alternative zoning provisions which promote ingenuity in
design and preserve the natural features of the site.
§ 535-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-60
1:645
§ 535-61. Small-scale beekeeping.222 [Added 4-23-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-04]
B. Unified control. All land included for development as a cluster
subdivision shall meet the requirements of unified control for planned
unit developments in § 535-59B.
C. Permitted uses. Single-family detached dwellings.
D. General requirements. All permitted uses shall be subject to the
accessory use and structure, sign, height and parking requirements of
the district within which the subdivision is located.
E. Area and density requirements. A tract or parcel of land proposed for
development as a cluster subdivision shall contain a minimum area of
two acres. Maximum density of a cluster subdivision shall be eight
dwelling units per net acre.
F. Minimum lot area requirements. All single-family detached dwellings
shall have a minimum lot area of 3,600 square feet, front yard of 10 feet
and rear yard of 20 feet. There shall be a minimum side yard of two feet
and minimum aggregate side yards of 12 feet; provided, however, that
there shall be a minimum building separation of 10 feet. All lot size
reductions shall be compensated for by a substantially equivalent
amount of land in cluster open space to be preserved and maintained
for its scenic, recreational or conservation value. The maximum extent
practicable, such open space areas shall be directly accessible by all
dwellings.
G. Procedures for approving cluster subdivisions. The procedures for
approving cluster subdivisions shall be the same as provided in
§ 535-59I.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow small-scale beekeeping
on lots with a residential use. A further purpose is to establish certain
requirements for beekeeping within the community to avoid issues that
might otherwise be associated with beekeeping in residential
neighborhoods. Honeybees are critical pollinators for flowers, fruits
and vegetables. Managed colonies of bees help to increase yields and
quality of a large variety of plants commonly found in backyard
gardens, parks, and natural areas. A growing interest in renewable
resources has prompted more people to take up beekeeping as a way to
produce their own honey, beeswax, pollen and other hive products that
are high in nutritional value. Domestic strains of honeybees have been
selectively bred for desirable traits so that they can be kept within
populated areas and in reasonable densities, without causing a
nuisance if the bees are properly located and carefully managed. By
providing a "best practices" ordinance for small-scale ("hobby")
222. Editor's Note: Original § 27.07(6), Industrial development, was repealed at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.) See § 535-39G, Industrial and
commercial district performance standards.
§ 535-60 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-61
1:646
beekeeping on residential properties, the Town can support a
sustainable activity while setting standards that are practical for
beekeepers and safe for neighbors.
B. Standards and practices. No hives are allowed on any property that is
not in residential use (including property zoned residential), with the
exception that hives are allowed under the General Agricultural District
as a "farm-related" use. The following criteria constitute standards and
practices that, when applied to small-scale beekeeping on residential
lots, protect the health, safety, property and welfare of the general
public.
(1) Number of hives. The maximum number of hives allowed on any lot
zoned and used for residential purposes are based on the size of lot,
as follows:
(a) Lot size of 1/2 acre or smaller: maximum two hives allowed.
(b) Lot size larger than 1/2 acre but smaller than one acre:
maximum four hives allowed.
(c) Lot size of one acre or larger: maximum six hives allowed.
(2) Location. Hives are allowed only within side or rear yards. In all
cases, a minimum setback of 10 feet must be maintained between
any property line and the closest point of any hives. Any hives
located within 25 feet of a property line must be shielded with a
minimum six-foot height flyway barrier installed at the property
line. The flyway barrier may consist of a solid wall, fence, dense
vegetation, or combination thereof that extends 10 feet beyond the
outer edges of the hives in each direction so that all bees are forced
to fly over the material to reach the colony.
(3) Water supply. Every beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient and
constant supply of water is provided near the hives for as long as
colonies remain active outside of the hives.
(4) Best practices. The following best practices are established as
standards of operation for any small-scale beekeeping operation
hereafter licensed by the Town:
(a) Provide screening around hives so colonies are out of sight
from neighboring properties.
(b) Maintain colonies in movable-frame hives mounted on
substantial stands.
(c) Hives and all other beekeeping equipment must be kept in
good and useable condition, including securing unused
equipment from weather, theft, vandalism or occupancy by
swarms of bees.
§ 535-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-61
1:647
§ 535-62. Mobile home parks.223
(d) Leave enough room between any screening and the hives for
ease of working around the colonies.
(e) Limit beekeeping activities to times when it doesn't interfere
with neighbors' outdoor activities.
(f) Inspect and monitor bees on a regular basis for the health of
the hive and to ensure that the colonies are not creating a
nuisance to others.
(g) Prevent swarming or aggressive behavior by re-queening
colonies.
C. Administration and enforcement. A beekeeping license application
must be received and approved by the Town before a property owner or
tenant can begin beekeeping operations at a residential lot. In addition,
beekeeping licenses must be renewed annually, prior to April 1.
(1) Neighbor notification. Prior to Town issuance of a beekeeping
license, the applicant/beekeeper will be required to notify all
neighbors whose properties share a common lot line with the
property where beekeeping will take place.
(2) Town inspections. The Community Development Department is
authorized to make inspections, during reasonable hours, to
investigate any complaints, or to determine continued compliance
with the beekeeping ordinance. The Department may revoke a
license if there have been three or more violations of the ordinance
within any six-month period.
(3) Effect of compliance. Compliance with this section shall not be a
defense to a proceeding alleging that a given bee colony is in
violation of other codes or ordinances governing public nuisances,
or public health and safety. However, compliance with this section
may be offered as evidence of the beekeeper's efforts to abate any
proven nuisance, or as evidence of the beekeeper's compliance
with generally accepted standards of practice among small-scale
hobby beekeepers in the State of Wisconsin.
A. Intent. It is the intent of this chapter to provide limited opportunities for
mobile home parks as a means of providing balance and variety to
housing in the Town of Grand Chute. All mobile home parks are subject
to the site plan requirements of Article X.
B. Character of tract. Each mobile home park tract shall be suitable for the
development proposed, recognizing and preserving to the maximum
extent practicable outstanding natural features. Every mobile home
park shall be located on a well-drained area, and the premises shall be
223. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 382, Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks.
§ 535-61 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-62
1:648
properly graded so as to prevent the accumulation of stormwater or
other waters.
C. Access. Access shall be designed for safe and convenient movement of
traffic into and out of the park. All vehicular traffic into and out of the
park shall be through designated entrances and exits.
D. Streets. All sites shall abut upon a street. For a two-way street, the
width must be at least 32 feet if parking is to be permitted on both sides
of the street, 25 feet in width if parking is permitted on only one side, or
18 feet in width if parking on the street is prohibited. A one-way street
must be at least 14 feet in width and parking is prohibited unless the
width is appropriately increased.
E. Sites. Each site shall be clearly defined and delineated. The basic
dwelling unit shall not occupy more than 33% of the site area and the
basic dwelling unit and all accessory buildings shall not occupy more
than 35% of the site area. Each site shall contain a concrete slab not
less than 10 feet by 20 feet in dimension for a carport or patio; such slab
shall not be required until after the mobile home is in position.224
F. Area and density. A tract of land proposed for development as a mobile
home park shall contain a minimum area of three acres and a maximum
density of six dwelling units per net acre.225
G. Site requirements. Each mobile home site shall contain a minimum area
of 3,600 square feet. Each mobile home shall have a minimum front
yard of 25 feet, rear yard of 25 feet and side yards of eight feet each.
H. Mobile home standards. Each mobile home shall be certified as meeting
the mobile home construction and safety standards of the Department
of Housing and Urban Development. Each mobile home shall have a
visible foundation or skirting around the entire perimeter to form a
complete enclosure under exterior walls.
I. Buffer area. A buffer area not less than 25 feet in width may be required
along public streets and mobile home park boundaries. Such buffer
strip may be used for drainage structures and utility easements but
shall not be used for any other purpose. All such buffer strips shall be
planted in suitable ground cover material.
J. Off-street parking. Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for
each site. One parking space for each 200 square feet of nonstorage
floor space shall be provided for offices, recreation facilities and the
like.
K. Accessory uses and structures.
224. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
225. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-62
1:649
§ 535-63. Mobile home subdivisions.226
(1) Accessory uses and structures in § 535-25C(1) through (3) in the
RSF District.
(2) Park recreation facilities, including room or center, courts for
games and the like.
(3) Park offices, maintenance facilities and laundry facilities.
(4) Enclosed storage structures and storage garage facilities, with use
limited to park residents only.
L. Utilities. Each mobile home site shall be connected to central water and
sewer. No individual water supply or sewage disposal system shall be
permitted in any mobile home park. Each site shall also be provided
with electrical power and central gas (if used) and shall be serviced by
individual meters.
A. Intent. It is the intent of this chapter to provide opportunities for mobile
home subdivisions wherein mobile home sites (lots) are individually
owned.
B. Character of tract. Each mobile home subdivision tract shall be suitable
for the development proposed, recognizing and preserving to the
maximum extent practical outstanding natural features. Every mobile
home subdivision shall be located on a well-drained area, and the tract
shall be properly graded so as to prevent the accumulation of surface
water.
C. Permitted uses.
(1) Mobile homes and manufactured homes. Each mobile home shall
be certified as meeting the safety standards of the Department of
Housing and Urban Development. Each mobile home shall have a
permanent foundation and form a complete enclosure under
exterior walls. Minimum width of the main structure shall not be
less than 16 feet as measured across the narrowest portion of the
structure.
D. Area and density requirements. A tract or parcel of land proposed for
development as a mobile home subdivision shall contain a minimum
area of two acres. Maximum density of a mobile home subdivision shall
be six dwelling units per net acre.
E. Lot requirements. Each lot in a mobile home subdivision shall have a
minimum lot area of 3,600 square feet, minimum lot width of 30 feet,
minimum front yard of 25 feet, minimum side yards of eight feet each,
and minimum rear yard of 25 feet. Each lot shall be connected to
central water and sewer.
226. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 382, Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks, and Ch. 475,
Subdivision of Land.
§ 535-62 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-63
1:650
§ 535-64. Home occupations. [Amended 3-4-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-04]
F. Buffer area. A buffer area of not less than 25 feet in width may be
required along exterior subdivision boundaries. Such buffer area may
be used for drainage structures and utility easements.
G. Accessory uses and structures. As for the RSF District.
H. Approval and permits. Approval procedures shall be as provided in
§ 535-60 for a cluster subdivision; provided, however, that a mobile
home subdivision shall not need a special exception permit as a cluster
subdivision. Final approval of a mobile home subdivision does not
constitute approval for individual structures. Application for building
permits shall be submitted and processed in accordance with standard
procedures.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate all home occupations
within the Town of Grand Chute. By controlling the type, number,
location, and operation of home occupations now in use, planned, or
hereafter started, citizens are provided an opportunity to start and
grow a business while still protecting the health, safety, property, and
welfare of the general public. A further purpose of this section is to
reinforce standards that provide for particular types and intensities of
land use, especially in residential neighborhoods.
B. General regulations.
(1) Home occupations shall be permitted only in the following zoning
districts:
(a) RSF Single-Family Residential District;
(b) RTF Two-Family Residential District;
(c) R-2 Two-Family Residence District;
(d) R-3 Single-Family Attached Residence District; or
(e) On a lot containing a one-family or two-family structure located
in a zoning district not listed directly above.
(2) Only one home occupation is permitted per lot.
(3) A home occupation shall be classified as one of the following:
(a) Office, such as accounting, architecture, web-based
businesses, brokering, computer programming;
(b) Professional service, such as massage therapy, physical
therapy, photography, and real estate; or
§ 535-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-64
1:651
(c) Home goods and products, all made or produced as part of the
home occupation, such as baked goods, cake-decorating, and
small-scale production of custom, as-ordered crafts.
(4) A home occupation shall not modify the interior or exterior of any
structure in any manner that reduces the residential character of
such structure or the lot on which it is located.
(5) A home occupation must be incidental and secondary to the use of
such building for dwelling purposes.
(6) A home occupation may be allowed to operate in an accessory
structure as a special exception, in accordance with the provisions
of Chapter 535, Article XI, of the Town of Grand Chute Municipal
Code.
(7) The gross floor area of a home occupation shall be no greater than
25% of the floor area of the principal structure or 500 square feet,
whichever is less.
C. Performance standards. A home occupation shall conform to all the
following:
(1) Signs. Any signage associated with a home occupation shall
conform to the provisions of Chapter 535, Article XV, of the Town of
Grand Chute Municipal Code.
(2) Hours of operation. No home occupation shall conduct on-site
business with an external client between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m.
(3) Employment. No home occupation shall have more than one
nonresident employee in the home during hours of operation. An
off-street parking space must be provided for nonresident
employee use.
(4) Traffic. No home occupation shall generate any more vehicular
traffic than what is normal for a residential street. No home
occupation shall increase traffic by more than two cars at a time.
The lot on which the home occupation is located shall provide
sufficient off-street parking to accommodate clients' vehicles.
(5) Clients. No home occupation shall have more than two clients on
the lot at any time.
(6) Noise. No home occupation shall create noise greater than what is
normally generated in a residential setting and must comply with
§ 415-7A of the Town of Grand Chute Municipal Code.
(7) Refuse and recycling. No home occupation shall generate refuse or
recycling waste in a volume greater than what is typically and
customarily produced by or associated with residential dwellings.
All home occupations shall adhere to Town of Grand Chute
§ 535-64 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-64
1:652
ordinances and policies for refuse and recycling on residential
properties.
(8) Storage. All home occupations shall store associated goods and
products within an enclosed structure. All storage areas shall count
towards the amount of space measured as part of the home
occupation.
(9) Equipment and machinery. Only equipment and machinery
recognized as being part of the normal practice of owning and
maintaining a residence are permitted for use in conducting a
home occupation.
(10) Hazardous materials. All home occupations shall use, store, and
dispose of any hazardous or other restricted materials in
accordance with the International Fire Code and the National Fire
Protection Association Life Safety Code. No home occupation
activity shall require the installation of safety features not common
to residential uses.
(11) Air quality. No home occupation shall emit smoke, dust, or steam
that reduces ambient air quality and visibility beyond any lot line.
(12) Light. No home occupation shall produce light that exceeds 0.1
foot-candles above ambient levels as measured at any lot line.
(13) Odor. No home occupation shall produce noxious odors that
transgress beyond any lot line.
(14) Temperature. No home occupation shall alter ambient air
temperature by more than 1º F., as measured at any lot line.
(15) Vibration. No home occupation shall create vibrations for an
extended period of time, as measured at any lot line.
D. Administration and enforcement. An application for a home occupation
permit shall be filed with the Department of Community Development.
Necessary supporting documentation, if any, and the required filing fee
shall accompany the application. The Community Development Director
will complete the review of the request for a home occupation, and will
either approve or deny the request based on conformance to the
requirements and standards as specified in this section. In the case of
an applicant feeling aggrieved by a decision to deny approval of a home
occupation permit, said applicant may file an appeal to the Plan
Commission for final action.
(1) Permit. Home occupation permits are approved for a specified use,
by a specified resident/operator, at a specified location. As such,
permits are not automatically transferrable to a different resident
or different address from those approved with the issuance of the
permit. If the holder of a home occupation permit intends to
§ 535-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-64
1:653
§ 535-65. Solid-fuel-fired outdoor heating devices. [Added
1-17-2006; amended 2-7-2006]
relocate and conduct a home occupation at a new address in the
Town, a new home occupation permit must be approved.
(2) Inspection. Upon reasonable notice, the permit holder shall allow
the Community Development Department to conduct an on-site
inspection of the premises to determine compliance with the
requirements and standards of this section.
(3) Revocation/voiding of permit. The Community Development
Department may revoke and void any previously issued home
occupation permit upon finding that said home-based business is
being operated in noncompliance with the requirements and
standards of this section, and any specified conditions contained in
the originally approved permit. Revocation may take place at any
time, and a revoked permit shall become null and void and said
home occupation shall be immediately terminated and
discontinued.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
SOLID-FUEL-FIRED OUTDOOR HEATING DEVICE — Any equipment,
device or apparatus, or any part thereof, which is installed, affixed
or situated outdoors for the primary purpose of combustion of fuel
to produce heat or energy used as a component of a heating system
providing heat for any interior space or water source.
STACK or CHIMNEY — Any vertical structure enclosing a flue or flues
that carry off smoke or exhaust from a solid-fuel-fired heating device,
especially that part of such structure extending above a roof.
B. Regulations. All solid-fuel-fired outdoor heating devices shall:
(1) Be installed, operated and maintained in strict conformance with
the manufacturer's instructions and regulations and all other
applicable local, state and federal standards.
(2) Be approved by the Department of Safety and Professional Services
through an approved testing agency.
(3) Be provided with written documentation from the manufacturer
that the device meets the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
emission criteria identified in 40 CFR 60, Subpart AAA, Section
60.532(b)(2).
(4) Be provided with written documentation from the manufacturer
that the device meets or is in the process of being registered with
the Department of Safety and Professional Services Boiler Division.
(5) In addition, be operated and maintained as follows:
§ 535-64 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-65
1:654
(a) Fuel shall be only natural, untreated wood or other solid fuel
specifically permitted by the manufacturer, such as corn or
other pellets specifically designed for the solid-fuel-fired
outdoor heating device.
(b) The following fuels are prohibited:
[1] Processed wood products other than wood.
[2] Petroleum in any form.
[3] Rubber.
[4] Plastic.
[5] Garbage.
[6] Painted wood or treated wood.
[7] Any other items not specifically allowed by the
manufacturer.
C. A solid-fuel-fired outdoor heating device may be installed in the Town of
Grand Chute in accordance with the following provisions:
(1) The solid-fuel-fired outdoor heating device shall be located at least
300 feet from all exterior property lines.
(2) The solid-fuel-fired outdoor heating device shall have a chimney
that extends at least 15 feet above the ground surface. If there are
any residences within 500 feet, the chimney shall also extend at
least two feet higher above the ground surface than the height of
the roofs of all such residences. All chimneys greater than 15 feet
in height above the ground shall be provided with documentation
from the manufacturer specifying that the solid-fuel-fired outdoor
heating device will function with this increased chimney height and
how the chimney shall be supported.
(3) The owner of the solid-fuel-fired outdoor heating device shall
obtain an HVAC permit from the Town of Grand Chute before
installing a solid-fuel-fired outdoor heating device.
(4) All solid-fuel-fired outdoor heating devices must be installed by a
contractor appropriately registered or by the owner of the dwelling
who is qualified to install the device in accordance with the all
codes and the manufacturer's guidelines.227
D. Nuisance. Should any solid-fuel-fired outdoor heating device permitted
under this section become hazardous, harmful, noxious, offensive or a
nuisance to the surrounding neighborhood as determined by the
Building Inspector and/or Fire Chief, then the owner shall correct,
227. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-65
1:655
improve or abate the nuisance using whatever means are necessary in
accordance with this section. If the nuisance cannot be abated, then
operation of the device shall be discontinued until a solution to the
nuisance can be found.
E. Penalties. Any person, firm, corporation, business or entity who or
which fails to comply with any provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, forfeit an amount as prescribed in the Uniform
Forfeiture and Bond Schedules, plus the cost of prosecution for each
violation, and on default of the payment of any such fine and costs of
prosecution shall be committed to the county jail until payment thereof,
but not exceeding 30 days. Each day of violation shall represent a
separate violation of this section as described herein.228
228. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-65 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-65
1:656
ARTICLE VIII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 535-66. Town Zoning Administrator.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the
Town Zoning Administrator (hereinafter referred to as the "Administrator").
The Administrator is authorized to act through aides and assistants. In
the performance of the duties of the office of Zoning Administrator, the
Administrator may request the assistance of any appropriate officer or
agency of the county or State of Wisconsin.
§ 535-67. Duties and powers of Zoning Administrator.
The Administrator shall have the following duties and powers. The Zoning
Administrator shall:
A. Examine all applications for building permits and, if necessary, advise
the Building Inspector as to the provisions of this chapter and arrange
for corrections to be made to ensure compliance with this chapter and,
for applications for building permits for any structure requiring
connection to a private domestic sewage treatment and disposal
system, advise the Building Inspector as to whether a system satisfying
all applicable codes already exists or that all permits necessary to
install such a system have been obtained. All permits shall be examined
to ensure that any proposed construction will not interfere with a
functioning private domestic sewage treatment and disposal system.
B. Examine all applications for special exceptions and building permits
which require submittal and approval of a site plan under Article X of
this chapter and refer such applications to the Plan Commission.
Special exception permits and building permits which require site plan
approval shall only be issued upon order of the Plan Commission.
C. Receive all applications for a special exception, interpretation, appeal
and/or variance and refer such applications to the Plan Commission or
Board of Appeals. A variance shall only be issued upon order of the
Board of Appeals.
D. Conduct inspections to determine compliance or noncompliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
E. Issue stop and cease and desist orders and orders requiring the
correction of all conditions found to be in violation of the provisions of
this chapter. Such written orders shall be posted in the property in a
conspicuous place and/or served personally or by certified mail upon
persons deemed by the Administrator to be in violation of the provisions
of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any persons to violate any such
order issued by the Administrator.
F. Institute in the name of the Town any appropriate action or proceedings
to prevent violations of this chapter.
§ 535-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-67
1:657
§ 535-68. Building Inspector.
Upon adoption of this chapter the Town shall appoint a Building Inspector.
§ 535-69. Duties and powers of Building Inspector.
The Building Inspector shall:
G. Revoke by order any building permit approved under a misstatement of
fact or contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
H. Maintain maps of all special exceptions and maintain a file on each.
I. Upon request of the Town Board, Plan Commission, or Board of
Appeals, present to such persons or bodies facts, records, or reports
which they may request to assist them in making decisions or assist
them in any other way as requested.
J. Maintain a map or maps showing the current zoning classification of all
lands under the jurisdiction of this chapter. The Administrator shall also
ensure that a current copy of the Official Zoning Atlas is available for
public inspection.229
K. For good cause, recommend the removal of a Building Inspector to the
Town Board.
A. Receive and examine all applications for building permits and forthwith
transmit copies of all such applications to the Administrator.
B. Issue building permits only where there is compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. Building permits for structures requiring
connection to a private domestic sewage treatment and disposal system
shall be issued only where there is compliance with applicable sanitary
codes. Building permits which require site plan approval under Article
X of this chapter shall only be issued by order of the Plan Commission.
Building permits for development in the floodplain, shoreland and
wetland jurisdiction of the Town of Grand Chute shall not be issued
until approved by the Zoning Administrator.
C. Receive and forthwith transmit to the Administrator all applications for
building permits which require site plan approval under Article X of this
chapter.
D. Conduct inspections to determine compliance or noncompliance with
the provisions of this chapter and report any violations of this chapter
to the Administrator and the Town Board.
229. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-67 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-70
1:658
§ 535-70. Remedies.
Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by
appropriate fines and penalties. Compliance may also be enforced by
injunctional suit of the Town or by the owner or owners of real estate within
the district affected by the regulation.
§ 535-71. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any order, rule
or regulation made hereunder shall, upon conviction, forfeit an amount as
prescribed in the Uniform Forfeiture and Bond Schedules for each offense,
together with the costs of prosecution. Each day that a violation continues
to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 535-72. Notice of violation.
If the Administrator finds that any of the provisions of this chapter are
being violated, he shall notify, in writing, by registered or certified mail,
the person(s) responsible indicating the nature of the violation and ordering
the action necessary to correct the violation. Whenever a person shall have
been notified in writing that he is in violation of the provisions of this
chapter, such person shall commence correction of all violations within 10
days of notice and shall correct all violations within 45 days of notice. If
such corrections are not commenced within 10 days of written notice or not
corrected with 45 days of written notice, each day that a violation continues
shall be considered a separate offense.
§ 535-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-72
1:659

ARTICLE IX
Building Permits
§ 535-73. Building permit required.
No building or structure (except signs exempt from the provisions of this
chapter) shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, moved or
enlarged until a building permit has been obtained from the Administrator
or Building Inspector.
§ 535-74. Application for building permit.
Application for a building permit shall be made in writing upon a form
furnished by the Town of Grand Chute and shall include the following
information:
§ 535-75. Approval and issuance of building permit.
If the Administrator or Building Inspector determines that the proposed
structure or building will comply with the provisions of this chapter, he shall
officially approve and sign one set of plans and return it to the owner or
applicant and shall issue a building permit which shall be kept on display at
the site of the proposed building or structure.
A. Name and address of the owner of the land and the owner of the
building or structure if different.
B. Plot and construction plans, drawn to scale, showing the actual shape
and dimensions of the lot to be built upon and the exact sizes and
locations on the lot of buildings or structures already existing, if any,
and the exact sizes and locations on the lot of buildings or structures
proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered or
enlarged.
C. The existing and/or proposed use of all buildings or parts thereof on the
lot.
D. The number of families the building is designed to accommodate, the
gross leasable floor space of the building, or the number of employees
the building is designed to accommodate.
E. The location and number of required off-street parking and loading
spaces.
F. Such other information with regard to the lot and existing or proposed
buildings or structures as may be necessary to determine compliance
with and provide enforcement of these regulations, including but not
limited to a detailed plan of any existing private domestic sewage
treatment and disposal system.
§ 535-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-76
1:661
§ 535-76. Scope of building permit.
Building permits issued on the basis of applications and plans approved
by the Administrator or Building Inspector authorize only the use,
arrangement and construction set forth in such approved applications and
plans. Use, arrangement and construction at variance with that authorized
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
§ 535-77. Lapse of building permit.
A building permit shall have lapsed and be void unless substantial
construction or operations described in the permit are commenced within
one year from the date of its issuance.
§ 535-78. Revocation of building permit.
A building permit which was issued in error or under a misstatement of fact
by the applicant shall not create any right in such permit, and the Town
shall be entitled to revoke such permit.
§ 535-79. Effect on existing permits.
No building permit lawfully issued by the Administrator or Building
Inspector prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
chapter shall be invalidated by the adoption or amendment of this chapter.
Such permit shall remain valid and subsisting subject only to its own terms.
§ 535-76 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-79
1:662
ARTICLE X
Site Plans
§ 535-80. Submission and review of site plan.
§ 535-81. Contents of site plan.
A site plan required to be submitted by the terms of this chapter shall
contain the following elements, where applicable:
A. Where, by the terms of this chapter, a site plan is required in connection
with any use or structure, such site plan shall be submitted coincident
with an application for a building permit or special exception, as the
case may be. The Administrator shall forthwith circulate the site plan
for comment by the Town Plan Commission and any other Town officer
who may have a responsibility for or interest in an aspect of the
development.
B. Within 30 days of submittal, the Administrator shall transmit the site
plan along with all pertinent comments to the Plan Commission for its
consideration. Except as required in connection with a special
exception, no public notice and hearing are required for site plan
consideration, but such matters shall be handled in public session as
part of a previously prepared agenda. All matters relating to site plan
consideration shall be a public record. In cases where a site plan is
submitted in connection with an application for a special exception,
public notice and hearing are required. Site plan approval shall require
formal action of the Plan Commission.
A. Statements of ownership and control of the proposed development.
B. Statement describing in detail the character and intended use of the
development.
C. A site plan containing the title of the project and the names of the
project planner and developer, date, and North arrow and, based on an
exact survey of the property drawn to a scale of sufficient size to show
boundaries of the project, any existing streets, buildings, watercourses,
easements, and section lines; exact location of all buildings and
structures; access and traffic flow; off-street parking and off-street
loading areas; location of recreation facilities; and access to utilities
and points of utility hookups.
D. Tabulations of total gross acreage in the project and the percentages
thereof proposed to be devoted to the various permitted uses.
E. Tabulations showing the derivation of numbers of off-street parking and
loading spaces and total project density in dwelling units per gross
acre.
§ 535-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-81
1:663
§ 535-82. Amendments to site plan.230
A site plan required to be approved by the Plan Commission under this
article shall not be modified as to any of the elements contained in § 535-81
unless approved by the Plan Commission. This requirement shall not be
varied with the exception of the access to utilities and points of utility
hookups required under § 535-81C. As it relates to access to utilities and
points of utility hookups, variation may be made after approval by the
Superintendent of the Sanitary District and the Town Administrator.
Variation from the plan which has received approval by the Plan
Commission may be granted by the Town Administrator where it is
necessary for the avoidance of utilities or for the public convenience or
for the efficiency and adequacy of utility hookups or when the change
is, in the opinion of the Administrator, minor and will not increase lot
coverage or density or decrease required setbacks below the minimum
standard contained in the zoning district in which it is located. Relocating
driveway openings, changes in signage, or changes in landscaping adjacent
to residential land uses shall require Plan Commission review.
§ 535-83. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Added 6-21-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-15]
F. Architectural definitions for buildings in the development and exact
number of dwelling units, sizes, and types, together with typical floor
plans of each type.
G. Storm drainage and sanitary sewage plans.
H. If common facilities (such as recreation areas or structures, common
open space, etc.) are to be provided for the development, statements as
to how such common facilities are to be provided and permanently
maintained. Such statements may take the form of proposed deed
restrictions, deeds of trust, homeowners' associations, surety
arrangements, or other legal instruments providing adequate
guarantee to the Town that such common facilitates will not become a
future liability for the Town.
I. Plans for signs, if any.
J. In the Industrial District, plans for the exterior walls of all buildings,
lighting, outside storage and industrial processes and materials
pertinent to conformance with the industrial performance standards
herein.
K. Such additional data, maps, plans or statements as may be required for
the particular use or activity involved or as the applicant, Administrator
or Plan Commission may believe are pertinent.
230. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-81 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-83
1:664
A. Any person, firm, or corporation who or which fails to comply with the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine or
forfeiture for each violation committed hereunder, plus reasonable
costs of prosecution. The amount of such fine and forfeiture shall be in
accordance with bond and forfeiture schedules in effect for the Town of
Grand Chute. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a
separate offense, punishable pursuant to the provisions set forth in this
article.
B. Enforcement and penalties set forth in this article shall be in addition to
all remedies of injunction, abatement and/or costs, whether existing
under this article or otherwise.
§ 535-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-83
1:665

ARTICLE XI
Special Exceptions
[Amended 3-5-2002; 5-21-2002]
§ 535-84. Definition.
A special exception is a use or structure that may not be appropriate
generally or without restriction throughout a district but which, if
controlled as to number, area, location or relation to neighborhood, would
promote the public health, safety, welfare, comfort, convenience or the
general welfare. Such uses or structures may be permissible in a zoning
district as a special exception only if specific provision for such use or
structure is made in the district. A special exception shall not be issued for
any other use or structure.
§ 535-85. Procedure.
All applications for a special exception shall be submitted to the
Administrator. Where a site plan is required by the terms of this chapter
it shall be submitted coincident with the application. In cases where a
site plan is not required by the terms of this chapter, the application shall
contain information equivalent to that required for a building permit under
§ 535-74. The application may also be accompanied by any other material or
information necessary to demonstrate that the grant of a special exception
will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of these zoning
regulations and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise
detrimental to the public interest. The Administrator shall refer all
applications and accompanying materials to the Plan Commission.
§ 535-86. Notice requirements.
Upon the filing of an application for a special exception, the Plan
Commission shall fix a reasonable time (not more than 45 days from the
filing date) for a review and recommendation. Notice shall be mailed to the
parties in interest as determined by the Plan Commission.
§ 535-87. Public hearing.
A. Any hearing required under this article shall be conducted after a Class
2 notice pursuant to Ch. 985, Wis. Stats., and the Plan Commission shall
keep a record of its proceedings under this section, all of which shall be
filed immediately as public records.
B. Public hearing. A public hearing is a formal proceeding conducted by
the Plan Commission in accordance with the following procedures:
(1) The Commission Chairperson shall open the hearing and make a
concise statement of its scope and purposes. Appearances shall be
entered on the record. Any official or employee of the Town of
Grand Chute and any other person may participate in the hearing.
Any person desiring to participate in the hearing, whether on his or
§ 535-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-87
1:667
§ 535-88. Town Board decision.
her own behalf or as an authorized agent or attorney, shall enter
an appearance in person by giving his or her name and address,
the name and address of the person being represented, and the
capacity in which he or she represents such person.
(2) Persons entering an appearance may make statements, offer
evidence or ask questions concerning the matter to be heard. Such
statements need not be made under oath. The Chairperson shall
determine the order in which people may speak and may limit the
length of the presentations if it appears there will not be enough
time for all who wish to speak or if presentations are unduly
repetitious. Cross-examination of those who speak may not be
permitted, but clarifying questions of those who speak or rebuttal
statements shall be permitted by the Chairperson. Statements may
be submitted in oral or written form.
(3) The hearing shall be recorded by an electronic recording device.
(4) The Plan Commission shall conduct the public hearing. The Plan
Commission shall make a recommendation to the Town Board to
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the special exception.
A. Conditions and safeguards. Where, by the terms of these regulations,
certain conditions or requirements are specified for a special exception
use or structure such conditions or requirements must be imposed by
the Town Board. In addition to the conditions or requirements specified
by the terms of these regulations, the Town Board may impose
appropriate additional conditions or requirements as deemed necessary
to ensure the proposed use or structure will serve the objectives of this
chapter and promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience
and general welfare. Violation of such conditions and requirements,
when made part of the terms under which the special exception is
granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
B. Records and decisions. The Town Board shall keep a record of its
proceedings under this section, all of which shall be filed immediately
as public records. A majority of the Town Board members must concur.
Every final decision under this section shall be in writing accompanied
by findings of fact based on the record. No special exception shall be
approved unless the Town Board shall find that:
(1) The establishment, maintenance or operation of the proposed
special exception use or structure at the proposed location will not
be detrimental or injurious to the use and enjoyment of existing
uses on adjacent properties or properties in the vicinity.
(2) The establishment, maintenance or operation of the proposed
special exception use or structure alone or in combination with
§ 535-87 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-88
1:668
§ 535-89. Appeals.
Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by
any officer, department or board of the municipality affected by a decision
of the Town Board pursuant to § 535-95.
§ 535-90. Existing special exceptions.
Any use or structure existing on the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter which is classified as a special exception in
the district in which it is located shall be deemed to have been granted
approval, subject to maintaining the character and extent of such use or
structure existing on that date. Any extension, enlargement or change in
such use or structure shall require approval according to the terms of this
chapter.
§ 535-91. Expiration of special exception permit.
Any special exception permit issued shall be in full use by the applicant
within one year of approval. The special exception permit shall expire,
without notice, if the applicant is not in operation and full compliance with
the permit.
other existing special exception uses and structures in the vicinity
will not cause traffic hazards.
(3) Adequate provision is made for surface water drainage, ingress and
egress to the property, and off-street parking.
(4) Adequate public facilities and services are available for the
proposed special exception use or structure.
§ 535-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-91
1:669

ARTICLE XII
Board of Appeals
§ 535-92. Establishment of Board of Appeals.
In order that the objectives of this chapter may be more fully and equitably
achieved and a means for interpretation provided, there is established a
Board of Appeals (hereinafter referred to as the "Board") for the Town of
Grand Chute.
§ 535-93. Membership; terms of office; compensation.
§ 535-94. Rules, meetings, decisions and records.
A. Board members. The Board shall consist of five members. The Town
Chairperson shall appoint the members with the approval of the Town
Board. The members of the Board shall all reside within the Town. The
Town Chairperson shall appoint the Chairperson of the Board.
B. Terms. The terms of the first five Board members appointed shall be as
follows: one for one year, two for two years and two for three years,
respectively. Thereafter, successors shall be appointed in such manner
at the expiration of each term, and their terms of office shall be three
years in all cases, beginning June 1 in the year in which they were
appointed and until their successors are appointed.
C. Alternates. The Town Chairperson may appoint two alternates for
staggered terms of three years commencing May 1, 1995. For the
purpose of those first appointed, one alternate shall serve for two years
and one shall serve for three years. The Chairperson shall annually
designate a first alternate and a second alternate per § 62.23(7)(e)1 and
2, Wis. Stats. All subsequent appointees shall be for three-year terms.
D. Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any
member whose term becomes vacant.
E. Compensation. The actual and necessary expenses incurred by the
Board in the performance of its duties shall be paid and allowed by the
Town Board as in cases of other claims against the Town. The Town
Board may also compensate the members of the Board and their
assistants as may be authorized by the Town Board.
A. Rules. The Town Board shall adopt rules for the conduct of the business
of the Board in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The
Board may adopt further rules as necessary to carry into effect the
regulations of the Town Board. No rule may be changed without the
concurring vote of a majority of the Board.
B. Meetings. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson and at such other times as the Board may determine. Such
Chairperson or, in his or her absence, the Acting Chairperson may
§ 535-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-94
1:671
§ 535-95. Appeals.
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings
of the Board shall be open to the public.
C. Records and decisions. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings
showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or
failing to vote, indicating such fact and shall keep records of its
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be
immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record.
All actions or decisions shall be taken by resolution in which the
concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board shall be
necessary. Each resolution shall contain a written statement of the
grounds forming the basis of such resolutions. Notice of filing of all
actions and decisions shall be mailed to the parties in interest as
determined by the Board.
A. Powers. The Board shall have the power to hear and decide appeals
where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision
or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement
of this chapter. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or
may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed
from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination
as ought to be made and to that end shall have all the powers of the
officer from whom the appeal is taken.
B. Procedures. Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by any officer, department, or board or the Building
Inspector or other administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken
within 60 days of the order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed from by filing with the Zoning Administrator and with the
Board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning
Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
The Board may request the applicant to provide additional information
as may be needed to determine the case.
C. Stays. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken shall
certify to the Board, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with
him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by
the Board or by a court of record on application, on notice to the officer
from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
D. Withdrawal or amendment.
(1) If the applicant elects to withdraw the appeal any time before final
determination is made by the Board, this fact shall be noted on the
application, with the signature of the applicant attesting
§ 535-94 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-95
1:672
§ 535-96. Variances.
withdrawal. Copies of the withdrawn application shall be returned
to the files of the Board, to the Building Inspector or officer and to
the applicant.
(2) Amendment of an appeal by the applicant may be permitted at any
time prior to or during the public hearing, provided that no such
amendment shall be such as to make the case different from its
description in the notice of public hearing. If the amendment is
requested by the applicant after public notice of the hearing has
been given and such amendment is at variance with the
information set forth in the public notice, the applicant shall pay an
additional fee to cover the cost of amending the public notice. If the
amended notice can be published within the time frame specified
for the public hearing, the hearing on the amended appeal may be
held on that date, otherwise the Chairperson shall announce that
the hearing originally scheduled on the case will be deferred to a
future meeting, before which appropriate public notice will be
given, and will state the reasons for deferral.
A. Powers. The Board shall have the power to authorize upon appeal in
specific cases such variance from the terms of this chapter as will not
be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a
literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in
unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of this chapter shall be
observed and substantial justice done.
B. Requirements for a variance. In general the power to authorize a
variance from the requirements of this chapter shall be sparingly
exercised and only under peculiar and exceptional circumstances. No
variance shall be granted for actions which require an amendment to
this chapter. Variances shall only be granted when the Board finds that:
(1) The variance is not contrary to the public interest and that such a
variance will be in general harmony with the purposes and intent of
this chapter.
(2) The variance will not permit the establishment of a use which is not
permitted or permissible in the district.
(3) Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to
the land, structure, or building involved and which are not
applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same
district.
(4) The literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would
deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other
properties in the same district.
(5) The hardship is not shared generally by other land or buildings in
the area.
§ 535-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-96
1:673
§ 535-97. Interpretations.
The Board shall have the power to hear and decide applications for
interpretations of the zoning regulations and the boundaries of the zoning
districts.
§ 535-98. Public hearings.
§ 535-99. Conduct of public hearings.
Any hearing required under this article shall be conducted by the Board in
accordance with § 535-87B.
§ 535-100. Appeals from Board decisions.
Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of
the Board or any taxpayer or any officer, department, board or bureau of
the municipality may, within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the
office of the Board, commence an action seeking the remedy available by
certiorari.
(6) The hardship results from the strict application of this chapter and
is not the result of self-created or self-imposed circumstances.
A. Time period. Upon filing with the Board an application for an appeal or
variance, the Board shall fix a reasonable time (not more than 60 days
from the filing date) for a public hearing.
B. Notice of hearing. A Class 2 notice pursuant to Ch. 985, Wis. Stats.,
shall be published specifying the date, time and place of the hearing
and matters to come before the Board.
§ 535-96 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-100
1:674
ARTICLE XIII
Amendments
§ 535-101. Power of amendment.231
The Town Board may amend the regulations and requirements of this
chapter or change the district boundaries of the Official Zoning Atlas. A
petition for amendment may be made by any property owner in the area to
be affected by the amendment, by the Town Board or by any member of the
Town Board or Town Plan Commission.
§ 535-102. Amendment procedure.
The petition shall be filed with the Town Clerk, who shall immediately
refer it to the Plan Commission for its consideration, report and
recommendations. Procedures shall be in accordance with § 59.69(5)(e),
Wis. Stats.
231. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-102
1:675

ARTICLE XIV
Fees
§ 535-103. Fees.
Fees for amendments, special exceptions, variances, appeals and contested
case hearings shall be established by the Town Board. No action shall be
taken prior to payment of the requisite fee.
§ 535-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-103
1:677

ARTICLE XV
Signs and Billboards
[Amended 2-7-2002; 12-7-2004; 10-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-09;
12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-30; 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15;
2-19-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-01]
§ 535-104. Purpose.
A. The purpose of this article is to establish standards that safeguard life
and property, protect the right of free speech, promote the public's
general welfare, and enhance community aesthetics by regulating the
appearance, construction, location and maintenance of signs and
billboards.
B. Applicability. This article applies to all signs in the Town of Grand Chute
visible beyond the boundaries of the lot upon which they are located,
inclusive of any sign currently in use, planned, or hereafter installed or
structurally altered, except for:
(1) Any sign, signal, or legal notice posted or erected by, or required to
be posted by, any Town, county, state, federal or other formal
governmental entity, or private utility; and
(2) Any vehicle sign, as defined in § 535-105.
C. Interpretation. The Town will use literal readings of regulations in this
article. Regulations are no more or less strict than stated. Where the
regulations of this article do not provide a basis for concluding that a
sign is allowed, it is prohibited. Where there is a conflict between the
provisions this article and the provisions of any other regulation,
statute, ordinance or covenant, the most restrictive regulation will
apply.
D. Nonconforming signs. In accordance with §§ 60.61(5) and 62.23(7)(h),
Wis. Stats., and § 535-15 of the Town of Grand Chute Municipal Code,
any sign lawfully existing at the effective date of this article that does
not conform with the provisions herein will be characterized as a
nonconforming sign and may continue in existence at its current
location, subject to the following restrictions:
(1) No structural component, face or panel of a nonconforming sign
may be altered in any manner that would increase the extent of
nonconformity.
(2) The total structural repairs or alterations of a sign may not, during
its life, exceed 50% of the assessed value of the sign, unless
permanently changed to a conforming sign.
(3) If, for a period of 12 consecutive months, the use a nonconforming
sign is discontinued or abandoned for any reason whatsoever, any
future use of said sign must conform with the provisions of this
article or be removed.
§ 535-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-104
1:679
§ 535-105. Definitions.
Words used in this article have their broad dictionary definition unless they
are described otherwise.
ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION — A projection, not including a sign as
defined in this section, that extends beyond the face of a building's exterior
wall.
ATTACHED SIGN — A permanent sign directly affixed to or primarily
supported by a building. Includes awning signs, canopy signs, projecting
signs, roof signs and wall signs.
AWNING SIGN — An attached sign on a fixed or retractable architectural
projection made of rigid or nonrigid materials that is anchored to and
supported by a building, which may be illuminated by means of internal or
external sources of light. See illustration below.
BANNER — A temporary sign constructed of fabric, pliable plastic or other
nonrigid material of any shape, in which more than one edge or surface is
secured to another structure or support to prevent movement.
BILLBOARD — A wall or freestanding sign displaying either a static or
digital electronic message that attracts attention to a business, product,
service, entertainment, or activity conducted, sold, or offered at a location
other than the premises on which the sign is located. Also referred to as
"off-premises advertising sign."
CANOPY SIGN — An attached sign on a freestanding architectural
projection that is anchored by columns or cantilevers, and that may be
illuminated by means of internal or external sources of light. See
illustrations below.
(4) A nonconforming sign that becomes damaged or destroyed by
violent wind, vandalism, fire, flood, ice, snow, mold or infestation
may be restored to its prior size, height, arrangement and location
without restriction as to the costs of the required repair,
restoration or reconstruction.
§ 535-104 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-105
1:680
CONFORMING SIGN — A sign that is legally installed in accordance with
all prevailing jurisdictional laws and ordinances.
DEVELOPMENT AREA — A lot or combination of adjoining lots that
comprise a minimum land area of two acres, containing a mix of land uses,
and typically developed with more than one principal building under unified
ownership or control. Development areas include, but are not limited to,
lots, buildings and site improvements located in planned unit developments
and planned development districts.
DIGITAL MULTIPLE MESSAGE SIGN or DIGITAL BILLBOARD — A
billboard or off-premises advertising sign that contains multiple or variable
messages that automatically change by any digital or electronic process.
DISSOLVE or FADE — A mode of message transition on an electronic
message center sign in which the first message gradually appears to
dissipate and lose legibility with the gradual appearance and legibility of
the second message.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER SIGN or EMU — An on-premises sign on
which the message is changed by electronic process. Messages displayed
include, but are not limited to, copy, art, graphics, time and temperature,
public service announcements, and advertising of products or services.
FACADE — That portion of any exterior elevation of a building extending
vertically from normal grade to the top of a parapet wall or eaves, and
horizontally across the entire width of the building elevation.
FLAG SIGN — A sign, constructed of fabric, pliable plastic or other nonrigid
material and typically oblong or rectangular in shape, which is attached by
one edge to a mast arm, staff or vertical pole. Noncommercial flags are not
considered signs.
FLASHING — A visual effect on a directly or indirectly illuminated sign in
which artificial light intensity and color is not maintained stationary and
constant at all times when in use.
FOOTCANDLE — A measure of illuminance in which #0.1 footcandle equals
one lumen per square foot.
FRAME — A complete, static display screen on an electronic message
center sign.
FRAME EFFECT (DYNAMIC) — A visual effect on a frame in which the
illusion of motion and/or animation is used on an electronic message center
sign or a digital multiple message sign.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign supported by a structure affixed to the
ground, as opposed to being affixed to a building. Also referred to as
"ground sign," "monument sign," "pole sign" or "pylon sign." See
illustrations below.
§ 535-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-105
1:681
ILLUMINANCE — The amount of light falling upon a real or imaginary
surface. Expressed in English units as footcandles and in SI (metric) units
as lux. Also referred to as "light level" or "illumination."
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign characterized by the use of artificial light,
including:
INFLATABLE SIGN — Any sign constructed of fabric or other flexible
material that takes on a three-dimensional shape when filled with air.
LIGHT TRESPASS — Light from an artificial source that intrudes into an
area where it is not wanted or does not belong.
LUMINANCE — The light that is emitted by or reflected from a surface,
measured in units of luminous intensity (candelas) per unit area. Expressed
in English units as foot lamberts and in SI units as cd/m2. Also referred to as
"nits."
LUX — The SI unit for illuminance, in which one lux equals 0.093 footcandle.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign that was legally installed under all
municipal sign regulations and ordinances in effect at that time, but which
may no longer comply with subsequently enacted regulations and
ordinances having jurisdiction over the sign.
NORMAL GRADE — A measure of the ground elevation of a lot, being the
lower of the existing grade prior to construction or the newly established
grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, landscaping or mounding
done solely for the purpose of installing a sign structure.
ON-PREMISES SIGN — A sign constructed, maintained and operated in the
outdoor environment for the purpose of displaying messages appurtenant
to the use of, or products sold at, the property on which it is displayed.
PARAPET — The portion of a building facade that extends vertically above
the structural roofline.
PERMANENT SIGN — An attached or freestanding sign constructed,
maintained and operated in a manner to remain in a fixed place over its
Externally or indirectly illuminated sign: emits light from a source(s)
located outside of the actual sign.
A.
Internally or directly illuminated sign: emits artificial light directly
through any transparent or translucent material from a source located
within or on the sign. This includes electronic message center signs.
B.
§ 535-105 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-105
1:682
useful life. Permanent signs are designed and constructed to receive dead
loads and withstand wind pressures as required in Chapter 220 of the Town
of Grand Chute Municipal Code or other regulations, and are constructed
of durable materials capable of withstanding year-round exposure to the
outdoor environment.
POLITICAL SIGN — A temporary sign used to announce or support political
candidates or issues in any local, state or national election or political event.
PROJECTING SIGN — An attached sign that projects more than 18 inches
from the facade of a wall or building. Also referred to as "blade sign." See
illustration below.
READER BOARD — A sign on which the message is manually changed on a
display surface.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — Any sign used to offer for sale, lease or rent the
property on which it is placed.
ROOF SIGN — An attached sign mounted on, or extending above the
uppermost edge of, a wall or parapet of a building. See illustration below.
Roof Signs
SCROLL — A mode of message transition on an electronic message center
sign in which the message appears to move vertically across the display
surface.
SIGN — Any device used to attract attention beyond the boundaries of
the lot on which it is located, and whose purpose is to convey a message
to represent any person, entity or thing by means of lettering, numerals,
words, figures, emblems, devices, structures, designs, trade names,
trademarks or other alphabetic or pictorial imagery. Any sign(s) affixed to a
nonmotorized vehicle (i.e., trailer) not being actively used for the delivery
§ 535-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-105
1:683
of commercial goods is defined as a sign and is subject to the provisions of
this article.
SIGN AREA — The size of a sign, calculated as the entire area within the
periphery of a regular geometric form or combinations of regular geometric
forms on which all elements of a message(s) are displayed. In the case of
double-face signs, where both faces advertise a single facility, product, or
service, only one face is used to calculate sign area.
SIGN COPY — The actual physical sign message, including any lettering,
numerals, words, figures, emblems, designs, trade names, trademarks or
other alphabetic or pictorial imagery applied to any background. Sign copy
is expressed as the sum of the geometric shape(s) encompassing separate
individual letters, words or graphic elements on a background.
SIGN DISTRICTS — Geographic locations within the Town of Grand Chute
for which sign regulations are enforced based on types and intensities of
land use and prevailing zoning district classifications, to include:
SIGN FACE — The surface of a sign upon or through which the copy of the
sign is displayed.
SIGN HEIGHT — A measure of the vertical distance from normal grade to
the highest attached component of the sign structure, calculated as follows:
Rural Area: All lots zoned AED Exclusive Agricultural District and AGD
General Agricultural District.
A.
Suburban Area: All lots with residential uses zoned RSF Single-Family
Residential District; RTF Two-Family Residential District; R-2 Two-
Family Residence District; and R-3 Single-Family Attached Residence
District.
B.
Neighborhood Center: Locations characterized as:
All lots with nonresidential uses zoned RSF Single-Family
Residential District; RTF Two-Family Residential District; R-2 Two-
Family Residence District; and R-3 Single-Family Attached
Residence District.
(1)
All lots zoned R-4 Multifamily Residence District; R-5 Multifamily
Residence District; RMF Multifamily Residential District; and C-1
Neighborhood Commercial District.
(2)
C.
Community Center: All lots zoned C-2 Office Commercial District; CL
Local Commercial District; CR Regional Commercial District; CP
Planned Commercial District; and IND Industrial District.
D.
Sign regulations for lots zoned PDD Planned Development District are
prescribed in each project approval resolution approved by the Town of
Grand Chute.
E.
The height of an attached sign is the vertical distance measured from
the base of the facade of a wall or building at normal grade to the
highest point of any sign face.
A.
§ 535-105 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-105
1:684
SIGN STRUCTURE — The area of all sign faces, structural supports,
decorative trim and architectural features of the complete sign entity.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign constructed, maintained and operated in a
manner to be temporarily placed either in the ground or on a building.
Temporary signs may include, but are not limited to reader boards,
construction signs, development signs, political signs, real estate signs, sale
signs, electronic message center signs and special event signs.
TRANSITION — A visual effect used on an electronic message center sign
to change from one message to another. Transition effects include, but are
not limited to, fading, flashing, dissolving, traveling and scrolling.
TRAVEL — A mode of transition on an electronic message center sign in
which the message appears to move horizontally across the display surface.
VEHICLE SIGN — A sign(s) permanently painted or affixed on the surface of
a licensed, motorized vehicle that is used on a day-to-day basis to transport
goods and/or provide services.
WALL SIGN — A sign attached parallel to and extending less than 18 inches
from the facade of a wall, building or architectural projection. Also referred
to as "fascia sign." See illustration below.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign affixed to or etched on the interior side of any
building window that displays a message intended to be visible on the
exterior side.
§ 535-106. General sign regulations.
The height of a freestanding sign on a lot with an elevation equal to
or higher than the center line of the street it abuts is calculated as the
distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the
highest attached component of the sign structure.
B.
The height of a freestanding sign on a lot with an elevation lower than
the center line of the street it abuts is calculated as being equal to the
distance from the street center line elevation (at a point perpendicular
to the sign) to the top of the highest attached component of the sign
structure.
C.
A. Sign content. Any sign allowed or governed by this article may contain
any lawful noncommercial copy if it complies with the provisions herein
§ 535-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-106
1:685
and with all other applicable regulations. A sign may not bear or
contain any copy or indications of an obscene or pornographic nature.
B. Construction and maintenance.
(1) All sign supports and elements such as angle irons, chains, wires,
and electrical service must be concealed from public view to the
maximum extent possible.
(2) All signs must be maintained in a safe, presentable and structurally
sound condition at all times. Routine maintenance activities do not
require a permit. For the purposes of this provision, routine
maintenance includes, but is not limited to, painting, cleaning,
replacing or repainting sign copy or sign faces within their existing
framework, recladding, and replacing worn or defective parts.
C. Design and effect.
(1) All signs will be designed in a manner that creates the visual effects
intended by the provisions of this article. No sign may:
(a) Simulate the size, lettering, or design of any traffic or railroad
sign in a manner that misleads or confuses the public.
(b) Contain mirrors, strobe lights, or lights similar in nature to
equipment on emergency response vehicles.
(c) Contain ribbons, streamers, spinners or similar moving,
fluttering, or revolving parts; nor may these elements be used
for advertising or attracting attention separately from a sign.
(d) Emit any sound, flame, smoke, particles, visible vapors or
odors.
D. Placement.
(1) Projecting signs must be a minimum of 10 feet from all side lot
lines.
(2) All signs located within the ten-foot front yard setback area will
provide unobstructed vision between three feet and 12 feet,
measured vertically above the mean center line elevation of the
street it abuts. A maximum of two sign support structures, each
with a maximum width of 12 inches, is permitted within this
setback area.
(3) All signs placed within the vision triangle area of corner lots, as
defined in § 535-47, must provide unobstructed vision between 2 1/
2 feet and 10 feet, measured vertically above the mean center line
elevation of the street they abut.
(4) The lowest part of any awning sign or canopy sign must be a
minimum of seven feet above normal grade in areas with
pedestrian traffic, and a minimum of 10 feet above normal grade in
§ 535-106 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-106
1:686
areas with vehicular traffic. All canopy support structures must be
a minimum of two feet from any street or parking lot curb.
(5) No part of a sign may be located in public road right-of-way unless
allowed by Town Board approval based on a finding of unique
circumstances or unusual hardship.
(6) No part of a sign may cover or obstruct any functional door,
doorway, fire escape, fire ladder, standpipe or window in any
manner that prevents ingress or egress.
E. Lighting.
(1) Illuminated signs are allowed in sign districts based on the lighting
source, subject to the dimensional requirements in § 535-107.
Externally illuminated signs are allowed in all sign districts.
Internally illuminated signs, except EMUs, are allowed on lots in
the Neighborhood Center sign district. Internally illuminated signs,
including EMUs, are allowed in the Community Center sign district
and the PDD Planned Development District.
(2) Light trespass.
(a) Illuminance on a lot may not exceed 0.1 footcandle above
ambient levels along any lot line shared with a lot in a Rural
Area sign district or in a Suburban Area sign district.
(b) Illuminance on a lot may not exceed 0.3 footcandle above
ambient levels along any lot line shared with a lot in a
Neighborhood Center sign district.
(c) Illuminance on a lot may not exceed 0.8 footcandle above
ambient levels along any lot line shared with a lot in a
Community Center sign district or along any lot line that abuts
public road frontage.
(3) The Town may require a photometric plan before issuing a permit
for an illuminated sign. This plan must include a point-to-point plot
of footcandle levels throughout the lot at no more than ten-foot
intervals at ground level.
F. Sign type regulations.
(1) Temporary signs. Any temporary sign, whether requiring a permit
or not, may be in use for a maximum of four thirty-day periods
within any consecutive twelve-month period. Limits for size,
number, and height will be as required by § 535-107. All temporary
signs must be removed no later than two days after the event, sale,
lease or construction for which the sign was used. The owner of any
temporary sign found to be in violation of the provisions in this
article will be issued written notice ordering the removal of the
sign, subject to penalty as provided in § 535-71.
§ 535-106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-106
1:687
§ 535-107. On-premises sign regulations.
(2) Political signs. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 535-106F(1), all
political signs are eligible to be used in accordance with § 12.04,
Wis. Stats. Political signs may be no larger than 16 square feet and
must be removed no later than 10 days from the end of the
corresponding election campaign period.
(3) Real estate signs. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 535-106F(1),
all real estate signs are eligible to remain in use until the sale,
rental or lease has been accomplished. All real estate signs must be
removed no later than 10 days after completion of said sale, rental
or lease.
(4) Searchlights. Searchlights are permitted only on lots in the
Community Center sign district. All searchlights must be placed a
minimum of 10 feet from any property line. Searchlights require a
permit and may be in use for a maximum of five days within any
consecutive six-month period.
(5) Inflatable signs. Inflatable signs are permitted only on lots in the
Community Center sign district. All inflatable signs must be placed
a minimum of 10 feet from any property line and must be directly
anchored to the ground with a tether having a maximum length of
five feet. Inflatable signs require a permit and may be in use for a
maximum of five days in any consecutive six-month period.
A. Standards for Rural Area Sign District.
(1) Allowed signs.
Permanent Attached Freestanding
By right • Signs allowed on 1
facade
• Maximum sign size is 9
square feet
• No sign may extend
above the facade it is
attached to
• One sign per public road
frontage
• Maximum sign size is 9
square feet
• Maximum sign height is
4 feet
With
permit
• Signs allowed on a
maximum of 2 facades
• Maximum sign size is
36 square feet
• No sign may extend
above the facade it is
attached to
• One sign per public road
frontage
• Maximum sign size is 36
square feet
• Maximum sign height is
8 feet
§ 535-106 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-107
1:688
TemporaryAttached Freestanding
By right • One sign allowed
• Maximum sign size is 36
square feet
• No sign may extend
above the facade it is
attached to
• Maximum 9 square feet
of total sign area per lot
• Maximum sign size is 4
square feet
• Maximum sign height is
6 feet
With
permit
• One sign allowed
• Maximum sign size is 64
square feet
• No sign may extend
above the facade it is
attached to
• Maximum 16 square feet
of total sign area per lot
• Maximum sign size is 36
square feet
• Maximum sign height is
8 feet
(2) Prohibited signs. No sign may be internally illuminated or include
an EMU.
B. Standards for Suburban Area Sign District.
(1) Allowed signs.
Permanent Attached Freestanding
By right • One sign allowed
• Maximum sign size is 4
square feet
• No sign may extend
above the facade it is
attached to
• One sign allowed
• Maximum sign size is 4
square feet
• Maximum sign height is
4 feet
With
permit
• None allowed • None allowed
§ 535-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-107
1:689
Temporary Attached Freestanding
By right • None allowed • Maximum 9 square feet
of total sign area per lot
• Maximum sign size is 4
square feet
• Maximum sign height is
4 feet
With permit • None allowed • Maximum 16 square
feet of total sign area per
lot
• Maximum sign size is 9
square feet
• Maximum sign height is
4 feet
(2) Prohibited signs. No sign may be internally illuminated or include
an EMU.
C. Standard to Neighborhood Center Sign District:
(1) Allowed signs.
Permanent Attached Freestanding
By right • Signs allowed on 1
facade
• Maximum sign size is 9
square feet
• No sign may extend
above the facade it is
attached to
• One sign allowed per
driveway access
• Maximum sign size is 9
square feet
• Maximum sign height is
4 feet
With permit • Signs allowed on a
maximum of 2 facades
• Maximum sign size is
50 square feet
• No sign may extend
above the facade it is
attached to
Any freestanding signs
allowed by right, plus:
• One sign allowed per
public road frontage
• Maximum sign size is
50 square feet
• Maximum sign height is
8 feet
§ 535-107 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-107
1:690
Temporary Attached Freestanding
By right • One sign allowed
• Maximum sign size is
12 square feet
• No sign may extend
above the facade it is
attached to
• Maximum 36 square
feet of total sign area per
public road frontage
• Maximum sign height is
6 feet
With permit • One sign allowed
• Maximum sign size is
36 square feet
• No sign may extend
above the facade it is
attached to
• Maximum 64 square
feet of total sign area per
public road frontage
• Maximum sign height is
8 feet
(2) Prohibited signs.
(Reserved)
D. Standards for Community Center Sign District.
(1) Allowed signs.
§ 535-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-107
1:691
Permanent Attached Freestanding
By right • Signs allowed on a
maximum of 2 facades
• Maximum sign size is
5% of the corresponding
facade or 36 square feet,
whichever is less
• No sign may extend
above the facade it is
attached to
• One sign allowed per
public road frontage
having a driveway access
• Maximum sign size is 9
square feet
• Maximum sign height is
4 feet
With permit • Maximum sign size is
10% of the
corresponding facade
• No sign may extend
above the facade it is
attached to
Any freestanding signs
allowed by right, plus:
• One sign allowed per
public road frontage
• Maximum sign size is
144 square feet
• Maximum size of
multitenant signs is 200
square feet
• Maximum sign height is
25 feet
Temporary Attached Freestanding
By right • Signs allowed on a
maximum of 2 facades
• Maximum sign size is
5% of the corresponding
facade or 36 square feet,
whichever is less
• No sign may extend
above the facade it is
attached to
• Maximum of 2 signs
allowed per public road
frontage
• Maximum 36 square
feet of total sign area per
public road frontage
• Maximum sign height is
6 feet
With permit • Signs allowed on a
maximum of 2 facades
• Maximum sign size is
5% of the corresponding
facade or 64 square feet,
whichever is less
• No sign may extend
above the facade it is
attached to
• Maximum of 2 signs
allowed per public road
frontage
• Maximum 64 square
feet of total sign area per
public road frontage
• Maximum sign height is
8 feet
§ 535-107 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-107
1:692
§ 535-108. Special exception permit signs.
(2) Prohibited signs.
(Reserved)
E. Standards for lots zoned PDD Planned Development District will be
prescribed in each project approval ordinance.
A. Purpose. To reinforce Zoning Code standards and provide appropriate
regulation of signage for particular types and intensities of land use,
the Town requires approval of a special exception permit for certain
signs.
B. Applicability. The following signs require a special exception permit, in
accordance with the procedures established in Article XI:
(1) All electronic message center signs, as prescribed in § 535-108C.
(2) Multitenant signs that are eligible for a size and height bonus, as
prescribed in § 535-108D.
(3) Roof signs, as prescribed in § 535-108E.
(4) A second freestanding sign on a lot that abuts any accesscontrolled
county, state or federal highway, as prescribed in
§ 535-108F.
(5) Billboards/off-premises advertising signs, as prescribed in
§ 535-109.
C. Electronic message center signs (EMU).
(1) Sign structure. An EMU may constitute one portion of sign area on
an attached or freestanding sign structure, or may comprise the
total sign area of a sign structure. No EMU may exceed the
maximum dimensions of permitted signs for the sign district in
which it is located. No EMU may exceed 144 square feet of size in
any sign district.
(2) Operation. All dynamic frame effects are permitted, except flashing
and animation. All frames must last at least eight seconds.
Transition effects are permitted. All transitions may last no more
than 0.5 second. All EMU signs must be equipped with automatic
light sensors to adjust sign brightness according to the intensity of
ambient light levels and to maintain compliance with the light
trespass standards in this article.
D. Multitenant signs eligible for size and height bonus.
(1) Intent. To provide effective signage for certain large-scale
developments, while preventing visual obstructions caused by an
excessive number and size of signs in the Community Center sign
district, the public interest is better served by allowing a larger and
§ 535-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-108
1:693
taller multitenant sign in exchange for reducing the overall
number, size and/or height of other permitted signs on the same lot
or development area.
(2) Eligibility. Multitenant signs are permitted only in the Community
Center sign district. A lot or development area is eligible to seek a
size and/or height bonus for a multitenant sign under the following
standards and requirements:
(a) No other permitted freestanding signs are allowed along the
same public road frontage on which the multitenant sign is to
be located.
(b) If the lot or development area has additional public road
frontage(s) other than the one on which the multitenant sign is
to be located, that frontage(s) is allowed one freestanding sign
with a maximum size of 100 square feet and a maximum height
of 15 feet.
(c) The lot or development area must meet at least three of the
following five criteria:
[1] Minimum lot size is two acres.
[2] Individually, or in combination with other adjoining lots,
the lot is characterized as a development area.
[3] The lot or development area contains at least 330 linear
feet of public road frontage on one or more sides.
[4] The lot or development area has frontage on more than
one public road.
[5] The lot or development area contains more than one
principal building.
(3) General requirements. A multitenant sign eligible for a size and
height bonus is regulated to a maximum size of 324 square feet,
including any EMU portion of the sign, and to a maximum height of
40 feet.
E. Roof signs. Roof signs are permitted only in the Community Center sign
district. A roof sign may extend a maximum of 10 feet above the roof or
parapet to which it is attached, or no more than an amount equal to
20% of the height of the building, whichever is less.
F. Second freestanding sign (Community Center sign district only). A lot
or development area is eligible to seek a special exception permit for a
second freestanding sign along frontage that abuts any accesscontrolled
county, state or federal highway. A second freestanding sign
is subject to a maximum size of 100 square feet and a maximum height
of 15 feet.
§ 535-108 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-109
1:694
§ 535-109. Billboards/off-premises advertising signs.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section of the Sign Code is to provide
minimum standards to protect the life, health, safety, property, welfare,
convenience, and enjoyment of the general public by regulating and
controlling the location, use, lighting, and maintenance of off-premises
advertising signs. The provisions of this section are intended to
promote the development and maintenance of an attractive visual
environment, while facilitating the communication of messages to the
general public. A further purpose of this section is to mitigate the
aesthetic impact of digital multiple message signs on the visual
environment.
B. Permitted locations. Off-premises advertising signs shall be permitted
only on lots or development areas located in the Community Center sign
district.
C. Existing and reserved off-premises advertising signs. Off-premises
advertising signs (21 total) and associated sign faces (37 total) existing
as of January 21, 2020, are subject to characterization as
nonconforming in accordance with the provisions of § 535-104D.
Additionally, as of January 21, 2020, the Town of Grand Chute hereby
reserves three off-premises advertising signs and six associated sign
faces for future approval and permitting, subject to compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. As of January 21, 2020, including existing
and reserved off premises advertising signs, the maximum number of
such signs permitted within the Town of Grand Chute shall be 24 signs
and 43 associated sign faces. [Amended 1-21-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-01]
D. General requirements for off-premises advertising signs.
(1) No more than one sign, including those with back-to-back sign
faces, is permitted on the same lot. In the case of a sign to be wallmounted,
only one sign face is permitted on the same lot.
(2) Maximum sign size is 385 square feet per sign face if located along
any local, county or state roadway, 675 square feet per sign face if
located on a limited access freeway or expressway, and 300 square
feet if wall-mounted.
(3) Maximum sign height is 30 feet, measured as the distance from the
street center line elevation (at a point perpendicular to the sign) to
the top of the highest attached component of the sign structure.
(4) Minimum front yard setback is 15 feet, measured from the property
line to the outermost physical extension of the sign. No sign may be
erected within 100 feet of a signalized intersection or within 50 feet
of all nonsignalized intersections, unless erected on or against an
existing building.
§ 535-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-109
1:695
(5) Signs may not be located within 200 feet of any residential zoning
district boundaries.
(6) No sign may be built within 800 feet of an existing sign as viewed
from any main travel direction of the same street, with the
exception that signs located along a limited access freeway or
expressway must be spaced a minimum of 1,000 feet apart.
Spacing will be measured in a lineal direction along or across the
street, freeway or expressway.
E. Digital multiple message sign operation. Digital multiple message signs
must meet all the requirements of this section and applicable State of
Wisconsin regulations, including the following:
(1) The time in which the message remains in a fixed position can be no
less than eight seconds before changing to the next message.
(2) The transition time, or the time it takes to change to the next
message, must be one second or less.
(3) No sign shall interfere with the visibility or the operation of any
traffic signal or railroad control device.
(4) Movement, flashing, blinking, scrolling and/or animation on any
part of the sign is prohibited.
(5) Audio speakers and all forms of pyrotechnics are prohibited.
(6) Signs must be equipped with automatic dimming capability, and
light produced by such signs must not exceed 0.3 footcandle over
ambient light levels.
(7) The Town of Grand Chute Public Works Department will be
provided key access to turn off a sign in the case of hazardous
glare, interference with the visibility or effectiveness of a traffic
signal or railroad control device, or other hazard caused by the
sign.
F. Mitigation of digital multiple message signs. Since the maximum
number of off-premises advertising signs permitted in Town of Grand
Chute is capped and fixed at the number in the current sign inventory at
any point in time, and because digital multiple message signs display
more messages than a traditional static billboard, in order to receive
approval for a new multiple message sign, mitigation through reduction
of sign inventory must be provided, as follows:
(1) The mitigation credit is one new digital multiple message sign
permitted in exchange for the permanent removal of two existing
off-premises advertising signs.
(2) Each sign face is considered to meet the definition of a sign for the
purposes of determining the mitigation credit.
§ 535-109 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-109
1:696
§ 535-110. Administration and enforcement.
§ 535-111. through § 535-114. (Reserved)
(3) An existing off-premises advertising sign must be a minimum 200
square feet in size to qualify for a mitigation credit.
(4) The signs to be removed as part of mitigation must be in locations
acceptable to and approved by the Town of Grand Chute as part of
the special exception permit for the new digital multiple message
sign.
(5) A new digital multiple message sign installed in the same location
as an existing nonconforming static billboard may be allowed, upon
approval of a special exception permit, without the necessity of a
variance that might otherwise be required.
(6) A demolition permit is required for the removal of each sign being
removed in mitigation of a new digital multiple message sign. A
sign permit for the new sign will not be issued until all conditions of
the associated demolition permit(s) have been met.
(7) If the new digital multiple message sign is not installed within one
year after the issuance of a sign permit, said permit will be revoked
and the special exception permit for the sign will automatically
expire.
A. The provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced in
accordance with the procedures established in Chapter 1, Article III,
and Chapter 535, Articles VIII and IX, of the Town of Grand Chute
Municipal Code. Any sign constructed or maintained in violation of the
provisions of this article shall be declared a public nuisance within the
meaning set forth in Chapter 398. In addition to any and all penalty
provisions under applicable law, the Town of Grand Chute may bring
separate action to abate the nuisance in the manner set forth in the
Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 535-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-111
1:697

ARTICLE XVI
Telecommunications Antennas and Towers
[Added 7-15-1997]
§ 535-115. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Man-made structures such as light
poles, elevated tanks, electric utility transmission line towers,
nonresidential buildings, and similar alternative-design mounting
structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
ANTENNA — Any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or
television communications through the sending and/or receiving of
electromagnetic waves.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
GOVERNING AUTHORITY — The governing authority of the Town of Grand
Chute.
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance
measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other
structure, even if said highest point is an antenna.
PREEXISTING TOWERS AND ANTENNAS — The meaning set forth in
§ 535-116D of this article.
TOWER — Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for
the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting
lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and
television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers,
cellular telephone towers, PCS towers, alternative tower structures, and the
like.
§ 535-116. Applicability.
A. District height limitations. The requirements set forth in this article
shall govern the location of towers that exceed, and antennas that are
installed at, a height in excess of the height limitations specified for
each zoning district. The height limitations applicable to buildings and
structures shall not apply to towers and antennas; however, in no case
shall any tower (including antennas) exceed a height of 160 feet.
B. Public property. Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased,
or otherwise controlled by the governing authority shall be exempt from
the requirements of this article, provided that a license or lease
authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the governing
authority.
§ 535-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-116
1:699
§ 535-117. General guidelines and requirements.
C. Amateur radio; receive-only antennas. This article shall not govern any
tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under 30 feet in height
and is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station
operator or is used exclusively as a receive-only antenna.
D. Preexisting towers and antennas. Any tower or antenna for which a
permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this article
shall not be required to meet the requirements of this article, other
than the requirements of § 535-117E and F, unless a previous permit
was conditioned upon compliance with new regulations. Any such
towers or antennas shall be referred to in this article as "preexisting
towers" or "preexisting antennas."
A. Purpose; goals. The purpose of this article is to establish general
guidelines for the siting of towers and antennas. The goals of this article
are to:
(1) Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas and
minimize the total number of towers throughout the community;
(2) Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites;
(3) Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the
community is minimal;
(4) Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way
that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and
antennas; and
(5) Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services
to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and
efficiently.
B. Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered
either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use or an existing
structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an
antenna or tower on such lot. For purposes of determining whether the
installation of a tower or antenna complies with district development
regulations, including but not limited to setback requirements, lot
coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions
of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may
be located on leased parcels within such lots. Towers that are
constructed and antennas that are installed in accordance with the
provisions of this article shall not be deemed to constitute the
expansion of a nonconforming use or structure.
C. Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower
shall provide to the Community Development Department an inventory
of all existing towers that are within a three-mile radius of the proposed
§ 535-116 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-117
1:700
site, including specific information about the location, height, and
design of each tower. The Community Development Department may
share such information with other applicants applying for
administrative approvals or special exception permits under this article
or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction
of the governing authority; provided, however, that the Community
Development Department is not, by sharing such information, in any
way representing or warranting that such sites are available or
suitable.232
D. Aesthetics and lighting. The guidelines set forth in this subsection shall
govern the location of all towers and the installation of all antennas
governed by this article; provided, however, that the governing
authority may waive these requirements if it determines that the goals
of this article are better served thereby.
(1) Towers shall maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any
applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to
reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(2) At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures
shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures,
screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to
the natural setting and built environment.
(3) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must
be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with,
the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and
related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
(4) Towers shall not be artificially lighted unless required by the FAA
or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the governing
authority may review the available lighting alternatives and
approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the
surrounding views.
(5) Towers and antennas shall not be used for displaying any
advertising. If FCC rules require that the owner's name be shown
on the tower or antenna, it shall be posted no more than six feet
above the ground on a placard no larger than 1 1/2 square feet.
E. Federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current
standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of
the federal government with the authority to regulate towers and
antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the
owners of the towers and antennas governed by this section shall bring
such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards
and regulations within six months of the effective date of such
232. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-117
1:701
§ 535-118. Permitted uses.
§ 535-119. Special exception permits.
standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance
schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to bring
towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or
antenna by the governing authority at the owner's expense.
F. Building codes and safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity
of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in
compliance with the standards contained in applicable state and local
building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are
published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from
time to time. If, upon inspection, the governing authority concludes that
a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a
danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the
owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower
into compliance with such standards. If the owner fails to bring such
tower into compliance within said 30 days, the governing authority may
remove such tower at the owner's expense.
A. General. The uses listed in this section are deemed to be permitted uses
and shall not require a special exception permit. Nevertheless, all such
uses shall comply with § 535-117 of this article and all other applicable
articles. All permitted uses shall require staff review prior to issuance
of any permit.
B. Specific permitted uses. The following uses are specifically permitted:
(1) Installing an antenna on an existing structure other than a tower
(such as elevated tanks, electric utility transmission line towers, or
nonresidential buildings), so long as said additional antenna adds
no more than 20 feet to the height of said existing structure; and
(2) Installing an antenna on an existing tower, including a preexisting
tower, and further including the placement of additional buildings
or other supporting equipment used in connection with said
antenna, so long as any accessory building does not exceed 150
square feet per user.
A. General. The following provisions shall govern special exception
permits:
(1) If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under § 535-118 of
this article, then a special exception permit shall be required prior
to construction of any tower or the placement of any antenna.
(2) Towers and antennas may only be located in the Industrial (IND),
General Agricultural (AGD), Local Commercial (CL) and Regional
§ 535-117 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-119
1:702
Commercial (CR) Zoning Districts, except that amateur radio
towers or antennas may be considered in residential districts.
(3) If a special exception permit is granted, the governing authority
may impose conditions to the extent the governing authority
concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse
effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties.
(4) Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant
submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified
by a licensed professional engineer.
B. Information required. Each applicant requesting an special exception
permit under this article shall submit a scaled site plan and a scaled
elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other
documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate licensed
professionals, showing the location and dimensions of all
improvements, including information concerning topography,
frequency coverage, tower height requirements, setbacks, drives,
parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and other information
deemed by the governing authority to be necessary to assess
compliance with this article.
C. Factors considered in granting special exception permits. The
governing authority shall consider the following factors in determining
whether to issue a special exception permit, although the governing
authority may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one or
more of these criteria if the governing authority concludes that the
goals of this article are better served thereby:
(1) Height of the proposed tower.
(2) Capacity of the tower structure for additional antenna equipment
to accommodate expansion or to allow for co-location of another
provider's equipment.
(3) Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential
district boundaries.
(4) Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties.
(5) Surrounding topography.
(6) Surrounding tree coverage and foliage.
(7) Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating
visual obtrusiveness.
(8) Proposed ingress and egress.
(9) Availability of suitable existing towers and other structures as
discussed in Subsection D of this section.
§ 535-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-119
1:703
D. Co-location.
(1) Any proposed telecommunication tower and tower site shall be
designed, structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to
accommodate co-location of both the applicant's antenna(s) and
comparable antenna(s) for at least two additional users. Towers
and tower sites shall be designed to allow for future rearrangement
of antennas upon the tower, to accept antennas mounted at varying
heights, and to accommodate supporting buildings and equipment.
(2) The holder of a permit for a tower, excepting amateur radio towers
and sites, shall allow co-location for at least two additional users
and shall not make access to the tower and tower site for the
additional users economically unfeasible. If additional user(s)
demonstrate(s) (through independent arbitrator or other pertinent
means) that the holder of a tower permit has made access to such
tower and tower site economically unfeasible, then the permit shall
become null and void.
(3) No new tower, excepting amateur radio towers and sites, shall be
permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable
satisfaction of the governing authority that no existing tower or
structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna.
Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or
structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may
consist of any of the following:
(a) No existing towers or structures are located within the
geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering
requirements.
(b) Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to
meet the applicant's engineering requirements.
(c) Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural
strength to support the applicant's proposed antenna and
related equipment.
(d) The applicant's proposed antenna would cause
electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing
towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or
structures would cause interference with the applicant's
proposed antenna.
(e) The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the
owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to
adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are
unreasonable. Costs that would exceed new tower
development are presumed to be unreasonable.233
233. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 535-119 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-119
1:704
§ 535-120. Removal of abandoned antennas and towers.
Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of six
months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna
or tower shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from
the governing authority notifying the owner of such abandonment. If such
antenna or tower is not removed within said 90 days, the governing
authority may remove such antenna or tower at the owner's expense. If
there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not
become effective until all users cease using the tower.
(f) The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting
factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
E. Setbacks and separation. The following setbacks and separation
requirements shall apply to all towers and antennas for which a special
exception permit is required; provided, however, that the governing
authority may reduce the standard setbacks and separation
requirements if the goals of this article would be better served thereby:
(1) Towers must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower
from any off-site residential structure.
(2) Towers, guys, and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum
zoning district setback requirements.
(3) In zoning districts other than General Agricultural (AGD),
Industrial (IND), Local Commercial (CL) or Regional Commercial
(CR) Districts, towers over 90 feet in height shall not be located
within 1/4 of a mile of any existing tower that is over 90 feet in
height.
F. Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the landscaping
surrounding towers for which a special exception permit is required;
provided, however, that the governing authority may waive such
requirements if the goals of this article would be better served thereby:
(1) Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a mixture of deciduous
and evergreen trees and shrubs that effectively screens the view of
the tower compound from adjacent residential property. The
standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least four feet
wide outside the perimeter of the compound.
(2) In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal,
the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived altogether.
(3) Existing mature trees growth and natural land forms on the site
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases,
such as towers sited on large wooded lots, natural growth around
the property perimeter may be sufficient buffer.
§ 535-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-120
1:705

ARTICLE XVII
Freestanding Solar Energy Systems
[Added 3-4-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-04]
§ 535-121. Permit required.
No person, firm, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or any
other entity shall be allowed to construct a solar energy system, as defined
in § 13.48(2)(h)(l)(g), Wis. Stats., within the Town of Grand Chute without
first obtaining a permit as herein required.
§ 535-122. Application for permit.
Every application for a permit shall be made upon a form furnished by
the Community Development Department and verified and shall contain the
name, place of residence, age, and occupation of the applicant, the purpose
for which a permit is desired, and detailed plans for the installation and
location of the solar energy system. Such plans shall include, but shall not
necessarily be limited to, a map of the exact location of the solar energy
system, a narrative explanation or description of the size and nature of the
solar energy system, as well as detailed specifications of the solar energy
system sufficient to make any determination necessary under § 535-123
below.
§ 535-123. Investigation; action on permit application.
Upon receipt of each such application, the Community Development
Director shall immediately institute such investigation of the applicant's
detailed plans and specifications for the solar energy system, and may
involve other departments of the Town, consultants, and/or experts, as
useful or necessary. The Community Development Director shall decide
whether to approve, deny, or conditionally approve an application; however,
an application may only be denied or conditionally approved in accordance
with the provisions of § 66.0401, Wis. Stats. In addition, and in accordance
with § 66.0401, no permit application shall be approved for any solar energy
system unless the following design criteria are met:
A. The height of any freestanding solar energy system and/or attached
accessory may not exceed the distance from the base or any projection
of the solar energy system to the nearest adjoining property line.
B. The height of any solar energy system and/or attached accessory which
is affixed to or made part of a principal building located on any property
may not exceed the height of the principal building structure.
C. A solar energy system shall be located in the rear yard.
D. The applicant understands that no adjoining property owner shall be
required to remove structures or vegetation that may block sunlight to
the solar energy system.
§ 535-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-123
1:707
§ 535-124. Permit application fee.
The permit application fee shall be payable according to the Town Building
Permit Fee Schedule.
E. Neighbors within a three-hundred-foot radius of a proposed solar unit
being installed are to be notified by the Town of the installation and this
cost will become part of the permit cost.
§ 535-123 GRAND CHUTE CODE § 535-124
1:708
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1997 Code to 2011 Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. II.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Section From 1997 Code Location in 2011 Code
Ch. 1, Composition and Duties of
General Town Government
§§ 1.01, 1.02, 1.04, 1.05 and 1.06 Ch. 110
§ 1.03 (boards) Ch. 16
§ 1.07 (records) Ch. 135, Art. I
Ch. 2, Town Board Meetings
§ 2.01 Ch. 154
§§ 2.02 to 2.08 Ch. 150
Ch. 3, Police and Civil Defense
§§ 3.01 and 3.02 Ch. 123
§ 3.03 Ch. 128
§ 3.04 NLP; see Ch. 45
§ 3.05 (county ordinance) Ch. A542
§ 3.06 REP
Ch. 4, Traffic Code and Snowmobile
Regulations
Ch. 515
Ch. 5, Fire Department - Prevention -
Protection
§ 5.01 NLP; see Ch. 61
§§ 5.02 to 5.10 and 5.20 Ch. 291
Ch. 6, Subdivision Control Ordinance Ch. 475
Ch. 7, Public Safety/Public Order
Ordinance
§§ 7.01 to 7.06, 7.08, 7.09, 7.11,
7.13 to 7.15, 7.18, 7.22, 7.23, 7.235,
7.25 and 7.28
Ch. 415
§ 7.07 Ch. 185, Art. I
§ 535-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:709
Chapter/Section From 1997 Code Location in 2011 Code
§§ 7.12, 7.19 and 7.20 Ch. 335, Art. II
§ 7.16 Ch. 197, Arts. II and III; Ch. 335,
Art. II; Ch. 415
§§ 7.10 and 7.17 REP
§ 7.21 Ch. 241, Art. II
§ 7.24 Ch. 310
§ 7.26 Ch. 197, Art. II
§ 7.27 Ch. 224
§ 7.29 Ch. 197, Art. III
Ch. 8, Public Nuisances Ch. 398
Ch. 9, Licenses and Permits
§§ 9.01 and 9.16 (liquor) Ch. 335, Art. I
§ 9.02 (direct sellers) Ch. 259
§ 9.03 (cigarettes) Ch. 241, Art. I
§ 9.04 (animals) Ch. 197, Art. I
§ 9.05 (junk dealers) Ch. 349
§ 9.06 (amusements) Ch. 190
§ 9.07 (tracks) Ch. 492
§ 9.08 (fireworks) Ch. 295
§ 9.09 (dances) Ch. 252
§§ 9.10 and 9.19 (licenses generally) REP
§ 9.11 (cable television) NLP; see Ch. 230
§ 9.12 (penalty) Chs. 190, 197, Art. I, 241, Art. I,
252, 295, 335, Art. I, 349, 456,
480 and 492
§ 9.13 (bicycles) REP
§ 9.14 (open containers - same as
7.19)
REP
§ 9.15 (escorts and escort services) Ch. 279
§ 9.17 (taxicabs) Ch. 480
§ 9.18 (special events) Ch. 456
§ 9.20 (pawnbrokers) Ch. 412
Ch. 10, Solid Waste and Garbage
Disposal
Ch. 520, Art. I
Ch. 11, Mobile Home and Mobile
Home Park Regulations
Ch. 382
§ DT-1 GRAND CHUTE CODE § DT-1
1:710
Chapter/Section From 1997 Code Location in 2011 Code
Ch. 12, Minimum Standards Housing
Code
Ch. 317
Ch. 13, Town Building Code Ch. 220, Art. I
Ch. 14, Building Regulations Ch. 220, Art. II
Ch. 15, Public Utilities Ch. 440, Art. I
Ch. 16, Public Works
§§ 16.01 to 16.10 Ch. 468
§ 16.11 (trees) Ch. 497
Ch. 17, Finance Ch. 57, Art. I
Ch. 18, Construction and Effect of
Ordinances
§§ 18.01 and 18.02(1) Ch. 1, Art. I
§§ 18.02(2), 18.03, 18.04 and 18.05 NLP; see Ch. 1, Art. III
Ch. 19, Municipal Justice and Court Ch. 28
Ch. 20, Public Parks Ch. 409
Ch. 21, Rules, Rates and Regulations
for Water Users
Ch. 523
Ch. 22, Stormwater Utility - Sanitary
District No. 3
Ch. 463, Art. I
Ch. 23, Illicit Discharge and
Connection Ordinance
Ch. 440, Art. II
Ch. 24 (number not used) —
Ch. 25, Erosion and Sediment Control
Ordinance
Ch. 275
Ch. 26, Stormwater Management
Ordinance
Ch. 463, Art. II
Ch. 27, Zoning Ch. 535
Ch. 28, Uniform Forfeitures/Bond
Schedules
NI
Ch. 29, Special Assessment Policy Ch. 57, Art. II
Ch. 30, Impact Fees Ch. 330
Ch. 31, Comprehensive Plan Ch. 246
Ch. 32, Property Maintenance Code Ch. 423
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:711
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2008-01 1-15-2008 Fires and fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 291
2008-02 2-5-2008 Moratorium NCM
2008-03 2-21-2008 Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2016-13
2008-04 3-4-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
2008-05 Void
2008-06 3-4-2008 Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2016-13
2008-07 Void
2008-08 9-16-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
2008-09 10-7-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
2008-10 11-6-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 515
2008-11 11-18-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
2008-12 12-16-2008 Fires and fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 291
2008-13 12-16-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 515
2009-01 1-20-2009 Impact fees amendment Ch. 330
2009-02 2-3-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 515
2009-03 2-3-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
2009-04 2-3-2009 Pawnbrokers and
secondhand dealers
Ch. 412
2009-05 3-3-2009 Finance and taxation
amendment
Ch. 57, Art. I
2009-06 2-19-2009 Nuisances amendment Ch. 398
2009-07 2-19-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
2009-08 2-19-2009 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 415
2009-09 4-9-2009 Fires and fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 291
2009-10 3-17-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
§ DL-1 GRAND CHUTE CODE § DL-1
1:712
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2009-11 5-19-2009 Fires and fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 291
2009-12 6-2-2009 Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2016-13
2009-13 9-1-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 515
2009-14 9-1-2009 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 415
2009-15 Void
2009-16 10-20-2009 Sewer use amendment Ch. 440, Art. I
2009-17 12-15-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
2009-18 12-15-2009 Comprehensive Plan Ch. 246
2009-19 12-15-2009 Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2016-13
2010-01 1-5-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 515
2010-02 1-5-2010 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 468
2010-03 Void
2010-04 Void
2010-05 4-20-2010 Property maintenance Ch. 423
2010-06 6-1-2010 Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages
licensing amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2016-13
2010-07 6-15-2010 Nuisances amendment Ch. 398
2010-08 8-5-2010 Animals at special events Superseded by
Ord. No. 2011-34
2010-09 8-17-2010 False alarms Ch. 185, Art. I
2010-10 8-17-2010 Municipal Court
amendment
Ch. 28
2010-11 10-5-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
2010-12 10-5-2010 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 468
2010-13 9-7-2010 Deposit Schedule
amendment
NCM
2010-14 9-7-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 515
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:713
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2010-15 9-21-2010 Town Building Code
amendment; numbering of
buildings
Ch. 220, Art. I;
Ch. 224
2010-16 10-19-2010 Purchase or possession of
cigarettes and tobacco
products by minors
amendment
Ch. 241, Art. II
2010-17 11-4-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 515
2010-18 11-4-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 515
2010-19 11-16-2010 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 415
2010-20 11-16-2010 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 415
2010-21 11-16-2010 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 415
2010-22 11-16-2010 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 415
2010-23 12-21-2010 Official Map amendment NCM
2010-24 12-7-2010 Escorts and escort
services
Ch. 279
2010-25 12-21-2010 Fires and fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 291
2011-01 1-18-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2011-02 1-18-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
2011-03 1-18-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
2011-04 1-18-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
2011-05 1-18-2011 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 415
2011-06 2-1-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 515
2011-07 2-17-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2011-08 2-17-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
2011-09 4-7-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
2011-10 4-7-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2011-11 5-3-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2011-12 4-7-2011 Records retention and
destruction
Ch. 135, Art. I
§ DL-1 GRAND CHUTE CODE § DL-1
1:714
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2011-13 5-17-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2011-14 6-21-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
2011-15 6-21-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
2011-16 6-21-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
2011-17 5-17-2011 Appointing Clerk to Board
of Review
NCM
2011-18 6-21-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
2011-19 6-21-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
2011-20 7-7-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2011-21 7-7-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2011-22 8-4-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2011-23 8-16-2011 Deposit Schedule
amendment
NCM
2011-24 9-6-2011 Police canines Superseded by
Ord. No. 2011-34
2011-25 10-18-2011 Attaching property NCM
2011-26 11-1-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2011-27 11-15-2011 Municipal Court
amendment
Ch. 28
2011-28 Voided
2011-29 12-20-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2011-30 12-20-2011 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. II
2011-31 12-20-2011 Official Map amendment NCM
2011-32 Voided
2011-33 12-20-2011 Nuisances amendment Ch. 398
2011-34 12-20-2011 Animals Ch. 197
2011-35 12-20-2011 General penalty Ch. 1, Art. III
2011-36 12-20-2011 Abandoned property
amendment
Ch. 128
2011-37 12-20-2011 Nuisances amendment Ch. 398
2011-38 12-20-2011 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 415
2011-39 Voided
2011-40 12-20-2011 Direct sellers, auctions
and closeout sales
amendment
Ch. 259
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:715
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2011-41 12-20-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 515
2011-42 12-20-2011 Municipal Court
amendment
Ch. 28
2012-01 6-19-2012 Hotels and motels Ch. 315
2012-02 1-3-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2012-03 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2012-04 3-6-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 515
2012-05 3-20-2012 Town Board amendment;
Town Meeting amendment
Chs. 150; 154
2012-06 3-20-2012 Solid waste and garbage
disposal amendment
Ch. 520, Art. I
2012-07 5-1-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2012-08 5-15-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2012-09 Not adopted
2012-10 Not adopted
2012-11 7-3-2012 Fires and fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 291
2012-12 9-4-2012 Finance and taxation:
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 57, Art. I
2012-13 11-8-2012 Official Map amendment NCM
2012-14 12-4-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2012-15 12-18-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
2012-16 12-4-2012 Water amendment Ch. 523
2012-17 12-4-2012 Deposit Schedule
amendment
NCM
2012-18 12-4-2012 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 415
2012-19 12-4-2012 Fee Schedule amendment NCM
2012-20 12-4-2012 Fires and fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 291
2012-21 1-3-2013 Official Map amendment NCM
2012-22 12-18-2012 Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages:
licensing amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2016-13
§ DL-1 GRAND CHUTE CODE § DL-1
1:716
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2013-01 1-15-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 515
2013-02 2-5-2013 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 475
2013-03 2-5-2013 Fee Schedule amendment NCM
2013-04 3-5-2013 Trees and shrubs
amendment
Ch. 497
2013-05 3-5-2013 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 468
2013-06 3-5-2013 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 475
2013-07 3-5-2013 Trees and shrubs
amendment
Ch. 497
2013-08 3-5-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
2013-09 4-4-2013 Deposit Schedule
amendment
NCM
2013-10 5-7-2013 Fires and fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 291
2013-11 5-21-2013 Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages:
licensing amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2016-13
2013-12 6-4-2013 Hotels and motels
amendment
Ch. 315
2013-13 7-16-2013 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 415
2013-14 7-16-2013 Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages:
licensing amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2016-13
2013-15 7-16-2013 Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages:
offenses involving
alcoholic beverages
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2016-13
2013-16 9-3-2013 Hotels and motels
amendment
Ch. 315
2013-17 9-17-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2013-18 10-15-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2013-19 Not adopted
2013-20 12-17-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2013-21 12-17-2013 Official Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:717
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2013-22 12-17-2013 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 246
2014-01 4-3-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2014-02 2-4-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2014-03 2-4-2014 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 423
2014-04 3-4-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
2014-05 2-4-2014 Deposit Schedule
amendment
NCM
2014-06 2-20-2014 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 415
2014-07 4-3-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 515
2014-08 6-3-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2014-09 9-2-2014 Water amendment Ch. 523
2014-10 8-19-2014 Boards, commissions and
committees amendment
Ch. 16
2014-11 9-16-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2014-12 10-21-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2014-13 10-21-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2014-14 10-7-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 515
2014-15 10-7-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 515
Res. 11-6-2014 Creation of Tax Increment
District No. 1
NCM
2015-01 2-19-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
2015-02 3-17-2015 Water amendment Ch. 523
2015-03 3-17-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2015-04 4-23-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 535
2015-05 4-9-2015 Fee Schedule amendment NCM
2015-06 4-23-2015 Nuisances amendment;
property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 398; Ch. 423
2015-07 4-23-2015 Special events amendment Ch. 456
2015-08 5-19-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 515
2015-09 6-2-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 GRAND CHUTE CODE § DL-1
1:718
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2015-10 6-2-2015 Boards, commissions and
committees amendment
Ch. 16
2015-11 7-21-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2015-12 8-6-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2015-13 8-6-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 515
2015-14 9-1-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 515
2015-15 10-6-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2015-16 10-6-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 515
2015-17 11-3-2015 Finance and taxation:
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 57, Art. I
2015-18 12-1-2015 Fee Schedule amendment NCM
2015-19 12-15-2015 Official Map amendment NCM
2016-01 1-5-2016 Officers and employees
amendment
Ch. 110
2016-02 3-1-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2016-03 3-1-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2016-04 4-21-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2016-05 5-3-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2016-06 Number not used
2016-07 Number not used
2016-08 11-1-2016 Nuisances amendment;
property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 398; Ch. 423
2016-09 8-4-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2016-10 8-16-2016 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 409
2016-11 10-18-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2016-12 10-18-2016 Special events amendment Ch. 456
2016-13 12-18-2016 Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages
Ch. 335
2016-14 11-15-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2017-01 1-3-2017 Fee Schedule amendment NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:719
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2017-02 1-17-2017 Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages
amendment
Ch. 335
2017-03 3-21-2017 Boards, commissions and
committees amendment
Ch. 16
2017-04 4-20-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2017-05 6-20-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 515
2017-06 7-18-2017 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 409
2017-07 7-18-2017 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 475
2017-08 7-18-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 515
2017-09 7-18-2017 Building construction:
building regulations
amendment
Ch. 220, Art. II
2017-10 8-3-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2017-11 8-3-2017 Official Map amendment NCM
2017-12 9-5-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2017-13 9-5-2017 Erosion and sediment
control amendment
Ch. 275
2017-14 9-5-2017 Stormwater utility and
management: stormwater
management amendment
Ch. 463, Art. II
2017-15 10-3-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 515
2017-16 11-21-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2017-17 12-19-2017 Fees Schedule amendment NCM
2018-01 1-16-2018 Elections: Municipal Board
of Absentee Ballot
Canvassers
Ch. 40, Art. I
2018-02 2-22-2018 Official Map Amendment NCM
2018-03 2-22-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
2018-04 3-6-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
2018-05 3-20-2018 Property Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 423
2018-06 3-20-2018 Nuisances Amendment Ch. 398
2018-07 3-20-2018 Nuisances Amendment Ch. 398
§ DL-1 GRAND CHUTE CODE § DL-1
1:720
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2018-09 4-17-2018 Finance and Taxation:
General Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 57, Art. I
2018-10 6-5-2018 Nuisances Amendment Ch. 398
2018-11 7-17-2018 Appointment NCM
2018-12 8-9-2018 Official Map Amendment NCM
2018-13 7-17-2018 Zoning Classification of
Property
NCM
2018-14 Not Adopted
2018-15 7-17-2018 Parks and Recreation
Amendment
Ch. 409
2018-16 7-17-2018 Intoxicating Liquor and
Fermented Malt Beverages
Amendment
Ch. 335
2018-17 8-9-2018 Intoxicating Liquor and
Fermented Malt Beverages
Amendment
Ch. 335
2018-18 Not Adopted
2018-19 9-18-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
2018-20 10-16-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
2018-21 12-4-2018 Fires and Fire Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 291
2018-22 11-20-2018 Official Map Amendment NCM
2018-23 12-18-2018 Fee Schedule Amendment NCM
2019-01 1-3-2019 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
2019-02 2-5-2019 Fees NCM
2019-03 2-19-2019 Finance and Taxation:
State Property Tax Credits
Ch. 57, Art. III
2019-04 3-19-2019 Nuisances Amendment Ch. 398
2019-05 4-16-2019 Cigarettes and Tobacco
Products: Purchase or
Possession by Minors
Amendment
Ch. 241, Art. II
2019-06 6-18-2019 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
2019-07 7-16-2019 Intoxicating Liquor and
Fermented Malt Beverages
Amendment
Ch. 335
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:721
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2019-08 10-1-2019 Finance and
Taxation: General
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 57, Art.
I
21
2019-09 Not Adopted 21
2019-10 Not Adopted 21
2019-11 11-19-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 21
2019-12 12-3-2019 Peace and Good
Order Amendment
Ch. 415 21
2019-13 12-3-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 21
2019-14 12-17-2019 Fee Schedule
Amendment
NCM 21
2020-01 1-21-2020 Zoning Amendment Ch. 535 22
2020-02 1-21-2020 Official Map NCM 22
2020-03 1-21-2020 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 515 22
2020-04 1-21-2020 Nuisances
Amendment
Ch. 398 22
2020-05 3-24-2020 Peace and Good
Order Amendment
Ch. 415 22
2020-06 3-24-2020 Intoxicating Liquor
and Fermented Malt
Beverages:
Licensing
Amendment
Ch. 335 22
§ DL-1 GRAND CHUTE CODE § DL-1
1:722