Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
General Construction; Definitions
[Adopted as § 1.002 of the 2000 Code; amended in its entirety at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III)]
§ 1-1. General construction; word usage.
§ 1-2. Definitions.
As used in this Code, the following specific terms shall be defined as follows:
A. Terms used in this Code, unless specifically defined in this Code, have
the same meanings prescribed by the Wisconsin Statutes for the same
terms, or if not defined in this Code or the statutes, then their usual and
customary meanings.
B. In the construction of this Code, the following rules shall be observed
unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent
of the ordinance:
(1) Wisconsin Statutes. All references to "Wisconsin Statutes" or "Wis.
Stats." mean the Wisconsin Statutes as of the adoption of this Code
and as they may be amended from time to time.
(2) Gender, singular and plural. Every word in this Code imparting the
masculine gender may extend and be applied to females as well as
males, and every word imparting the singular number only may
extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one
person or thing, provided that these rules of construction shall not
be applied to any provision which contains any express language
excluding such construction or when the subject matter or context
of such provision may be repugnant thereto.
(3) Person. The word "person" extends and applies to natural persons,
firms, corporations, associations, partnerships or other bodies
politic and to all entities capable of being sued, unless plainly
inapplicable.
(4) Acts of agents. When a provision requires an act to be done which
may by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such
requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done
by an authorized agent.
(5) Tense. The use of any verb in the present tense shall not preclude
the interpretation of the verb in the future tense, where
appropriate.
(6) Shall and may. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is
discretionary.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:3
ACT — Includes the failure or omission to do something which should have
been done, or which was required to be done, under the circumstances then
existing.
BOARD — The Village Board of the Village of Hobart, and similarly the title
of any other official, board or commission shall refer to that of the Village of
Hobart unless otherwise stated.
CODE — The Village of Hobart Code (this Code).
COUNTY — Brown County.
ORDINANCE — An ordinance of the Village of Hobart and all amendments
thereto included in this Code; and any ordinance passed and published but
not yet included in this Code.
PERSON — Any natural individual, firm, partnership, trust, estate, club,
association or corporation. As applied to partnerships or associations, the
term includes the partners or members thereof; as applied to corporations,
the term includes the officers, agents or employees thereof who are
responsible for the act referred to.
STATE — State of Wisconsin.
VILLAGE — Village of Hobart, Brown County, Wisconsin.
§ 1-2 HOBART CODE § 1-2
1:4
ARTICLE II
General Penalty
[Adopted as §§ 1.005, 1.006 and 1.12 of the 2000 Code]
§ 1-3. Penalties.
A. Standard penalty. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the
Code for any particular provision, section or chapter, any person
violating any provision of this Code or any rule or regulation adopted or
issued in pursuance thereof, or any provision of any code adopted here
by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of not less
than $20 nor more than $10,000 and the cost of prosecution. In default
of immediate payment of such forfeiture and costs, such person shall be
committed to the Brown County Jail until such forfeiture and costs are
paid. Every commitment shall limit the duration of such imprisonment
to a definite term not exceeding 90 days.
B. Each day a violation. Each act of violation, and every day upon which a
violation occurs or continues, constitutes a separate offense.
C. Applicability. The penalty provided by this section and/or any section of
this Code applies to the amendment of any section of this Code and any
code adopted herein by reference to which the penalty relates whether
or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinances, unless
otherwise provided in the amendment.
D. Reference to sections. Reference to any section of this Code shall be
understood also to refer to and include the penalty section relating
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
E. Failure of officers to perform duties. The failure of any officer or
employee of the Village to perform any official duty imposed by this
Code shall not subject such officer or employee to the penalty imposed
for violation of this Code, unless a penalty is specifically provided.
F. Bond schedule, non-traffic violations. The Bond Schedule for non-traffic
violations shall be as set forth in Chapter 14, Citations.
G. Court authority to impose alternative juvenile dispositions and
sanctions.
(1) For a juvenile adjudged to have violated an ordinance, a court is
authorized to impose any of the dispositions listed in §§ 938.343
and 938.344, Wis. Stats., in accordance with the provisions of those
statutes.
(2) For a juvenile adjudged to have violated an ordinance who violates
a condition of a dispositional order of the court under § 938.343 or
938.344, Wis. Stats., the municipal court is authorized to impose
any of the sanctions listed in § 938.355(6)(d), Wis. Stats., in
accordance with the provisions of those statutes.
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:5
§ 1-4. Responsibility for acts.
Every person concerned in the commission of any act prohibited by this
Code, whether he directly commits the act, or in any way directs,
encourages, advises, aids, or abets its commission, may be prosecuted and
on conviction thereof is subject to punishment the same as if he had directly
committed such act.
(3) This section is enacted under the authority of § 938.17(2)(cm), Wis.
Stats.
§ 1-3 HOBART CODE § 1-4
1:6
ARTICLE III
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
§ 1-5. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to § 66.0103, Wis. Stats., the ordinances of the Village of Hobart
of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Village Board of the
Village of Hobart, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and
sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 295, are
hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Village
of Hobart," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-6. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-7. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of the ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of the
Code by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances
and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall
date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinances.
§ 1-8. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code has been filed in the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer
and shall remain there for use and examination by the public for at least
two weeks, in accordance with § 66.0103, Wis. Stats., and until final action
is taken on this ordinance, and, if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy
shall be certified to by the Village Clerk-Treasurer, and such certified copy
shall remain on file in the office of said Village Clerk-Treasurer to be made
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-9. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Village Board
to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such
Code so that reference to the "Code of the Village of Hobart" shall be
understood and intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments
or supplements. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or
supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be inserted
in the Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-10
1:7
§ 1-10. Publication; filing.
The Clerk-Treasurer of the Village of Hobart, pursuant to law, shall cause to
be published, in the manner required by law, a notice of the adoption of this
ordinance. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be maintained in the office of
the Clerk-Treasurer for inspection by the public at all times during regular
office hours. The publication of notice of the enactment of this ordinance,
coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the
public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication
of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-11. Code to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk-Treasurer, or someone authorized
and directed by the Clerk-Treasurer, to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the Code required to be filed in the Clerk-Treasurer's office for use by
the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent
to the effective date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically
as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such changes or new ordinances are included as
supplements to said Code book.
§ 1-12. Sale of Code.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk-Treasurer or an authorized agent of the Clerk-Treasurer upon the
payment of a fee to be set by the Village Board. The Clerk-Treasurer may
also arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
The Clerk-Treasurer may also arrange for a copy of the Code to be made
available on the Village's website or other Internet service.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Village
of Hobart to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a penalty as
provided in § 1-3 of the Code.
§ 1-14. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be
deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or
parts thereof. If any provision of this Code or the application thereof to any
person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this Code and the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected thereby.
§ 1-10 HOBART CODE § 1-15
1:8
§ 1-15. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-16. Repealer.
§ 1-17. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-16 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Village of Hobart which is
not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to
remain in full force and effect.
B. The following provisions of the 2000 Village Code are hereby
specifically repealed:
(1) Sec. 1.10, Creation of Police Committee and Police Department.
(2) Sec. 1.12, Municipal Court authority to impose alternative juvenile
dispositions and sanctions.
(3) Sec. 3.815, Smoking in Public Places.
(4) Sec. 3.835, Nonsmoking Regulations.
(5) Sec. 10.0, Public Sanitation.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to June 17, 2014.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:9
§ 1-18. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the Village's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
J. The annexation or dedication of property or approval of preliminary or
final subdivision plats.
K. Ordinances providing for local improvements or assessing taxes or
special assessments therefor.
L. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
N. Any ordinances adopting or amending the Zoning Map or otherwise
rezoning property.
O. Any charter ordinances.
P. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing or amending a
specific fee amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the
Village.
Q. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing or amending a
deposit or bond schedule.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing or amending
rates or charges for water or sewer service.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for publication as the Code
of the Village of Hobart, no changes in the meaning or intent of such
ordinances have been made, except as provided for in Subsections B
and C hereof. Certain grammatical changes and other minor
nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said pieces of
legislation. It is the intention of the Village Board that all such changes
be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
B. The following changes are made throughout the Code:
§ 1-17 HOBART CODE § 1-18
1:10
(1) References in the Code to the Village "Clerk" or Village "Treasurer"
are changed to Village "Clerk-Treasurer."
(2) The term "Chairman" is changed to "Chairperson."
(3) References to the "Health Officer" are deleted.
(4) "Plan Commission" and "Planning Commission" are changed to
"Planning and Zoning Commission."
(5) References to the "Building Inspector" are changed to "Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector."
(6) References to the "Zoning Administrator" are changed to "Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector."
(7) "Zoning Board of Appeals," "Board of Zoning Appeals," "Board of
Adjustment" and "Board of Adjustment/Appeals" are changed to
"Board of Appeals."
(8) In Chapter 150, references to the "Hobart Utility District" are
changed to "Village of Hobart."
(9) In Chapter 163, Fees, Article II, Fee in Lieu of Land Dedication,
instances of "Park Board" are changed to "Village Board."
(10) In Chapter 177, instances of "solid-fuel-fired heating device" are
amended to add "outdoor" preceding such term.
(11) In Chapter 288, instances of "Plan Commission" are changed to
"Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector," except that instances in
§ 288-7 are not affected.
(12) In Chapter 293, instances of "special exception" and "special
exception permit" are changed to "conditional use" and
"conditional use permit," respectively.
(13) In Chapter 295, Article XXXII, instances of "governing authority"
are changed to "Village Board."
C. The amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A attached
hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become effective
upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter and section number
references are to the ordinances as they have been renumbered and
appear in the Code.)1
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-18C, the chapters, parts and sections that were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, repealed) 1-6-2015 by Ord. No.
01-2015." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in
the Village offices.
§ 1-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-19
1:11
§ 1-19. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as required
by law.
§ 1-19 HOBART CODE § 1-19
1:12
Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT; ORGANIZATION OF
VILLAGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrator — See Ch. 7.
Municipal Court — See Ch. 26.
Elections — See Ch. 33.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 54.
Village Board — See Ch. 82.
§ 5-1. Organization of Village.
The acting Village Board of the Village of Hobart does ordain as follows,
pursuant to § 66.0101, Wis. Stats., and any other applicable statutes.
§ 5-2. Village Board.
§ 5-3. Meetings. [Amended 11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-23]
A. The Village of Hobart hereby, pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 61.195 and
66.0101, elects not to be governed by those provisions of §§ 61.19;
61.20, and 61.23, Wis. Stats., and any other provision of Chapter 61 of
the Wisconsin Statutes which are inconsistent with this section.
B. Constituted. The Village Board shall consist of the Village President and
four Trustees, all of whom shall be elected from the Village at large.
C. Term of office.
(1) The four Trustees elected at the first election shall serve two-year
terms.
(2) The Village President shall be elected for a three-year term of
office.
A. Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the Village Board shall be held
at least twice during each calendar month, on such day, at such hour
and at such place as the Board shall designate.
B. Special meetings.
(1) Special meetings of the Village Board may be called by two
members of the Village Board, in writing, filed with the Clerk-
Treasurer at least 48 hours prior to the time specified for such
meeting. The Clerk-Treasurer shall immediately notify the
President and each Trustee of the time and purpose of such
meeting by causing a written notice thereof to be personally
delivered to each Board member, if he or she can be found, or, if he
§ 1-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3
1:13
or she cannot be found, then by leaving a copy of such notice at the
home of such person in the presence of an adult member of his or
her family. If the period between the time the meeting is called and
the time fixed for such meeting makes it not practicable to give 48
hours' notice, the longest possible notice of such meeting shall be
given each member by the Clerk-Treasurer, and the notice shall be
signed by at least two members of the Board. The Clerk-Treasurer
shall cause an affidavit showing service of such notice as herein
provided to be filed in his or her office prior to the time fixed for
such special meeting.
(2) Appropriate public notice of any such meeting shall be given
according to Wisconsin Statutes.
C. Village Board meeting agendas. The Village President, in cooperation
with the Village Administrator and/or Clerk-Treasurer, shall be
responsible for coordinating agendas for Village Board meetings. Any
Trustee wishing to add an agenda item to a Village Board agenda shall
first consult with the Village President regarding such request. The
Village President shall have 48 hours to notify the Clerk-Treasurer, in
writing, as to the language of the requested agenda item. A copy of the
same shall be delivered to the requesting Trustee. In the event the
President fails to act on said agenda request, any two Trustees may file,
in writing, with the Clerk-Treasurer, the specific language to be placed
on the agenda. The Clerk-Treasurer shall include the agenda language
on the agenda at the time of public notice of the meeting. Any additional
agenda item(s) must be submitted to the Clerk-Treasurer, by the Village
President or any two Trustees, in a timely manner such that it will
satisfy public notice requirements.
D. Adjournments. The Board may, by a majority vote of those present, but
by not less than three affirmative votes, adjourn from time to time to a
specific date and hour.
E. Open meetings. All meetings shall comply with the notice and other
requirements of the Wisconsin Open Meeting Law.
F. Participation via telecommunications.
(1) In the event that a regular or special meeting of the Village Board is
scheduled and a Trustee cannot be physically present at the
meeting due to prior commitments (remote trustee), the Trustee
may participate via telecommunications under the following
conditions:
(a) There is a quorum of other Trustees physically present in the
Board Room at the time that the meeting is called. Under no
circumstances shall attendance via telecommunications be
used to constitute a quorum.
(b) The Trustee who desires to attend a meeting via
telecommunications shall contact the Village Clerk-Treasurer
§ 5-3 HOBART CODE § 5-3
1:14
§ 5-4. Presiding officer. [Amended 3-5-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-04]
or the Administrator as soon as practically possible to advise
them that his or her presence at a meeting will be physically
impossible.
(c) The Clerk-Treasurer will make arrangements to have the
telephone handset available for use in the Board Room.
(d) The handset or other communication device must be placed in
the Board Room so that the member not physically present can
hear and be heard by all who are physically present including
the members of the public.
(e) Trustees attending via telecommunications shall attend the
entire meeting and may not attend for certain selected items of
interest and then disconnect.
(f) Trustees attending via telecommunications may participate in
debate the same as any other Trustee and vote at the
appropriate time via roll call. To avoid confusion, the President
or designated chair will ask the remote Trustee, prior to any
votes taken, for his or her comments on a particular issue.
(g) The Trustees attending the meeting via telecommunications
shall initiate the contact with the Clerk from wherever their
physical presence may be at least 10 minutes prior to the
meeting to ensure a timely start of the board meeting.
(h) Failure to establish the connection at that time shall result in
the remote Trustee not being able to attend the meeting.
(i) Any fees associated with this contact shall be at the remote
Trustee's expense.
(2) A remote Trustee shall not be permitted to participate in a closed
session of the Board, and must be disconnected from the
telecommunications immediately after the Board votes to enter into
a closed session. The remote Trustee shall not permitted to
participate in any action, if any, when the Board adjourns to open
session following a closed session, and prior to adjournment.
A. Designated. The Village President shall preside. In the absence of the
President, the Clerk-Treasurer shall call the meeting to order and the
Trustees present shall elect one of their members as the temporary
presiding officer. If the President appears while the meeting is in
session, the temporary presiding officer shall vacate the chair.
B. Duties. The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum, decide
all questions of order and conduct the proceedings of the meeting in
accordance with the parliamentary rules contained in the latest revision
§ 5-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-4
1:15
§ 5-5. Roll call; quorum. [Amended 11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-22]
§ 5-6. Clerk pro tem.
In the absence of the Clerk-Treasurer, a Deputy Clerk-Treasurer shall act as
Clerk pro tem.
of Robert's Rules of Order, unless otherwise provided by statute or by
these rules.
C. Decisions, appeals from. Any member may appeal from a decision of the
presiding officer. An appeal shall be sustained by a 3/4 vote of the
members present, excluding the presiding officer.
D. If the Board President is absent or temporarily incapacitated, the
Village Board may appoint a member of the Village Board to discharge
the President's duties until he or she returns or until the Board
President is able to resume his or her duties.
E. The Village Board shall designate, by an approved motion, a member of
the Village Board, not including the Village President, as the alternate
signatory of all Village bills and legal documents in the absence of the
Village President to sign.
A. Roll call; procedure when quorum not in attendance. As soon as the
Board is called to order, the Clerk-Treasurer shall proceed to call the
names of the members in alphabetical order, noting who is present and
who is absent, and record the same in the proceedings of the Board. If
there is not a quorum present, the fact shall be entered on the journal
and the Board may adjourn; or the President, or in his or her absence
the Clerk-Treasurer, when requested by three or more members, may
issue a process to any constable or policeman commanding him or her
to summon all of the absentees to the meeting. Any member may leave
the meeting with special permission from three members of the Board.
Any member of the Village Board who is unable to attend a properly
noticed meeting of the Village Board shall give written or oral notice of
his or her inability to attend to the Village Clerk-Treasurer or Village
Administrator, as soon as practicable, and the Village Clerk-Treasurer
or Village Administrator shall announce, prior to the taking of the roll
call being taken at the meeting, that that member will be unable to
attend and has provided notification of their absence, or, if no
notification has been provided, inform the Board, prior to the roll call
being taken, that that member is absent without notification.
B. Quorum. A majority of the members of the Village Board shall constitute
a quorum. The President shall be counted in computing a quorum. A
majority vote of all members of the Village Board in favor of any
proposed ordinance, resolution, or appointment shall be necessary for
passage or approval, unless a larger number is required by statute.
§ 5-4 HOBART CODE § 5-7
1:16
§ 5-7. Conduct of deliberations.
The deliberations of the Village Board shall be conducted in the following
manner:
A. When a member is about to speak, he or she shall address himself or
herself to the presiding officer, and the presiding officer shall recognize
the member entitled to speak. When two or more members
simultaneously seek recognition, the presiding officer shall name the
member who is to speak first. A member shall confine his or her
remarks to the question under discussion.
B. No person other than a member shall address the Board, except by vote
of a majority of the members present, or during a period when the
meeting has been opened by the presiding officer for public discussion.
C. Every motion or proposition submitted to the Village Board for
consideration must be reduced to writing if the presiding officer or any
member so requires. Every resolution or ordinance submitted to the
Village Board must be in writing.
D. No motion shall be discussed or acted upon until it has been seconded
unless the rules permit one Trustee to initiate action. No motion shall
be withdrawn without the consent of the person making the same and
the person seconding it.
E. When a motion is made and seconded it shall be deemed to be before
the Village Board and shall be stated by the presiding officer, or in
writing read by the Clerk-Treasurer, previous to debate. A motion may
be withdrawn at any time before a vote has been taken thereon.
F. When a question is under discussion, no action shall be in order except
the following motions, which shall have precedence in the order listed:
(1) To adjourn.
(2) To lay on the table.
(3) To move the question.
(4) To postpone to a certain day.
(5) To refer to a committee.
(6) To amend.
G. Any member desiring to terminate debate may move the question, in
which event the presiding officer shall announce the question
substantially as, "Shall the question now be put?" If a majority of the
members present vote in the affirmative, the main question shall be
voted upon without further debate, its effect being to put an end to all
debate and bring the Board to a direct vote, first upon any pending
amendments and then upon the main question.
§ 5-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-7
1:17
§ 5-8. Enforcement authority.
The presiding officer shall maintain order and decorum, and may order any
person to leave a Village meeting if the person has conducted himself or
herself in a disorderly manner and persisted in such conduct after being
directed by the presiding officer to cease the conduct. If the person refuses
the presiding officer's order to withdraw, the presiding officer may order a
law enforcement officer to take the person into custody until the meeting is
adjourned.
§ 5-9. Appointed officials.
H. Any Trustee may demand a roll call vote on any matter, and such vote
shall be entered in the proceedings. Every member shall vote when a
question is put unless the Board by a majority vote of those present
excuses him or her for special cause.
I. Any proposed ordinance, order or resolution, after reference to a
committee and a report submitted thereon, may be again referred by
the Village Board at any time previous to its final passage.
J. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order; and a motion to adjourn or
to lay on the table and a call for the question shall be decided without
debate.
K. The President shall vote as a member of the Board.
L. No member of the Board shall vote upon any proposed ordinance, order,
resolution, or proposition in which he or she may be personally
interested other than as a citizen of the Village.
M. All questions shall be decided by a roll call of the members. A Board
member may not change his or her vote on any question after the result
has been announced.
N. Any member voting with the majority may move for a reconsideration of
the vote on any question immediately after the vote is had or at the next
succeeding meeting. A motion to reconsider, being put and lost, shall
not be renewed.
O. Any member of the Board shall have the right to protest against any
ordinance of the Board which he or she may think injurious to the public
or to any individual and have his or her reasons for his or her protests
entered upon the records.
A. Officers. The following officers shall be appointed:
(1) Village Administrator.
(2) Clerk-Treasurer.
(3) Assessor.
§ 5-7 HOBART CODE § 5-9
1:18
(4) Animal Control Officer.
B. Appointments. Appointed officials shall serve at the pleasure of the
Village Board but may be appointed for a fixed term not to exceed three
years. Appointments shall be in writing. A person may be reappointed
to the same office. Expiration of the term for which an appointment has
been made shall automatically create a vacancy in the office. No person
lawfully removed from office for cause shall be eligible to fill the
vacancy caused by his or her removal. No person shall have a right to
be reappointed to an office. Appointments to office shall be made by the
majority vote of the Village Board. A corporation or an independent
contractor may be appointed as Village Assessor in compliance with the
provisions of § 61.197(1)(f), Wisconsin Statutes 1999-2000, and as the
same may be amended or renumbered from time to time.
C. Duties. The duties of each office shall be those as required by the
Wisconsin Statutes, rules and regulations and the Village ordinances,
and as determined by the Village Board from time to time. No contract
for an office shall limit the duties to be performed by the official.
Reporting requirements and supervisory responsibilities shall be in
accordance with a Chart of Organization as shall be established by the
Village Board from time to time.
D. Removal.
(1) Removal from a term of office shall be by affirmative vote of at least
three-fifths of the Village Board. A removal shall be made by order
delivered to the officer, or if he or she cannot be found, then mailed
by certified United States mail, postage prepaid, to his or her last
known address and a certified copy of which shall be filed in the
office of the Clerk-Treasurer. If removal is for cause, the order shall
contain a statement of the cause or causes for which removal is
made.
(2) Removals from office for cause may be made only upon written
verified charges preferred by one or more persons who are either
taxpayers or residents, or both, of the Village, and after a speedy
public hearing whereat said officer shall have had full opportunity
to be heard in his or her defense, both personally and by legal
counsel. Before any action shall be taken, the verified charges shall
be filed in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer, together with a bond by
the person or persons preferring the same in the sum of $1,000,
with one or more sureties to be approved by the Village Board,
conditioned for the payment of all costs and expenses actually
incurred by the Village in the hearing and investigation of such
charges. A copy of the charges and written notice of the time and
place for the hearing thereon shall be given the officer by the
Village by personal delivery or by mailing the same by certified
United States mail, postage prepaid, to his or her last known
address, not less than 15 days prior to the hearing. Service on the
officer shall be deemed to be on the date of personal delivery, or on
§ 5-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-9
1:19
§ 5-10. Boards, commissions and committees.
the date of mailing, whichever is applicable. The officer may within
10 days from service of such charges file his or her verified answer
thereto with the office of the Clerk-Treasurer. The hearing shall
be conducted and an investigation made by the Village Board with
due dispatch. The Village Board may make and enforce such orders
and rules as are necessary to properly conduct the hearing and
may appoint and fix the compensation of a stenographer or court
reporter to take testimony thereat. Evidence may be presented to
the Village Board on videotape which is properly authenticated.
Each member of the Village Board is authorized to administer oaths
and to issue subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses and for
the production of evidence. Upon the issuance of an order for
removal for cause, there shall be filed in the office of the Clerk-
Treasurer a complete transcript of the testimony and proceeding
at the hearing. The expenses of the procedure for removal shall
be paid by the Village; except that, if the Village Board finds
against removal and further finds that the complaint was willful
and malicious, and without probable cause, all such expenses shall
be paid by the person or persons who preferred the charges and
may be collected in an action against him or all of them, or on the
bond furnished, or both.
E. Village Administrator.
(1) The Administrator shall be appointed on the basis of merit with due
regard to training, experience, administrative ability and general
fitness for the office as shall be determined by the Village Board of
Trustees ("Board"). [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
(2) Functions and duties. The Administrator shall be the chief
administrative officer of the Village, responsible to the Board for
the proper administration of the business affairs of the Village,
pursuant and subject to the case and statutory law of the State of
Wisconsin, the resolutions and ordinances of the Village, and the
directives of the Board, with such powers and duties as are
delegated.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BOARD — A permanent body of the Village whose members are
officially appointed and empowered to exercise designated
governmental functions. When used in this section, the term "board"
shall not include the Village Board.
COMMISSION — A board.
COMMITTEE — An official body of the Village to which has been
delegated particular duties which are to be performed in the
expectation that such acts will be confirmed by the Village Board, or
§ 5-9 HOBART CODE § 5-10
1:20
that its recommendations and advice will be of aid and assistance to the
Village Board in determining what acts and functions the Village should
perform.
B. Creation. The following boards, commissions and committees are
created to perform such duties as required by the Wisconsin Statutes,
rules and regulations and the Village ordinances, and as determined via
Village Board resolution as may be amended from time to time:
(1) Planning and Zoning Commission.
(2) Board of Appeals.
(3) Board of Review.
(4) Board of Police Commissioners.
(5) Board of Fire Commissioners.
(6) Public Works and Utilities Advisory Committee.
(7) Site Review Committee.
(8) Ethics Committee.
C. Appointments. Unless otherwise required by Wisconsin Statutes, and/or
specifically denoted in the appointments sections of each board,
commission or committee below, members of such boards, commissions
and committees shall be appointed to regular terms by the Village
President, subject to confirmation by the Village Board at a meeting
held after the spring election and prior to May 1 of the calendar year in
which the term is to begin. Regular terms shall commence on May 1 and
end April 30, and be of such length as hereinafter provided. In the event
of a vacancy during a term on a board, commission or committee which
does not have an appointed alternate member, an appointment for the
remainder of the term shall be made by the Village President, subject to
confirmation by the Village Board. In the event of a vacancy during a
term on a board, commission or committee having an appointed
alternate, that alternate member shall take the place of the vacating
regular member, if he or she so accepts, and the Village shall seek to
appoint another alternate member in the same manner prescribed
above. All appointments shall take into consideration the qualifications
for members of the specific board, commission, or committee as
established by the Village Board from time to time. All members of
boards, commissions, and committees shall serve at the pleasure of the
Village Board unless otherwise provided by Wisconsin Statutes.
D. Boards/commissions.
(1) Planning and Zoning Commission.
(a) Composition. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
consist of seven regular members ("Commissioners"), one of
§ 5-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-10
1:21
whom is the Village President and one of whom is another
Village Board member. The Village President shall serve as
the Commission's presiding officer, and the Village President
and Village Board member shall serve as full voting
Commissioners. The Commission shall always have at least
three citizen Commissioners who are not Village officials.
(b) Appointments. All members of the Commission shall be
appointed by the Village President to three-year terms, except
that initial appointments shall be as follows: three-year terms,
three two-year terms, and one one-year term. Appointments to
the Commission do not require Village Board confirmation.
Appointments shall be made during the month of April for
terms that expire in April or at any other time if a vacancy
occurs during the middle of a term.
(c) Quorum. A majority of the Planning and Zoning Commissioners
(four), shall constitute a quorum. If there is not a quorum
present, the fact shall be entered on the journal, and the
Commission may adjourn. At least four members of the
Commission must vote on all matters, exclusive of abstentions;
a majority vote of all members electing to vote shall be
necessary for passage or approval of any matter before the
Commission.
(2) Board of Appeals.
(a) Composition. The Board of Appeals shall consist of five regular
members and two alternate members. No member of the
Village Board shall be a member of the Board of Appeals.
(b) Appointments. All regular members of the Board of Appeals
shall be appointed by the Village President, subject to the
confirmation of a majority vote of the Village Board, to threeyear
terms, except that initial appointments shall be as follows:
two three-year terms, two two-year terms, and one one-year
term.
(c) Quorum. A majority of the regular members of the Board of
Appeals (three) shall constitute a quorum. If there is not a
quorum present, the fact shall be entered on the journal, and
the Board may adjourn.
(d) Alternate members. Alternate members shall serve for
staggered three-year terms. Annually, the Village President,
not subject to a majority vote of the Village Board, shall
designate the first alternate member and the second alternate.
The first alternate shall act, with full power, only when a
member of the Board refuses to vote because of interest or
when a member is absent. The second alternate shall so act
only when the first alternate so refuses or is absent or when
§ 5-10 HOBART CODE § 5-10
1:22
more than one member of the Board so refuses or is absent.
[Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
(3) Board of Review.
(a) Composition. The Board of Review shall consist of five regular
members and the Clerk-Treasurer, who shall be a nonvoting
member and act as Secretary to the Board.
(b) Appointments. All regular members of the Board of Review
shall be appointed by the Village President, subject to the
confirmation of a majority vote of the Village Board, to fiveyear
terms, except that initial appointments shall be as follows:
two three-year terms, two two-year terms and one one-year
term.
(c) Quorum. A majority of the regular members of the Board of
Review (three) shall constitute a quorum. If there is not a
quorum present, the fact shall be entered on the journal, and
the Board may adjourn.
(4) Board of Police Commissioners. [Amended 10-7-2014 by Ord.
No. 04-2014]
(a) Composition. The Board of Police Commissioners shall be
constituted in accordance with Wisconsin Statutes, including
§ 61.65, Wis. Stats., but none of the specified "optional powers
of Board" are extended to the Board of Police Commissioners.
The Board shall consist of five members, at least three of whom
are residents of the Village of Hobart, and none of whom shall
hold any other public office in the Village of Hobart, or in any
other municipality. [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No.
01-2015]
(b) Appointments. All regular members of the Board of Police
Commissioners shall be appointed by the Village President,
subject to the confirmation of a majority vote of the Village
Board, to five-year terms, except that initial appointments shall
be as follows: one five-year term, one four-year term, one
three-year term, one two-year term, and one one-year term.
(c) Quorum. A majority of the members of the Board of Police
Commissioners (three) shall constitute a quorum. If there is
not a quorum present, the fact shall be entered on the journal,
and the Board may adjourn.
(5) Board of Fire Commissioners. [Added 10-7-2014 by Ord. No.
04-2014]
(a) Composition. The Board of Fire Commissioners shall be
constituted in accordance with Wisconsin Statutes, including
§ 61.65, Wis. Stats., but none of the specified "optional powers
§ 5-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-10
1:23
of Board" are extended to the Board of Fire Commissioners.
The Board shall consist of five members, none of whom shall
hold any other public office in the Village of Hobart, or in any
other municipality.
(b) Appointments. All regular members of the Board of
Commissioners shall be appointed by the Village President,
subject to the confirmation of a majority vote of the Village
Board, to five-year terms, except that initial appointments shall
be as follows: one five-year term, one four-year term, one
three-year term, one two-year term, and one one-year term.
(c) Quorum. A majority of the members of the Board of Fire
Commissioners (three) shall constitute a quorum. If there is
not a quorum present, the fact shall be entered on the journal,
and the Board may adjourn.
E. Committees.
(1) Public Works and Utilities Advisory Committee.
(a) Composition. The Public Works and Utilities Committee shall
consist of seven regular members, two of whom shall be Village
Board members, and one alternate member. Village Board
members shall serve as full voting members. All regular
members shall be residents of the Village.
(b) Appointments. In accordance with Subsection C of this section,
members shall be appointed to three-year terms, except that
initial appointments shall be as follows: three three-year terms,
three two-year terms, and two one-year terms.
(c) Quorum. A majority of the regular members of the Public
Works and Utilities Committee (four) shall constitute a
quorum. If there is not a quorum present, the fact shall be
entered on the journal, and the Committee may adjourn.
(d) Alternate member. The alternate member shall attend and
participate in all Committee meetings, but shall only act with
full voting authority when a regular member of the Committee
refuses to vote because of interest or when a regular member
is absent.
(2) Site Review Committee.
(a) Composition. The Site Review Committee shall consist of seven
regular members, two of whom shall be Village Board
members, and one alternate member. Village Board members
shall serve as full voting members. All regular members shall
be residents of the Village.
(b) Appointments. In accordance with Subsection C of this section,
members shall be appointed to three-year terms, except that
§ 5-10 HOBART CODE § 5-10
1:24
initial appointments shall be as follows: three three-year terms,
three two-year terms, and two one-year terms.
(c) Quorum. A majority of the regular members of the Site Review
Committee (four) shall constitute a quorum. If there is not a
quorum present, the fact shall be entered on the journal, and
the Committee may adjourn.
(d) Alternate member. The alternate member shall attend and
participate in all Committee meetings, but shall only act with
full voting authority when a regular member refuses to vote
because of interest or when a regular member is absent.
(3) Ethics Committee.
(a) Composition. The Ethics Committee shall consist of five
regular members. None of the members shall hold any other
public office in the Village. All members shall be residents of
the Village.
(b) Appointments. In accordance with Subsection C of this section,
members shall be appointed to three-year terms, except that
initial appointments shall be as follows: two three-year terms,
two two-year terms, and one one-year term.
(c) Quorum. A majority of the regular members of the Ethics
Committee (three) shall constitute a quorum. If there is not a
quorum present, the fact shall be entered on the journal, and
the Committee may adjourn.
(4) Other advisory or ad hoc committees. The Village Board may, via
resolution approved by a majority of the Village Board, create such
other advisory or ad hoc committees, for such period of time, for
such purposes, and of such size, as it shall determine from time to
time. Any appointments to such committees shall be made by the
Village President, subject to confirmation of the Board.
F. Miscellaneous.
(1) Unless otherwise provided herein, or as required by Wisconsin
Statutes, each Board, Commission and Committee shall annually
elect its Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, and, if applicable,
Secretary, at its first regular meeting held after April 30.
(2) Notice of all meetings shall comply with the notice and other
requirements of the Wisconsin Open Meeting Law.
(3) Any board, commission or committee may request any Village
officer to confer with it and supply information needed in
connection with any matter pending before it. Every such request
shall be in writing furnished to the appropriate officer, with a copy
to the Clerk-Treasurer, at least 72 hours before the expected return
or meeting date.
§ 5-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-10
1:25
§ 5-11. Continuity of government. [Added 3-5-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-03]
(4) This Charter Ordinance was first established in 2002. Subsequent
amendment history is as follows: 2013: §§ 5-2, 5-3, 5-9 and 5-10.2
A. Definitions. As used in this subsection, unless the context otherwise
clearly indicates:
BOARD — The Village Board of Trustees.
CIVIL EMERGENCY — Injury and damage resulting from disasters
caused by enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile actions, or by fire,
flood, storm, earthquake or other natural and man-made causes.
EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR — A person designated for
possible temporary succession to the powers and duties, but not the
office, of a Village officer in the event that such officer or any duly
authorized deputy is unavailable to exercise the powers and discharge
the duties of the office.
SICKNESS OR INJURY INCIDENT — Events or a series of events
which may occur involving one or more key executive, administrative or
legislative officials of the Village, who could fall victim to an individual,
concurrent or common injury or sickness which could disturb the usual
and normal continuity of the Village's government.
STATE OF EMERGENCY, A — Shall be deemed to exist whenever
during times of public crisis, disaster, rioting, catastrophe, or similar
public emergency, for any reason, public safety authorities are unable
to maintain public order or afford adequate protection for lives, safety
or property, or whenever the occurrence of any such condition is
imminent.
UNAVAILABLE — Either that a vacancy in office exists and there is no
deputy authorized to exercise all of the powers and discharge the duties
of the office, or that the lawful incumbent of the office (including any
deputy exercising the powers and discharging the duties of an office
because of a vacancy) and his or her duly authorized deputy are absent
or unable, for physical, mental or legal reasons, to exercise the powers
and discharge the duties of the office.
VILLAGE — The Village Of Hobart, Brown County, Wisconsin.
B. Designation, status, qualifications and term of emergency interim
successors.
(1) Appointive officers. The Board president shall, within 60 days
following the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
chapter, designate for appointive officers including Village
Administrator, Village Clerk-Treasurer, Chief of Police, Fire Chief,
2. Editor's Note: Section 5-10 was subsequently amended 10-7-2014 by Ord. No. 04-2014.
Original Sec. 100.10, Interpretation, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015.
§ 5-10 HOBART CODE § 5-11
1:26
Director of Public Works, Director of Building and Code
Compliance, Deputy Village Clerk-Treasurer, Village Attorney an
emergency interim successor to each of these officers.
(2) Qualifications. No person shall be designated to serve as an
emergency interim successor unless he or she may, under the
Constitution and statutes of the State of Wisconsin and the charter
or ordinances of the Village, hold the office of the person to whose
powers and duties he or she is designated to succeed, but no
provision of any ordinance prohibiting an officer or employee of
this Village from holding another office shall be applicable to an
emergency interim successor.
(3) Status of emergency interim successor. A person designated as an
emergency interim successor holds that designation at the
pleasure of the Board President. He or she retains this designation
as emergency interim successor until replaced by another
appointed by the Board President.
(4) Required order of succession. The normal succession of office for
legislative officials shall be:
(a) Village Board President to the remainder of the Board in the
order of longest to least tenure, with the longest tenure is to be
calculated as the total length of consecutive service as a
member of the Board of Trustees;
(b) In the event of two or more members having equal tenure, the
order of succession shall be determined on the basis of the
largest number of votes received at the most recent general
election;
(c) Should the Village Board President and all Board members be
incapacitated or otherwise unable to perform their duties for
any reason, and until such time as they are able to resume their
duties, or until a normal process of appointment or election can
provide successors in order to assure the continuity and
availability of governmental services, the succession for
administrative purposes shall continue to the administrative
heads of the departments of Village government or their
successors;
(d) The order of succession by department heads shall continue as
follows: Village Administrator, Village Clerk-Treasurer, Chief of
Police, Fire Chief, Director of Public Works, Director of
Building and Code Compliance, Deputy Village Clerk-
Treasurer, Village Attorney.
C. Assumption of powers and duties of officer by emergency interim
successor. If in the event of a civil emergency or sickness or injury
incident, any officer named in Subsection B(1) above is unavailable, his
or her emergency interim successor highest in rank in order of
§ 5-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-11
1:27
succession who is available shall, except for the power and duty to
appoint emergency interim successors, exercise the powers and
discharge the duties of such officer. An emergency interim successor
shall exercise these powers and discharge these duties only until such
time as the lawful incumbent officer or an emergency interim successor
higher in rank in order of succession exercises, or resumes the exercise
of, the powers and discharge of the duties of the office, or until, where
an actual vacancy exists, a successor is appointed to fill such vacancy
or is elected and qualified as provided by law.
D. Recording and publication. The name, address and rank of each duly
authorized emergency interim successor shall be filed with the Village
Administrator and each designation or replacement of an emergency
interim successor shall become effective when the Board President files
with the Village Administrator the successor's name, address and rank.
The Village Administrator shall keep on file all such data regarding duly
authorized emergency interim successors and it shall be open to public
inspection.
E. Quorum and vote requirements. In the event of a civil emergency:
(1) Quorum requirements for the Village Board shall be suspended.
(2) Where the affirmative vote of a specified proportion of members for
approval of an ordinance, resolution or other action would
otherwise be required, the same proportion of those voting thereon
shall be sufficient.
F. State of emergency.
(1) Declaration. In the event of an existing or threatened state of
emergency endangering the lives, safety, health and welfare of the
people within the Village or any part thereof, or threatening
damages to or destruction of property, the Board President is
hereby authorized and empowered to issue a public proclamation
declaring to all persons the existence of such a state of emergency,
and, in order to more effectively protect the lives and property of
people within the Village, to place in effect any or all of the
restrictions hereinafter authorized.
(2) Proclamation imposing prohibitions and restrictions. The Board
President, by proclamation may impose the prohibitions and
restrictions specified in this section in the manner described in
those sections.
(a) The Board President may impose as many of those specified
prohibitions and restrictions as he/she finds are necessary,
because of an emergency, to maintain an acceptable level of
public order and services, and to protect lives, safety, and
property.
(b) The proclamation shall be in writing.
§ 5-11 HOBART CODE § 5-11
1:28
(c) The Board President shall take reasonable steps to give notice
of the terms of the proclamation to those affected by it and
shall post a copy of it at the Village Officer, or the most
reasonable Village or public building if the Village Office is
rendered unusable.
(d) The Board President shall send the proclamation to the mass
communications media which serves the affected area and
officials located within the Village.
(e) The Board President shall retain a text of the proclamation and
furnish upon request certified copies of it.
(3) Evacuation. The Board President may direct and compel the
evacuation of all or part of the population of the Village, to
prescribed routes, modes of transportation, and destination in
connection with evacuation; and to control ingress and egress of a
major emergency or disaster area, the movement of persons within
the area, and the occupancy of premises therein. Details of the
evacuation may be set forth or amended in a subsequent
proclamation which shall be publicized.
(4) Curfew. The proclamation may impose a curfew prohibiting in
certain areas and during certain periods the appearance in public
of anyone who is not a member of an exempted class. The
proclamation shall specify the geographical area or areas and the
period during each twenty-four-hour day to which the curfew
applies. The Board President may exempt from some or all of the
curfew restrictions classes of people whose exemption the Board
President finds necessary for the preservation of the public health,
safety, and welfare. The proclamation shall state the exempted
classes and the restrictions from which each is exempted. Unless
otherwise specified in the proclamation, the curfew shall apply
during the specified period each day until the Board President by
proclamation removes the curfew.
(5) Restrictions on access to areas.
(a) The proclamation may prohibit obtaining access or attempting
to obtain access to any area, designated in the manner
described in this section, in violation of any order, clearly
posted notice, or barricade indicating that access is denied or
restricted.
(b) Areas to which access is denied or restricted shall be
designated by the Chief of Police and his subordinates or other
law enforcement officers when directed in the proclamation to
do so by the Board President. When acting under this authority,
the Chief of Police and his subordinates may restrict or deny
access to any area, street, highway or location within the
Village if that restriction or denial of access or use is
reasonably necessary to promote efforts being made to
§ 5-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-11
1:29
Chapter 7
ADMINISTRATOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 54.
Village Board — See Ch. 82.
§ 7-1. Office of Village Administrator.
In order to provide the Village of Hobart with a more efficient, effective
and responsible government under a system of a part-time Village President
and part-time Village Board at a time when Village government is becoming
increasingly complex, there is hereby created the Office of Village
Administrator for the Village of Hobart (hereinafter referred to as
"Administrator"). The office is created according to the provisions of
Chapter 5, Administration of Government.
overcome the emergency/disaster or to prevent further
aggravation of the emergency/disaster.
(c) The proclamation may prohibit or restrict:
[1] Movements of people in public places;
[2] The operation of offices, business establishments, and
other places to or from which people may travel or at
which they may congregate;
[3] Other activities or conditions the control of which may be
reasonably necessary to maintain order and protect lives
or property during the state of emergency, within the area
designated in the proclamation.
(6) Removal of prohibitions and restrictions. The Board President shall
by proclamation terminate the entire declaration of emergency or
remove any of the prohibitions and restrictions when the
emergency no longer requires them, or when directed to do so by
the Board.
(7) In case of absence or disability. In case of the absence or disability
of the Board President, the Board member so designated as his or
her successor in Subsection B(4) above shall have and exercise all
of the powers which have been herein given to the Board President.
In the case of the absence or disability of all Board members so
designated in Subsection B(4) above, the Village Administrator or
his or her designee or successor shall have and exercise all of the
powers which have been given herein to the Board President.
§ 5-11 HOBART CODE § 7-2
1:30
§ 7-2. Appointment, term of office and removal.
The Administrator shall be appointed on the basis of merit with due regard
to training, experience, administrative ability and general fitness for the
office, by a majority vote of the Village Board. The Village Administrator
may be employed to serve at the pleasure of the Village Board, or for a fixed
term, as determined by the Village Board. This section, however, shall not
preclude the Village Board from establishing other employment terms and
conditions not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, the Code of
the Village of Hobart, or Wisconsin State Statutes.3
§ 7-3. Functions and duties.
The Administrator, subject to the limitations defined in resolutions and
ordinances of the Village of Hobart and Wisconsin State Statutes, shall
be the chief administrative officer of the Village, responsible only to the
Village President and the Village Board for the proper administration of
the business affairs of the Village, pursuant to the statutes of the State of
Wisconsin, the ordinances of the Village of Hobart, and the resolutions and
directives of the Village Board, with power and duties as follows:
A. General duties.
(1) Carry out directives of the Village President and Village Board
which require administrative implementation, reporting promptly
to the Village President and Village Board any difficulties
encountered therein;
(2) Be responsible for the administration of all day-to-day operations of
the Village government, including the monitoring of all Village
ordinances, resolutions, Village Board meetings, and state statutes;
(3) Prepare a plan of administration, including an organization chart,
which defines authority and responsibility for all nonstatutory
positions of the Village, and submit it to the Village Board for
adoption as the official organization and administrative procedure
plan for the Village;
(4) Establish, when necessary, administrative procedures to increase
the effectiveness and efficiency of Village government according to
current practices in local government, not inconsistent with
Subsection A(3) above or directives of the Village President and
Village Board;
(5) Serve as ex officio nonvoting member of all boards, commissions
and committees of the Village, except as specified by the Village
Board or Wisconsin State Statutes;
3. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 1.703, Residency, which immediately followed this section,
was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 7-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-3
1:31
(6) Keep informed concerning current federal, state, and county
legislation and administrative rules affecting the Village and
submit appropriate reports and recommendations thereon to the
Village Board;
(7) Keep informed concerning the availability of federal, state and
county funds for local programs. Assist department heads and the
Village Board in obtaining these funds under the direction of the
Village President and the Village Board;
(8) Represent the Village in matters involving legislative and
intergovernmental affairs as authorized and directed as to that
representation by the Village President and Village Board;
(9) Act as public information officer for the Village with the
responsibility of assuring that the news media are kept informed
about the operations of the Village and that all open meeting rules
and regulations are followed;
(10) Establish and maintain procedures to facilitate communications
between citizens and Village government to assure that complaints,
grievances, recommendations and other matters receive prompt
attention by the responsible official, and to assure that all such
matters are expeditiously resolved;
(11) Promote the economic well-being and growth of the Village of
Hobart through public and private sector cooperation.
B. Responsibilities to the Village Board.
(1) Attend all meetings of the Village Board, assisting the Village
President and the Village Board as required in the performance of
their duties;
(2) In coordination with the Village President, the Village Board, and
the Village Clerk-Treasurer, ensure that appropriate agendas are
prepared to all meetings of the Village Board, all Village Board
committees, and all other appropriate committees and the
commissions of the Village, together with such supporting material
as may be required, with nothing herein being construed as to give
the Administrator authority to limit or in any way prevent matters
from being considered by the Village Board, or any of its
committees and commissions;
(3) Assist in the preparation of ordinances and resolutions as
requested by the Village President or the Village Board, or as
needed;
(4) Keep the Village President and Village Board regularly informed
about the activities of the Administrator's office by oral or written
report at regular and special meetings of the Village Board.
C. Personnel.
§ 7-3 HOBART CODE § 7-3
1:32
(1) Be responsible for the administrative direction and coordination of
all employees of the Village according to the established
organization procedures;
(2) Recommend to the Village Board the appointment, promotion, and,
when necessary, for the good of the Village, the suspension or
termination of department heads;
(3) In consultation with the appropriate department head, be
responsible for the appointment, promotion, and, when necessary,
for the good of the Village, the suspension or termination of
employees below the department head level;
(4) Serve as personnel officer for the Village with responsibilities to
see that complete and current personnel records, including specific
job descriptions, for all Village employees are kept; evaluate in
conjunction with department heads the performance of all
employees on a regular basis; recommend salary and wage scales
for Village employees not covered by collective bargaining
agreements; develop and enforce high standards of performance by
Village employees; assure that Village employees have proper
working conditions; work closely with department heads to
promptly resolve personnel problems or grievances;
(5) Assist in labor contract negotiations and collective bargaining
issues;
(6) Work closely with department heads to assure that employees
receive adequate opportunities for training to maintain and
improve their job-related knowledge and skills and act as the
approving authority for requests by employees to attend
conferences, meetings, training schools, etc., provided that funds
have been budgeted for these activities.
D. Budgeting and purchasing.
(1) Be responsible for preparation of the annual Village budget, in
accordance with guidelines as may be provided by the Village
Board and in coordination with department heads and pursuant to
state statutes, for review and approval by the Village President and
the Village Board prior to submission to the annual or special
Village meeting;
(2) Administer the budget as adopted by the Village of Hobart at its
annual or special Village meeting;
(3) Report regularly to the Village Board on the current fiscal position
of the Village;
(4) Supervise the accounting system of the Village and insure that the
system employs methods in accordance with current professional
accounting practices;
§ 7-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-3
1:33
§ 7-4. Cooperation of officials and employees.
All officials and employees of the Village shall cooperate with and assist the
Administrator so that the Village government shall function effectively and
efficiently.
Chapter 14
CITATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal court — See Ch. 26.
§ 14-1. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to § 66.0113 of Wisconsin Statutes, the Village Board hereby
elects to use the citation method of enforcement of Village ordinances
described herein or in a separate ordinance, including those for which a
statutory counterpart exists.
§ 14-2. Form of citation.
The citation shall contain the following:
(5) Serve as the purchasing agent for the Village, supervising all
purchasing and contracting for supplies and services, subject to the
purchasing procedures established by the Village Board and any
limitation contained in the Wisconsin State Statutes.
A. The name and address of the alleged violator;
B. The factual allegations describing the alleged violation;
C. The time and place of the offense;
D. The section of the ordinance violated;
E. A designation of the offense in such manner as can readily be
understood by a person making a reasonable effort to do so;
F. The time at which the alleged violator may appear in court;
G. A statement which in essence informs the alleged violator:
(1) That a cash deposit based on the schedule established by this or
other Village ordinance may be made which shall be delivered or
mailed to the Clerk of the Municipal Court prior to the time of the
scheduled court appearance.4
§ 7-3 HOBART CODE § 14-2
1:34
§ 14-3. Schedule of deposits.
The cash deposits for the various ordinances for which a citation may be
issued are as established on the deposit schedule adopted by the Village
Board, a copy of which is on file with the Village Clerk-Treasurer.
§ 14-4. Issuance of citation.7
The following officials may issue citations with respect to those specified
ordinances which are directly related to their official responsibilities.
(2) That if a deposit is made, no appearance in court is necessary
unless the defendant is subsequently summoned.
(3) If the alleged violator makes a cash deposit and does not appear in
court, he or she either will be deemed to have tendered a plea of no
contest and submitted to a forfeiture, plus costs, fees, and
surcharges imposed under Ch. 814, Wis. Stats., not to exceed the
amount of the deposit or will be summoned into court to answer the
complaint if the court does not accept the plea of no contest.5
(4) If the alleged violator does not make a cash deposit and does not
appear in court at the time specified, the court may issue a
summons or a warrant for the defendant's arrest or consider the
nonappearance to be a plea of no contest and enter judgment under
§ 66.0113(3)(d), Wis. Stats., or the municipality may commence an
action against the alleged violator to collect the forfeiture, plus
costs, fees, and surcharges imposed under Ch. 814, Wis. Stats.6
H. A direction that if the alleged violator elects to make a cash deposit, the
statement which accompanies the citation shall be signed to indicate
that the statement required under Subsection G above has been read.
Such statement shall be sent or brought with the cash deposit;
I. A statement that if the court finds that the violation involves an offense
that prohibits conduct prohibited by state statute punishable by fine or
imprisonment, or both, and that the violation resulted in property
damage or physical injury to a person other than the alleged violator,
the court may summon the defendant into court to determine if
restitution shall be ordered under § 800.093, Wis. Stats. (municipal
court);
J. Such other information as the Village deems necessary.
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 14-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-4
1:35
Ordinance Title Enforcement Official
Chapter 95, Alarm Systems Hobart Police Department
Chapter 102, Article I,
Barking Dogs
Hobart Police Department
Chapter 102, Article III,
Licensing and Control of
Dogs
Hobart Police Department
Chapter 121, Building
Construction
Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector
Chapter 127, Open Burning Hobart Police Department
Chapter 156, Explosives and
Blasting
Hobart Police Department, Zoning
Administrator, Village Administrator, or any
Village Trustee
Chapter 170, Firearms and
Other Weapons
Hobart Police Department
Chapter 185, Article I,
Public Sanitation
Hobart Police Department
Chapter 194, Article I,
Nonmetallic Mining
Hobart Police Department, Zoning
Administrator, Village Administrator, or any
Village Trustee
Chapter 197, Article I,
Curfew
Hobart Police Department
Chapter 207, Nuisances Hobart Police Department
Chapter 215, Parks and
Recreation Areas
Hobart Police Department
Chapter 248, Article I,
Storage, Disposal,
Transportation, and
Treatment of Solid Waste
Hobart Police Department
Chapter 248, Article II,
Recycling and Municipal
Solid Waste Collection
Hobart Police Department
Chapter 288, Agricultural
Shoreland Management
Hobart Police Department or designee
Chapter 295, Zoning Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector
§ 14-5. Procedure.
Section 66.0113(3), Wisconsin Statutes, relating to violator's options and
procedures on default is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference.
§ 14-6. Nonexclusivity.
§ 14-4 HOBART CODE § 14-6
1:36
Chapter 20
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
§ 20-1. Purpose, findings and declaration of necessity.
§ 20-2. Creation of a community development authority.
Pursuant to § 66.1335 of the Wisconsin Statutes, there is hereby created
a housing and community development authority, which shall be known as
the "Community Development Authority of the Village of Hobart" (CDAVH).
CDAVH is deemed to be a separate public body, corporate and politic,
exercising necessary public powers, and having all the powers, duties and
functions conferred on housing authorities, redevelopment authorities and
housing and community development authorities by applicable law, that
are necessary for the purpose of carrying out blight elimination, slum
clearance, urban renewal programs and projects and housing projects.
§ 20-3. Membership and appointment.
A. Other ordinance. Adoption of this chapter does not preclude the Village
Board from adopting any other ordinance or providing for the
enforcement of any other law or ordinance relating to the same or other
matter.
B. Other remedies. The issuance of a citation hereunder shall not preclude
the Village Board or any authorized office from proceedings under any
other ordinance or law or by any other enforcement method to enforce
any ordinance, regulation or order.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide the best possible
environment for human habitation and encourage the most appropriate
use of land throughout the Village by promoting the orderly layout and
use of land and facilitating an environment that promotes adequate
provisions for the Village's services, and to overall promote the public
health, safety, economy and general welfare of the community.
B. Findings. In support for the creation of the Community Development
Authority of the Village of Hobart (CDAVH), the Village finds that the
layout and use of land could better promote the public health, safety,
economy and general welfare of the community.
C. Declaration of necessity. The Village Board hereby finds and declares a
need for blight elimination, slum clearance, urban renewal, community
development programs and housing projects. The Village Board further
finds that a housing and community development authority functioning
within the Village of Hobart would constitute a more effective, efficient
means for carrying out such programs and projects.
A. Membership CDAVH shall consist of seven resident persons called
Commissioners ("Commissioners"), who, with the confirmation of the
§ 14-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-3
1:37
Village Board, shall be appointed by the Village President. The
Commissioners shall have sufficient ability and experience in the fields
of urban renewal, community development and housing.
B. Appointment.
(1) Commissioners.
(a) Two of the Commissioners shall be members of the Village
Board and shall serve during their term of office as Village
Board members, and the remaining Five Commissioners shall
not be members of the Village Board and shall serve as follows:
[1] Two Commissioners shall initially be appointed for terms
of one year;
[2] One Commissioner shall initially be appointed for a term of
two years;
[3] One Commissioner shall initially be appointed for a term of
three years; and
[4] One Commissioner shall initially be appointed for a term of
four years.
(b) Thereafter, the terms of Commissioners who are not Village
Board members shall be four years. A Commissioner who is not
a member of the Village Board shall hold office until his or her
successor has been appointed and qualified, unless such
Commissioner's term ends earlier because of his or her change
of residence, removal, resignation, incapacity or death.
(2) Officers. CDAVH shall annually elect a Chairperson and Vice
Chairperson from among the Commissioners. Vacancies occurring
in the office of Chairperson or Vice Chairperson shall be filled from
among the Commissioners for the unexpired portion of the term.
(3) Executive Director. The Village Administrator or his or her
designee shall serve as the Executive Director, but shall not be a
member of the CDAVH. The Executive Director shall be the chief
administrative officer of CDAVH and shall direct, manage and
supervise CDAVH administrative operations and technical
activities, in accordance with the directives of the CDAVH. The
Executive Director shall also serve as the Secretary of CDAVH and
shall perform such other duties and have such other powers and
responsibilities as may, from time to time, be delegated by the
authority.
C. New appointments, vacancies and reappointment.
(1) After the appointments of the original seven Commissioners have
been made and confirmed, vacancies occurring during any term
shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term, and new
§ 20-3 HOBART CODE § 20-3
1:38
§ 20-4. Removal of Commissioner.
A Commissioner may be removed from office by the Village Board for
incompetency, inefficiency, neglect of duty or misconduct in office, but such
Commissioner shall be removed only after he or she has been given a
copy of the charges at least 10 days prior to the hearing thereon and has
had an opportunity to be heard in person or by counsel. In the event of
the removal of any Commissioner, a record of the proceedings, together
with the charges and findings thereon, shall be filed in the office of the
Village Clerk-Treasurer. To the extent applicable, the provisions of Wis.
Stats. § 17.16 relating to removal for cause shall apply to any such removal.
§ 20-5. Powers and duties.
appointments or reappointments of Commissioners shall be made
in the same manner in which the original appointments were made.
(2) A certificate of appointment or reappointment of any Commissioner
shall be filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer and shall be
conclusive evidence of the due and proper appointment of such
Commissioner, if such Commissioner has been duly confirmed as
herein provided and has duly taken and filed the official oath before
entering upon his or her office.
A. CDAVH shall have all powers, duties, and functions set out in
§§ 66.1201 and 66.1333 for housing and redevelopment authorities, and
as to all housing projects initiated by the CDAVH, it shall proceed under
§ 66.1201, and as to all projects relating to blight elimination, slum
clearance, urban renewal and redevelopment programs, it shall
proceed under §§ 66.1301 to 66.1329, 66.1331, 66.1333, 66.1337 or
66.1105, as determined appropriate by the Village Board on a projectby-
project basis.
B. As to all community development programs and activities undertaken
by the Village under the Federal Housing and Community Development
Act of 1974, the CDAVH shall proceed under all applicable laws and
ordinances not inconsistent with the laws of this state.
C. CDAVH may act as an agent of the Village to perform all acts, except the
development of the general plan of the Village, which may otherwise be
performed by the Planning and Zoning Commission under §§ 66.1105,
66.1301 to 66.1329, 66.1331, or 66.1337 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
D. In addition to the foregoing powers, duties and functions, the CDAVH
shall have such other powers, duties and functions related to
community development as are conferred upon CDAVH by the Village
Board from time to time, which shall include any powers and duties
previously conferred on the Economic Development Advisory
Committee.
§ 20-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-5
1:39
§ 20-6. Meetings, quorum and bylaws.
All meetings of the CDAVH shall be held in compliance with the provisions
of the Open Meetings Law of the State of Wisconsin. Four Commissioners
shall constitute a quorum for the purposes of conducting its business and
exercising its powers and for all other purposes. Action may be taken by
the CDAVH upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the Commissioners
present at any meeting. CDAVH may adopt and from time to time amend or
repeal such bylaws or other rules or regulations not inconsistent with the
applicable laws and this chapter, as it deems necessary in the performance
of its functions and duties.
§ 20-7. Budget and annual report.
An annual budget shall be prepared by the CDAVH and shall be subject
to approval by the Village Board. CDAVH shall also prepare and file with
the Village President and Board a report of its activity for the preceding
calendar year on or before February 15 of the following year.
§ 20-8. Outside assistance.
CDAVH may employ or seek advice from technical experts and such other
officers, agents and employees, such as the Village Planning and Zoning
Commission and/or the Village Attorney, as it may require from time to
time in the performance of its duties and functions, within the limits of the
funds available for such position. CDAVH may delegate to one or more of its
agents or employees such powers or duties as it may deem proper.
§ 20-9. Compensation.
The Commissioners shall receive no compensation for their services, but
shall be entitled to reimbursement for their actual and necessary expenses,
including local travel expenses incurred in the discharge of their duties.
E. Specific action taken related to the powers and duties of the CDAVH
shall be subject to review and approval by the Village Board:
(1) Acquisition of land;
(2) Issuance of debt, other than "conduit debt" which is not supported
in any way by the CDAVH or the community;
(3) Expenditure of any funds in excess of $10,000;
(4) Exercise of powers of eminent domain;
(5) Amendments, deletions, or additions to this section.
§ 20-5 HOBART CODE § 20-10
1:40
§ 20-10. Termination of Economic Development Advisory
Committee.
Upon the adoption of this chapter, the Hobart Economic Development
Advisory Committee, which was previously enacted by Village resolution,
is hereby terminated. The powers and duties of the Hobart Economic
Development Advisory Committee shall be assumed by the CDAVH pursuant
to the terms of § 66.1335 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 20-11. Controlling statute.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to § 66.1335, as amended from time to
time, of the Wisconsin Statutes. In so far as this chapter may be inconsistent
with Wis. Stats. § 66.1335, the Wisconsin statute, as amended, shall control.
Chapter 26
COURT, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Citations — See Ch. 14.
§ 26-1. Municipal Court created.
Pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 755 of the Wisconsin Statutes,
there is hereby created and established a Joint Municipal Court to be
designated "Municipal Court for the Village of Hobart and the Town of
Lawrence," said court to become operative and function on January 1, 2001.
§ 26-2. Municipal Judge.
A. Qualifications. The Joint Court shall be under the jurisdiction of and
presided over by a Municipal Judge who resides in the Village of Hobart
or the Town of Lawrence.
B. Oath and bond. The Judge shall, after election or appointment to fill a
vacancy, take and file the official oath as prescribed in § 757.02(1), Wis.
Stats., and at the same time execute and file an official bond in the
amount of $10,000. The Judge shall not act until the oath and bond have
been filed, and the requirements of § 755.03(2) have been complied
with.8
C. Salary. The salary of the Municipal Judge shall be fixed by the Boards of
the municipalities that are parties to the agreement, which shall be in
lieu of fees and costs. No salary shall be paid for any time during the
term during which such Judge has not executed the official bond or
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 20-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-2
1:41
§ 26-3. Elections.
§ 26-4. Jurisdiction.
§ 26-5. Municipal Court.
official oath and filed it as required by § 755.03, Wis. Stats. The
municipalities may by separate ordinance allocate funds for the
administration of the Municipal Court pursuant to § 66.0301, Wis.
Stats.9
A. Term. The Municipal Judge shall be elected at large for a term of four
years commencing on May 1 in a spring election. All candidates for the
position of Municipal Judge shall be nominated by nomination papers as
provided in § 8.10, Wis. Stats., and selection at a primary election if
such is held as provided in § 8.11, Wis. Stats. The State Elections Board
shall serve as filing officer for the candidates. The initial Judge of the
Hobart-Lawrence Municipal Court shall be appointed by the Village
Board of the Village of Hobart and shall serve until May 1, 2002, at
which time the first elected Municipal Judge shall take office.10
B. Electors. Electors in the Village of Hobart and Town of Lawrence shall
vote for Judge.
A. The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction over incidents occurring on
or after January 1, 2001, as provided in Article VII, § 14 of the
Wisconsin Constitution, § 755.045 and § 755.05, Wis. Stats., and as
otherwise provided by state law. In addition, it shall have exclusive
jurisdiction over actions in the Village of Hobart and Town of Lawrence
seeking to impose forfeitures for violations of municipal ordinances of
the Village of Hobart and the Town of Lawrence, their resolutions and
bylaws.
B. The Municipal Judge may issue civil warrants to enforce matters under
the jurisdiction of the Municipal Court under §§ 755.045(2) and
66.0119, Wis. Stats.
C. The Municipal Court has jurisdiction over juvenile offenders when the
Village of Hobart or Town of Lawrence enacts an ordinance under the
authority of § 938.17(2)(cm), Wis. Stats.
A. Hours. The Municipal Court shall be open at such location and at such
times as determined by the governing bodies of the Village of Hobart
and Town of Lawrence, and the Municipal Judge.
9. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 26-2 HOBART CODE § 26-5
1:42
§ 26-6. Collection of forfeitures and costs.11
The Municipal Judge may impose punishment and sentences as provided by
Chapters 800 and 938, Wis. Stats., and as provided in the ordinances of the
Village of Hobart and Town of Lawrence. All forfeitures, fees, assessments,
surcharges and costs shall be paid to the treasurer of the municipality
within which the case arose within 30 days after receipt of the money by
the Municipal Court. At the time of the payment, the Municipal Court shall
report to the treasurer the title of the action, the nature of the offenses
and total amount of judgments imposed in actions and proceedings in which
such monies were collected.
§ 26-7. Contempt of court.12
The Municipal Judge, after affording an opportunity to the person accused
to be heard in defense, may impose a sanction authorized under § 800.12,
Wis. Stats. and may impose a forfeiture therefor not to exceed $200 or upon
nonpayment of the forfeiture and the assessments thereon, a jail sentence
not to exceed seven days.
§ 26-8. Abolition prohibited.
The Municipal Court hereby established shall not be abolished while the
§ 755.01(4) agreement is in effect.
Chapter 33
ELECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5. Village Board — See Ch. 82.
B. Employees. The Judge shall, in writing, appoint such clerks and deputy
clerks as are authorized and funded by the Boards of the Village of
Hobart and the Town of Lawrence.
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 26-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-8
1:43

ARTICLE I
Meetings on Election Day
[Adopted as § 1.13 of the 2000 Code]
§ 33-1. No meetings to be held; exception.
No Village Board meeting nor any meeting of Village committees boards
or commissions, including standing committees, of Village of Hobart
government shall take place on any primary or general election date held
in the Village of Hobart, Brown county, unless an emergency is declared by
the Village Board President.
§ 33-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-1
1:45

ARTICLE II
Split Shifts for Election Workers
[Adopted 3-18-2014 by Ord. No. 01-2014]
§ 33-2. Authority; intent.
The Village Board of the Village of Hobart, Brown County, Wisconsin, has
the specific authority under § 7.30 (1), Wis. Stats., to adopt this article. This
article allows the use of split shifts for election workers.
§ 33-3. Set of officials established.
Pursuant to the Wisconsin Statutes, there is hereby established one set of
election officials to conduct all elections in the Village and shall consist of
not less than seven inspectors. However, the Village Board shall have the
power to limit the number of election officials. The Village Clerk-Treasurer
shall determine in advance of each election whether the number of election
officials for such election should be reduced from the number prescribed by
the Wisconsin Statutes and, if such a reduction is so determined, the Clerk-
Treasurer shall further redistribute duties among remaining officials.
§ 33-4. Working hours established by Clerk-Treasurer.
The Village Clerk-Treasurer may, in the exercise of discretion, establish
different working hours for election officials assigned to the polling place.
This discretion shall include but not be limited to allowing designated
election officials to work for less than a full day.
§ 33-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-4
1:47

ARTICLE III
Absentee Ballots
[Adopted 6-7-2016 by Ord. No. 08-2016]
§ 33-5. Board of Absentee Canvassers; central canvassing.
Pursuant to §§ 7.52 and 7.53(2m) of the Wisconsin Statutes, the Village
Board of the Village of Hobart hereby creates a Municipal Board of
Absentee Canvassers and authorizes the centralized counting of absentee
ballots on election days as follows:
A. The Municipal Board of Absentee Canvassers shall be composed of the
Municipal Clerk, or a qualified elector of the municipality designated by
the Clerk, and two other qualified electors of the municipality appointed
by the Clerk for a term of two years, commencing on January 1 of each
odd-numbered year. A member appointed to fill a vacancy on the Board
of Absentee Canvassers would serve the remainder of the two-year
term. The Clerk may appoint additional inspectors under § 7.30(2)(a),
Wisconsin Statutes, to assist the Municipal Board of Absentee
Canvassers in canvassing absentee ballots under this section.
B. The Village of Hobart declares that, in lieu of canvassing absentee
ballots at polling places under § 6.88 of the Wisconsin Statutes, the
Municipal Board of Absentee Canvassers shall canvass all absentee
ballots at all elections held in the municipality.
C. The Municipal Clerk shall give at least 48 hours' notice of any meeting
of the Municipal Board of Absentee Canvassers under this section.
D. The Municipal Clerk upon the closing of the polls, shall post at his or
her office and on the Internet at a site announced by the Clerk before
the polls open, and shall make available to any person upon request, a
statement of the number of absentee ballots that the Clerk has mailed
or transmitted to electors and that have been returned by the closing
hour on election day.
§ 33-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-5
1:49
Chapter 40
FINANCE AND TAXATION
§ 33-5 HOBART CODE § 33-5
1:50
ARTICLE I
Village Obligation to Pay County Taxes
[Adopted as § 1.4 of the 2000 Code]
§ 40-1. Taxes required to be paid.
Pursuant to § 70.67(2), Wisconsin Statutes, the Village of Hobart obligates
itself to pay, if the Village of Hobart Clerk-Treasurer fails to do so, all state
and county taxes required by law to be paid by such Clerk-Treasurer to
the County Treasurer. A certified copy of this article shall be filed with the
Brown County Treasurer's Office and shall remain in effect until a certified
copy of its repeal is filed with such County Treasurer.
§ 40-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-1
1:51

ARTICLE II
Collection of Sewer Taxes for Interceptor
[Adopted as § 1.6 of the 2000 Code]
§ 40-2. Determination of gross acreage.
The Clerk-Treasurer is directed to determine the gross acreage owned by
each property owner within the Village of Hobart, which property is also
within the Green Bay Metropolitan Sewerage District and to determine the
total acreage lying within said area.
§ 40-3. Calculation of tax.
The Clerk-Treasurer is further directed to determine the amount needed
to be raised per acre in order to raise the sum needed to pay the annual
installments of $6,257.10 to the Green Bay Metropolitan Sewerage District.
§ 40-4. Special assessment charges for Green Bay Metropolitan
Sewerage District.
The Clerk-Treasurer is further directed to place on the tax roll of each
owner of property in the Village of Hobart which property is also within the
Green Bay Metropolitan Sewerage District a special charge to be inserted
in the tax roll as a special assessment a sum determined by multiplying the
total acreage owned by the per-acre amount as determined in § 40-3 of this
article.
§ 40-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-4
1:53

ARTICLE III
Disposal of Village-Owned Real Property
[Adopted 2-5-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-01]
§ 40-5. Definitions.
For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
DISPOSAL or DISPOSE — The sale, lease, exchange or donation of real
property.
LEASE — A tenancy in real property granting the right of possession for a
specified term for consideration, and shall not include a permit, license, or
franchise to use Village-owned or controlled real property or public right-ofway.
REAL PROPERTY — Any interest in real property owned by the Village
within or outside the corporate limits of the Village.
§ 40-6. Classification.
Real property qualifying for the procedure established in this section shall
be classified as follows:
§ 40-7. Scope.
A. Substandard undeveloped property. Parcels with no structures thereon
which are not of minimum buildable size for the zone in which located,
and parcels that do not meet the Village's existing development
ordinances.
B. Standard undeveloped property. Parcels with no structures thereon
which are of minimum or greater buildable size for the zone in which
located.
C. Developed property. Parcels of any size with structures thereon.
A. Real property owned by the Village shall be disposed of as provided in
this chapter unless another procedure is specified in the Municipal
Code or approved by the Village Board.
B. Any property disposed of through a direct negotiation with a
development invidual or entity shall be exempted from the provisions of
this article.
C. Before disposing of any real property under this chapter, the Village
shall find that the property is not needed for public use or that the
public interest may be furthered by disposal of such real property.
D. In determining whether to dispose of real property, the Village in its
discretion may consider whether to establish certain requirements as
conditions of the transaction, such as requiring the property be
developed to a certain standard by a specified date, that the property
§ 40-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-7
1:55
§ 40-8. Disposal of substandard undeveloped parcels.
§ 40-9. Disposal of standard undevelopment property and developed
property.
not be placed in tax-exempt status, and other conditions the Village may
deem appropriate.
A. Whenever a particular parcel or parcels is proposed for sale by the
Village, or purchase inquiry is made, and the property is classified as
substandard undeveloped property, the matters shall be set on the
regular Village Board agenda. Except as otherwise provided in this
section, notice of the agenda item shall be given to all property owners
within 250 feet of the parcel's boundary line and to any parties who
have inquired about the purchase. If the Village has issued a request for
bids seeking purchasers of the property and provided the request for
bids to property owners within 250 feet of the parcel's boundary line
and to those who have inquired about purchasing the property, notice
need only be provided to those who have submitted a bid proposal. The
Village Board shall determine whether it will offer the property for sale.
B. If the Village Board decides to sell the property, it will direct the Village
Administrator or his or her designee to take further action to sell the
property. The Village Board may authorize the Village Administrator or
his or her designee to publicize as appropriate, determine the existence
of interested prospective purchasers, and negotiate for the sale of the
property. Nothing in this section shall preclude the Village
Administrator or his or her designee from taking preliminary actions,
including publicizing a possible sale, determining the existence of
interested prospective purchasers, and issuing a request for bids prior
to the Village Board's decision, so long as the Village does not enter into
a binding agreement without Village Board authorization.
C. The Village Board shall have the final authority to approve or
disapprove the final terms of the sale. The Village Board may
preapprove terms and the agreement form at the meeting in which it
determines to sell the property. If the Village Board does not
preapprove terms and the agreement form at its initial meeting or if
alternate terms or agreement form are proposed, the Village Board
shall at a later regularly scheduled Council meeting consider approval
of the terms and agreement form.
A. Whenever a particular parcel or parcels is proposed for sale by the
Village or a purchase inquiry is made and the property is classified as
standard undeveloped property or developed property, the matter shall
be for a public hearing before the Village Board.
B. Notice of said hearing shall be published not less than once a week in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Village for two successive
weeks prior to the hearing, and shall describe the property for sale.
§ 40-7 HOBART CODE § 40-9
1:56
C. Prior to the sale of a parcel under this section, an appraisal of the
property shall be conducted. At the discretion of the Village Board, such
an appraisal may be ordered prior to or after the hearing. The appraisal
may be made available to the public at the hearing at the discretion of
the Village Board.
D. Public testimony shall be solicited at the hearing to determine if a sale
of any parcel is in the public interest, and the property is not needed for
public use.
E. After the hearing, the Village Board shall determine whether it will offer
the property for sale and what the minimum acceptable terms shall be.
F. If an offer to sell is authorized by the Village Board, the Village Board
shall decide whether to sell the property to the highest bidder at a
public sale, by sealed bid, or directly to the purchase inquirer on terms
established by the Village Board. A notice advertising the public sale or
solicited sealed bids shall be published at least once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Village, and said notice shall be published at
least two weeks prior to the sale or bid deadline date. The notice shall
describe the property to be sold, the minimum acceptable terms of sale,
and, if applicable, the person designated to receive bids, the last date
bids will be received, and the date, time and place that bids will be
opened.
G. If one or more bids are received at or above the minimum acceptable
terms, the highest bid shall be accepted and the Village Administrator
or designee shall complete the sale.
H. If no acceptable bids are received on a particular parcel, the following
options shall apply:
(1) The Village Board may alter or keep the same minimum terms as
established under Subsection E of this section and direct staff to
hold another sale, or
(2) The Village Board may alter or keep the same minimum terms
established under Subsection E of this section and list the property
for six months with a local real estate broker on a multiple listing
basis. A listing may be renewed for an additional one six-month
period.
I. After the expiration of the period set out in Subsection H above, the
property shall be removed from the market. Any decision to sell a piece
of property once it has been removed from the market shall require the
entire procedure set forth in this section to be repeated. The Village
Board may, however, decide whether or not an additional appraisal is
necessary.
§ 40-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-10
1:57
§ 40-10. Disposal to other public entities.
When disposing of real property to federal or state government or any of
their agencies or political subdivision, the Village Board may act without
complying with the provisions set forth in §§ 40-8 and 40-9 above when the
disposal is for a specific public use.
§ 40-11. Lease of surplus real property.
§ 40-12. Miscellaneous provisions.
A. When real property is determined by the Village Administrator to be
suitable for tenant occupancy and that occupancy is consistent with the
public purpose for which it was acquired or not be needed for the public
purpose for which it was acquired for up to three years, the Village
Board may lease any or all part of it to another for a term not to exceed
three years. The Village Board may require additional lease terms and
conditions consistent with the public health, safety and welfare.
B. When real property is determined by the Village Administrator to be
suitable for agricultural usage, the Village Board may lease any or all
part of it to another for a term not to exceed three years. The Village
Board may require additional lease terms and conditions consistent
with the public health, safety and welfare.
A. No employee of the Village of Hobart may enter into a purchase or
rental agreement under this article.
B. No member of the Village Board, whether individually or as a member
of any entity in which said member has a financial involvement, may
enter into a purchase or rental agreement with the Village Board,
unless the all of the following provisions are satisfied:
(1) The sale or rental is to the highest bidder at a public sale, or to the
highest bidder by sealed bid.
(2) The Ethics Board waives the requirement of the section after
determining that it is in the best interest of the City to do so.
§ 40-10 HOBART CODE § 40-12
1:58
Chapter 54
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 40-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-12
1:59

ARTICLE I
Nondisclosure of Confidential Information
[Adopted as § 1.14 of the 2000 Code]
§ 54-1. Declaration of policy.
§ 54-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms have the meaning indicated:
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION — Information in which the Village's
interests in its confidentiality or in the Village's effective functioning
outweigh interests in free speech to disclose such information at the time of
a proposed disclosure. "Confidential information" includes but is not limited
to information where the disclosure is prohibited by common law, or state
or federal law or statute, unless the release of such information is ordered
pursuant to a lawful order of a court or the informed consent of the subject,
as applicable; and information that is imparted during a closed session
meeting of a government body occurring pursuant to § 19.85, Wisconsin
Statutes, unless release is authorized by the legal custodian or other proper
legal authorization is given. For purposes of this definition, "information"
shall include knowledge imparted orally, digitally, recordings, and written
documents or records.
§ 54-3. Disclosure of confidential information prohibited.
No Village official or employee may use or publicly disclose confidential
information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the Village
gained in the course of or by reason of his official position or activities, nor
A. The Board recognizes that proper operation of democratic government
requires that public officials and government employees be open and
responsible to the people, and further recognize that citizens of the
Village are entitled to the largest degree of information regarding the
affairs of the Village, all as set forth in Subchapter V of Chapter 19 of
the Wisconsin Statues. At the same time, however, the Board recognizes
that § 19.85 of the Wisconsin Statutes recognizes the utility and
importance of closed session meetings of governmental bodies in
certain circumstances. In recognition of these two competing interests,
there is established this nondisclosure of confidential information for all
Village officials and employees, whether elected or appointed, paid or
unpaid, including members of boards, committees, and commissions of
the Village.
B. The purpose of this nondisclosure of confidential information is to
establish guidelines of conduct for all Village officials and employees by
directing nondisclosure by such officials and employees of information
declared confidential in matters affecting the Village. The provisions
and purpose of this nondisclosure of confidential information, and such
rules and regulations as may be established hereunder, are hereby
declared to be in the best interests of the Village.
§ 54-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-3
1:61
shall such official or employee use such information to advance the financial
or other private interest of such official or employee or others. Allegations
of unauthorized disclosures of confidential information shall be investigated
by the Ethics Committee, and the findings of such investigation shall be
forwarded to the Board for further action.
§ 54-4. Confidentiality of income and expense information.13
Whenever the Assessor, in the performance of the Assessor's duties,
requests or obtains income and expense information pursuant to
§ 70.47(7)(af), Wis. Stats., or any successor statute thereto, then such
income and expense information that is provided to the Assessor shall be
held by the Assessor on a confidential basis, except, however, that the
information may be revealed to and used by persons in the discharge
of duties imposed by law; in the discharge of duties imposed by office
(including but not limited to use by the Assessor in performance of official
duties of the Assessor's office and use by the Board of Review in
performance of its official duties); or pursuant to order of a court. Income
and expense information provided to the Assessor under § 70.47(7)(af),
unless a court determines that it is inaccurate, is, per § 70.47(7)(af), not
subject to the right of inspection and copying under § 19.35(1), Wis. Stats.
13.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 54-3 HOBART CODE § 54-4
1:62
Chapter 60
OFFICIAL MAP
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 295.
§ 60-1. Intent.
It is the intent of the Board of Trustees to establish an Official Map for the
purpose of serving and promoting the public health, safety, convenience,
economy, orderliness, and general welfare of the community; to further the
orderly layout and use of land; to stabilize the location of real property
boundary lines; to insure proper legal descriptions and proper
monumenting of land; to facilitate adequate provision for transportation,
parks, playgrounds, and stormwater drainage; and to facilitate the further
subdivision of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land.
§ 60-2. Authority.
This chapter is enacted under the authority granted by § 62.23(6) of the
Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 60-3. Official Map.
The Official Map shall show the location and extent of all platted and
existing streets, highways, parkways, parks, and playgrounds within the
corporate limits of the Village of Hobart as heretofore laid out, adopted and
established by law. There is hereby established, as the Official Map of the
Village of Hobart, the Map which accompanies and is made a part of this
chapter bearing the date of May 25, 1977. This map is hereby designated as
the "Official Map of the Village of Hobart," and all notations, references and
other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this chapter as
though the matters and information thereon were fully described herein.
§ 60-4. Changes and additions.
A. The Board of Trustees may change or add to the Official Map so as to
establish the exterior lines of planned new streets, highways, historic
districts, parkways, railroad rights-of-way, public transit facilities,
waterways, parks or playgrounds, or to widen, narrow, extend, or close
any plotted, existing, proposed or planned streets, highways, parkways,
parks or playgrounds.14
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 54-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-4
1:63
§ 60-5. Building permits.
§ 60-6. Municipal improvements.
No public sewer or other municipal street utility or improvement shall be
constructed in any street, highway or parkway within the corporate limits of
the Village of Hobart until such street, highway, or parkway is duly placed
on the Official Map.
§ 60-7. Appeals.17
The Board of Appeals shall have the power to review any administrative
decision of the Village Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector to deny a
permit for the erection of a structure under this chapter and to grant relief
B. The Board of Trustees shall refer any change or addition to the Official
Map to the Village Planning and Zoning Commission for review and
report thereon prior to adoption. The Village Planning and Zoning
Commission shall report their recommendation to the Board of Trustees
within 60 days.15
C. A public hearing of parties in interest and citizens before the Board of
Trustees shall be required before any changes or additions to the
Official Map are effective. Notice of the public hearing shall be
published as a class 2 notice under Ch. 985.16
D. Changes and additions made by duly approved subdivision plats shall
not require the public hearing if the changes or additions do not affect
any land outside the area being platted.
A. For the purpose of preserving the integrity of the Official Map, a
building permit shall be required for any structure or part thereof that
shall hereafter be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended,
enlarged, converted or structurally altered. No permit shall hereafter
be issued for any building in the bed of any existing or proposed street,
highway, or parkway shown on the Official Map. No permit for the
erection of any building shall be issued unless a street, highway, or
parkway giving access to such proposed structure has been duly placed
on this map.
B. The Village Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector may require each
applicant for a building permit to submit a plan prepared and certified
by a registered land surveyor, showing accurately the location of any
proposed building with reference to any street, highway, or parkway
shown on the Official Map.
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 60-4 HOBART CODE § 60-7
1:64
from the requirements of this chapter under the provisions of § 62.23(6)(e),
(f), and (g) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 60-8. Certified copy of map.
There shall be a certified copy of the Official Map described in § 60-4. The
certified copy shall be kept in the Office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer, and
shall be available for inspection by any interested person during regular
office hours. The certified copy shall bear on its face a certification that
it is a true copy of the Official Map described in and accompanying this
chapter and shall show the date of adoption of this chapter and shall be
signed by the Village President and countersigned by the Village Clerk-
Treasurer. Thereafter, no change or addition to such Official Map shall
become effective until it shall have been indicated by the appropriate
convention on the aforesaid certified copy of the Official Map and a
certificate placed thereon or attached thereto bearing the number and date
of adoption of the amending ordinance. The certificate shall be signed by
the Village President and countersigned by the Village Clerk-Treasurer.
§ 60-9. Map to be filed with register of deeds.
The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall be responsible immediately upon adoption
of the Official Map or any amendment thereto for recording a true copy
of the amended Official Map with the Register of Deeds of the County of
Brown, Wisconsin.
§ 60-10. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Village Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector
and the Chief of Police to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 60-11. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 75
RECORDS
A. Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties
as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.18
B. No damages shall be allowed for the taking by any government agency,
for street, highway and parkway purposes, any building erected in
violation of this chapter.
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 60-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-11
1:65

ARTICLE I
Records Retention
[Adopted as § 1.8 of the 2000 Code]
§ 75-1. Purpose.
§ 75-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORITY — Refers to any specific statutory, administrative rule, or
specific regulation that determines retention of the record. In most cases
this will be blank because units of government have discretion to establish
a time period.
BRIEF DESCRIPTION — Provide a brief description of the records. Group
specific items such as forms into logical groups that have the same function
or purpose.
LEGAL CUSTODIAN — The individual responsible for maintaining records
pursuant to § 19.33, Wis. Stats.
PERIOD OF TIME — Is expressed in years unless specifically identified as
month or day.
RECORD — Has the meaning defined in § 19.32(2), Wis. Stats.
RETENTION PERIOD — Refers to the time that the identified records must
be kept until destruction.
A. The purpose of this article is to establish a Village records retention
schedule and authorize destruction of Village records pursuant to the
schedule on an annual basis. Records custodians may destroy a record
prior to the time set forth in the schedule only if such a record has been
photographically reproduced as an original record pursuant to
§ 16.61(7), Wis. Stats.
B. Any record not covered by this article or any regulation or law shall be
retained seven years unless the record is added by amendment into the
ordinance and the shorter time period approved by the State Public
Records Board.
CR — "Creation," which usually refers to receipt or creation of the
record.
A.
FIS — "Current fiscal year" and the additional amount of time as
indicated.
B.
EVT — "Event" and refers to an occurrence that starts the retention
"clock ticking." Close of contract, termination of employee, and
disposition of a case are common events.
C.
D. P — "Permanent" retention.
§ 75-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-2
1:67
SHSW NOTIFY — Refers to whether or not the State Historical Society
of Wisconsin has waived the required statutory notification prior to
destruction of records.
§ 75-3. General provisions.
§ 75-4. Police Department records.
The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of the
designated retention period:
A. W — Records are not historical and the required notification is waived.
N — The records may have secondary historical value and therefore
SHSW notification is required on a case-by-case basis prior to
destruction.
B.
N/A — Not applicable and refers to those circumstances where a local
unit of government is retaining a record permanently.
C.
A. Historical records. Under § 19.21(4)(a), municipalities must notify the
State Historical Society of Wisconsin (SHSW) prior to destroying
records. However, the SHSW has waived the required sixty-day notice
for any record marked "W" (waived notice). SHSW must be notified
prior to destruction of a record marked "N" (non-waived). Notice is also
required for any record not listed in this article. "N/A" indicates "not
applicable" and applies to any record designated for permanent
retention.
B. Microfilming of records. Local units of government may keep and
preserve public records through the use of microfilm, providing the
microfilm meets the applicable standards in Wis. Stats. 16.61(7).
Retention periods and estimated costs and benefits of converting
records between different media should be considered in deciding
which records to microfilm. After verification, paper records converted
to microfilm should be destroyed. The retention periods identified in
this article apply to records in any media. [NOTE: When optical disk is
expressly authorized in the statutes for local government use, this
section should be revised to include its use.]
C. Destruction after request for inspection. No requested records may be
destroyed until after the request is granted or 60 days after the request
is denied. If an action is commenced under § 19.35, Wis. Stats., the
requested record may not be destroyed until after a court order is
issued and all appeals have been completed. See § 19.35(5), Wis. Stats.
D. Destruction pending litigation. No record subject to pending litigation
shall be destroyed until the litigation is resolved.
E. Review and approval by Public Records Board. This article and the
retention periods of less than seven years have been reviewed and
approved by the Public Records Board.
§ 75-2 HOBART CODE § 75-4
1:68
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Traffic citations (and
accompanying
documentation) sent through
Municipal Court
EVT + 8 years (after
closed)
W
Ordinance citations EVT + 8 years (after
closed)
W
All accounting records CR + 7 years W
Personnel records EVT + 8 years
Property inventory records EVT + 8 years
Citizen complaints against EVT + 8 years W
Investigation and citation
records:
Arrest records EVT + 8 years W
Incident records EVT + 10 years W
Fingerprint cards EVT + 8 years W
Evidence cards EVT + 10 years W
Investigation records EVT + 10 years from
date of closing of
investigation
W
Audio and video tape
recordings:
Police dispatch audio
tapes
CR + 120 days W
Police video tapes CR + 120 days W
Work schedules CR + 7 years W
Accident reports EVT + 4 years W
Informational teletype
messages
CR + 30 days W
Medical records, RE:
occupational exposure
EVT + 30 years W
Training records for exposure
control
CR + 3 years W
§ 75-5. Village Board and committee records.
The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of the
designated retention period:
§ 75-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-5
1:69
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Minute books Permanent N/A
Audio tapes CR + 1 year; CR + 90
days if made solely for
the purpose of drafting
the minutes
W
Ordinances Permanent N/A
Resolutions Permanent N/A
Ordinance book Permanent N/A
Affidavits of publication CR + 3 years W
§ 75-6. Real property records.
The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of the
designated retention period:
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Deeds Permanent N/A
Opinions of title Permanent N/A
Abstracts and certificates of
title
Permanent N/A
Title insurance policies Permanent N/A
Plats Permanent N/A
Easements Permanent N/A
Leases EVT + 7 years after
termination of lease
W
Vacation or alteration of plat Permanent N/A
§ 75-7. Licenses and permits.
The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of the
designated retention period:
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Liquor- and beer-related
license
EVT + 4 years W
Other license applications EVT + 3 years W
Receipts CR + 4 years W
License stubs:
All liquor- and beer-related CR + 4 years W
Other CR + 3 years W
§ 75-5 HOBART CODE § 75-7
1:70
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Dog licenses monthly report
to County Clerk (by
Treasurer)
CR + 3 years W
§ 75-8. Municipal borrowing records.
The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of the
designated retention period:
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Bond procedure record EVT + 7 years (after
bond issue expires)
W
Bond register EVT + 7 years (after
bond issue expires
W
Bond payment register EVT + 7 years (after
bond issue expires or
following payment of all
outstanding matured
bonds/notes, coupons,
whichever is later)
W
Canceled bonds, coupons and
promissory notes
EVT (until audited) W
Certificates of destruction EVT + 7 years (after
bond issue expires or
following payment of all
outstanding matured
bonds/notes/coupons,
whichever is later)
W
§ 75-9. Fidelity bond records.
The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of the
designated retention period:
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Fidelity bond EVT + 5 years (after
bond expires)
W
Fidelity bond book EVT + 5 years (after last
bond expires)
W
Oath of office EVT + 5 years (after the
term of service covered
by the oath has ended)
§ 75-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-10
1:71
§ 75-10. Legal opinions.
Legal opinions rendered shall not be destroyed and shall be retained
permanently.
§ 75-11. Accounting records.
Records Period of
Retention
SHSW Notice
Accounts payable:
Purchase invoices FIS + 7 years W
Vouchers FIS + 7 years W
Accounts receivable:
Accounts receivable
invoices
FIS + 7 years W
Receipts FIS + 7 years W
Collection blotters EVT + 1 year (after
audit)
W
§ 75-12. Journal, registers and ledger.
The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of the
designated retention period:
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Receipts journal FIS + 15 years W
Voucher/order register FIS + 15 years W
General journal FIS + 15 years W
Journal voucher FIS + 15 years W
Appropriation journal FIS + 15 years W
Appropriation journal
voucher
FIS + 15 years W
General ledger FIS + 15 years N
Trial balance EVT (until audited)
§ 75-13. Treasurer's records.
The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of the
designated retention period:
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Cashbook FIS + 15 years W
Daily cash drawer
reconciliations
EVT + 1 year (after
audit)
W
§ 75-10 HOBART CODE § 75-13
1:72
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Bank reconciliations FIS + 7 years W
Bank statements FIS + 7 years W
Cancelled order checks FIS + 7 years W
Lists of outstanding checks FIS + 7 years W
Check register FIS + 7 years W
Duplicate deposit tickets EVT + 1 year (after
audit)
W
Bank credit/debit notices EVT + 1 year (after
audit)
W
Investment records FIS + 7 years W
All receipts FIS + 7 years W
§ 75-14. Payroll records.
The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of the
designated retention period:
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Payroll support records FIS + 2 years W
Employee's withholding
allowance certificate
EVT + 5 years (after
being superseded)
W
Employee's Wisconsin
withholding exemption
certificate
EVT + 5 years being
superseded)
W
Employee enrollment and
waiver cards
EVT + 2 years (after
being superseded or
terminated)
W
Employee earning records FIS + 5 years W
Payroll check register FIS + 5 years W
Payroll distribution record FIS + 5 years W
Payroll voucher FIS + 5 years W
Employee earning records FIS + 5 years W
Payroll check register FIS + 5 years W
Payroll distribution record FIS + 5 years W
Payroll voucher FIS + 5 years W
Cancelled payroll checks FIS + 5 years W
Wage and tax statement FIS + 5 years W
Report of Wisconsin income
tax
FIS + 5 years W
§ 75-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-14
1:73
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Employer's annual
reconciliation of Wisconsin
income tax withheld from
wages
FIS + 5 years W
Federal deposit tax stubs FIS + 5 years W
Quarterly report of federal
income tax withheld
FIS + 5 years W
Annual report of federal
income tax withheld
FIS + 5 years W
State's quarterly report of
wages paid
FIS + 5 years W
Monthly memorandum report FIS + 5 years W
Quarterly report, payroll
summary
FIS + 5 years W
Premium due notice FIS + 5 years W
§ 75-15. Purchasing records.
The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of the
designated retention period:
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Purchase requisitions EVT + 1 year (after PO
issued)
W
Purchase orders FIS + 7 years W
Receiving report FIS + 7 years W
Bids, successful EVT + 7 years (after
contract has expired)
W
Bids, unsuccessful EVT + 1 year (after PO
issued)
W
Inventory of property EVT (retain until
superseded)
W
§ 75-16. Budget and audit records.19
The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of the
designated retention period:
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Budget worksheets FIS + 3 years N/A
Final budget Permanent N/A
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 75-14 HOBART CODE § 75-16
1:74
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Audit reports Permanent N/A
§ 75-17. Special assessment records.
The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of the
designated retention period:
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Preliminary resolution CR + 2 years W
Report on special assessment
project
CR + 2 years W
Waiver of special assessment
notice and hearing
EVT + 1 year (after the
final resolution is
approved)
W
Final resolution Permanent N/A
Certified special assessment
roll
EVT (retain until all
assessments are
collected)
W
Statement of new special
assessments
CR + 5 years W
Special assessment payment
register
EVT (retain until all
assessments are
collected)
W
§ 75-18. Board of Review records.
The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of the
designated retention period:
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Form of objection to property
assessment and supporting
documentation
EVT + 7 years (after
final action by board of
review or completion of
appeal)
W
Minute book of Board of
Review
CR + 7 years N
Proceedings of the Board of
Review on audio tapes or as
stenographic notes including
any transcriptions thereof
EVT + 7 years (after
final action by board of
review or completion of
appeal)
W
Notice of determinations of
the Board of Review
EVT + 7 years (after
final action by the Board
of Review or completion
of appeal)
W
§ 75-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-19
1:75
§ 75-19. Tax calculation records.
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Tax levy certification of the
school district clerk
FIS + 3 years W
Certificates of
apportionment
FIS + 3 years W
State shared aid payment
notices
FIS + 6 years provided
record has been audited
W
Final worksheet for
determining allowable levy
FIS + 5 years W
Statement of taxes Permanently N/A
Statement of new special
assessments
FIS + 5 years W
Statement of new sewer
service charges
FIS + 5 years W
General property tax credit
certification
FIS + 5 years W
Explanation of property tax
credit certification
FIS + 5 years W
Real property tax roll EVT (record is
transferred to the County
Treasurer)
N/A
Personal property tax roll FIS + 15 years N
§ 75-20. Tax collection records.
The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of the
designated retention period:
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Escrow account list EVT (retain until
superseded)
W
Receipts FIS + 7 years W
Receipt stub book FIS + 7 years W
Tax collection blotters EVT (until audited) W
Statement of taxes remaining
unpaid
EVT (retain with tax) N/A
Tax settlement receipt FIS + 5 years W
Municipal Clerk-Treasurer's
settlement
FIS + 5 years W
Personal property tax roll FIS + 15 years N
§ 75-19 HOBART CODE § 75-21
1:76
§ 75-21. Engineering and public works records.
The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of the
designated retention period:
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Field notes Permanent N/A
Benchmark books Permanent N/A
Section corner monument
logs
Permanent N/A
Aerial photographs EVT (until superseded) W
City maps Permanent N/A
Water, storm, and sanitary
sewer main maps
Permanent N/A
Profile and grade books Permanent N/A
Excavation plans of private
utilities
Permanent N/A
Index to maps Permanent N/A
Preliminary subdivision plats EVT (until superseded
by final plat)
W
Final subdivision plats Permanent N/A
Annexation plats Permanent N/A
Assessor's plats Permanent N/A
Structure plans for municipal
buildings and bridges
EVT (life of the
structure
N
Annual reports Permanent N/A
Records of the Board of
Public Works (includes
minutes of the meetings of
the Board and supporting
documents submitted to the
Board)
Permanent N/A
Records of the Planning and
Zoning Commission (includes
minutes of the meetings of
the Commission and
supporting documents
submitted to the Commission)
Permanent N/A
Records of the Board of
Appeals (includes minutes of
the meetings of the Board
and supporting documents
submitted to the Board)
Permanent N/A
§ 75-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-21
1:77
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
House number and address
change file
Permanent N/A
Street vacations and
dedications copies
EVT (retain for active
reference life)
W
Permits (includes permits for
the excavation of streets by
private utility companies)
EVT + 3 years W
Petitions for street and sewer
systems
EVT + 2 years W
Special assessment
calculations
EVT + 2 years W
TV sewer inspection records EVT (until superseded) W
State highway aids program
records
FIS + 7 years W
§ 75-22. Public works projects and contracts.
The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of the
designated retention period:
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Notice to contractors EVT + 7 years (after
completion of project)
EVT + 2 years (for
unsuccessful bidders)
W
Certified check EVT (retain until
contract has been signed
and return to bidder)
N/A
Bid bond EVT + 7 years (after
completion of project)
EVT + 2 years (for
unsuccessful bidders)
W
Bidder's proof of
responsibility
EVT + 7 years (after
completion of project)
EVT + 2 years (for
unsuccessful bidders)
W
Bids EVT + 7 years (after
completion of project)
EVT + 2 years (for
unsuccessful bidders)
W
§ 75-21 HOBART CODE § 75-22
1:78
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Affidavit of organization
authority
EVT + 7 years (after
completion of project)
EVT + 2 years (for
unsuccessful bidders)
W
Bid tabulations EVT + 2 years W
Performance bond EVT + 7 years (after
completion of project)
W
Contract EVT + 7 years (after
completion of project)
W
Master project files EVT + 20 years (after life
of structure)
N
Blueprints EVT (until superseded by
the as-built tracings)
W
As-built tracings EVT (life of the project) N
§ 75-23. Street and highway records.
The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of the
designated retention period:
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Street operations file CR + 2 years after
created
W
Street and sidewalk
maintenance and repair
CR + 25 years W
Tree planting, inspection,
trimming, and removal
CR + 25 years W
Stock control records CR + 2 years W
Fuel usage reports CR + 2 years W
Heavy equipment and
vehicle
EVT (life of equipment
and/or vehicle inventory
ledger or until inventory
ledger is superseded)
W
Vehicle maintenance
histories
EVT (life of vehicle) W
Vehicle expense reports EVT (life of vehicle) W
Vehicle usage reports CR + 2 years W
Payroll support records CR + 2 years W
Purchasing records CR + 7 years W
Complaint ledger CR + 2 years W
Monthly reports CR + 3 years W
§ 75-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-23
1:79
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Annual reports Permanent N/A
§ 75-24. Park records.
The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of the
designated retention period:
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Master park plan Permanent N/A
Plats Permanent N/A
Aerial photographs Permanent N/A
Supervisor's daily report of
work completed
CR + 2 years W
Payroll support records CR + 2 years W
Reservation requests CR + 30 days; if
payment receipts are
attached, CR + 7 years
W
Master reservation book CR + 2 years W
Records of the Board of Park
Commissioners (includes
minutes of the meetings of
the Board and minutes of the
meetings of the Board and
supporting documents
submitted to the Board)
Permanent N/A
§ 75-25. Building permits and inspection records.20
The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of the
designated retention period:
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Applications and permits EVT (life of structure) W
Code compliance inspection
reports
EVT (life of structure) W
Inspection address file EVT (life of structure) W
Certificates of occupancy EVT (until suspended) W
Energy calculation
worksheets
CR + 3 years W
State-approved commercial
building plans
EVT + 4 years N
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 75-23 HOBART CODE § 75-25
1:80
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Permit fee receipts FIS + 7 years W
Permit ledger CR + 7 years W
Village Attorney's case file
copy
EVT + 1 years (after
case has been closed)
W
Quarter section maps, copies EVT (until superseded) W
Records of the Board of
Appeals (includes minutes of
meetings of the Board and
supporting documents
submitted to Board)
Permanent W
Records of the Board of
Appeals (includes minutes of
meetings of Board and
supporting documents
submitted to Board)
Permanent N/A
Records of the Planning and
Zoning Commission (includes
minutes of meetings of
Commission and supporting
documents submitted to the
Commission)
Permanent N/A
§ 75-26. Sanitation and consumer protection records.
The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of the
designated retention period:
§ 75-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-26
1:81
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Public swimming pool survey
reports, campgrounds and
camping survey reports,
mobile home park survey
reports, recreational and
education camp survey
reports, restaurant and
tavern survey reports, hotels,
motels, tourist rooms, and
rooming houses survey
reports, retail dairy case and
milk products reports, retail
and wholesale food
establishment reports,
nursing home survey reports,
and vending machine survey
reports
EVT + 5 years W
Restaurant license
applications
EVT + 3 years W
Retail dairy products license EVT + 3 years W
Food handling and sale
permits
EVT + 3 years W
Septic tank permits Permanent N/A
Open air burning permits EVT + 6 months W
Weights and measures, field
test reports and package
weighing reports
CR + 3 years W
Complaints and follow-up
reports
EVT + 5 years (from the
date the complaint was
resolved)
W
Utility disconnections in
private residence
investigation reports
CR + 3 years E
Request to declare a medical
emergency
EVT + 3 years W
§ 75-27. Sewer and water utility records.
The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of the
designated retention period:
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Water stubs FIS + 2 years W
Receipts of current billings FIS + 2 years W
§ 75-26 HOBART CODE § 75-27
1:82
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Customer's ledgers of
municipal utilities
FIS + 2 years W
All other utility records CR + 7 years W
Water quality laboratory tests
(deep well and landfill well
water analysis detail and
summary reports; chemical
and bacteriological analysis
of municipal drinking water
detail and summary reports;
municipal drinking water
fluoride analysis; swimming
pool water bacteriological
analysis; public bathing
beach water bacteriological
analysis; and water quality
control readings)
EVT + 5 years (if
information has been
transferred to a
permanent test site
location file, EVT + 1
year)
W
Maps showing the location
and physical characteristics
of the utility plant
EVT (until map is
superseded)
W
Engineering records in
connection with construction
projects
EVT (until record is
superseded or 6 years
after plant is retired
provided mortality data
are retained)
W
Operating records:
Station pumpage records CR + 15 years or EVT +
3 years after the source
is abandoned
W
Interruption records CR + 6 years W
Meter test records EVT (see § PSC 185.46) W
Meter history record EVT (life of meter) W
Annual meter accuracy
summary
CR + 10 years W
Pressure records CR + 6 years W
Customer records:
Complaint records CR + 3 years W
Customer deposit EVT + 6 years (after
refund)
W
Meter reading sheets or
cards
CR + 6 years W
Billing records CR + 6 years W
§ 75-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-27
1:83
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Filed rates and rules Permanent W
Analyses of any water
samples taken from the water
system
EVT + 10 years
(pursuant to Wis. Adm.
Code § NR 809.82)
W
§ 75-28. Election records.
All materials and supplies associated with an election may be destroyed
according to the following schedule unless there is a recount or litigation
pending with respect to the election:
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Contents of a blank ballot
box-unused ballots and
materials
EVT (3 business days
after the canvas is
completed)
W
Voter serial number slips EVT (3 business days
after the canvas is
completed)
W
Voting machine recorders EVT (14 days after a
primary) (21 days after an
election)**
W
Detachable recording units
on electronic voting
equipment
EVT (14 days after a
primary) (21 days after an
election)***
W
Ballots (state, county, local) EVT (30 days after the
election
W
Ballots (federal offices)**** EVT (22 months after
election)
W
Applications for absentee
ballots (for federal election
ballots)
EVT (90 days after the
election) (22 months after
the election for federal
offices)
W
Forms associated with
election such as tally sheets,
inspector's statements and
nomination papers
EVT (90 days after the
election) (22 months after
the election for federal
offices)
W
Official canvass statements EVT (10 years after the
election)
W
Registration and poll
lists–nonpartisan primaries
and elections
EVT (2 years after the
election for which they
were created)
W
Registration and poll
lists–partisan primaries and
general elections
EVT (4 years after the
election)
W
§ 75-27 HOBART CODE § 75-28
1:84
Records Period of Retention SHSW Notice
Canceled registration cards EVT + 4 years (after
cancellation)
W
Election notices EVT + (1 year after the
election) (22 months for
federal election)
W
Proofs of publication and
correspondence relative to
publications
EVT + (1 year after the
election) (22 months for
federal election)
W
Campaign registration
statements
EVT + (6 years after
termination by the
registrant)
W
Campaign finance reports EVT + (6 years after date
of receipt)
W
NOTES:
** The Governor may by order permit the clearing of voting machine
recorders before this date if a special election is called.
*** Before units can be cleared or erased, the information must be
transferred to a disk or other recording medium and retained for 22
months.
**** Federal offices are President of the U.S., U.S. Senator, and Congress.
§ 75-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-28
1:85
Chapter 82
VILLAGE BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5. Elections — See Ch. 33.
§ 75-28 HOBART CODE § 75-28
1:86
ARTICLE I
Election and Salaries
[Adopted as § 1.9 of the 2000 Code]
§ 82-1. Membership; terms of office.
The Village Board shall consist of the Village President and four Trustees,
all of whom shall be elected from the Village at large. The terms of office
shall be as set forth in Chapter 5, Administration of Government. The Village
Board shall consist of the Village President and four Trustees, all of whom
shall be elected from the Village at large. The terms of office shall be as set
forth in Chapter 5, Administration of Government.
§ 82-2. Salaries.
The salary for the Village President is hereby formally established as
$17,900 annually. For the term of office commencing after the third Tuesday
in April 2014, the salary for the Village President shall be $15,000 annually.
The salary for each Trustee is hereby formally established as $7,500
annually.
§ 82-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-2
1:87
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 95
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 95-1. Purpose.
The primary purpose of this chapter is to reduce the incidence of false
burglar/holdup and fire alarms by eliminating those false alarms which are
preventable or avoidable. It is also meant to encourage the installation of
reliable emergency alarm systems in all structures within the Village in
order to provide additional protection to persons and property from fire,
crime, including burglary, robbery and vandalism, and other hazards that
may constitute a danger to persons and property. This chapter is intended
to impose standards and requirements from such causes as the negligence
of the user of an alarm system or of his employees in operating the system,
the maintenance of equipment or the sale, installation or servicing of such
installations will provide a technique of early detection, which will permit
the Police Department and Fire Department to increase the present level of
protection to persons and property.
§ 95-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
FALSE ALARM — A signal from an alarm system that alerts the Police
Department/Fire Department that results in an emergency response from
the Police/Fire Department when a situation of emergency does not exist.
LOCAL ALARM — An intrusion/burglar alarm system, or fire alarm that
gives a signal, either visual or audible, or both, on the exterior or interior
portion of the property, but does not leave that structure to a central control
receiving location. Not to include detectors such as smoke detectors/carbon
monoxide detectors, medical alarms such as Lifeline®, septic tank alarms
or electrical problem indicators. For the most part, these are standalone,
designed to warn persons inside the structure.
POLICE OR FIRE ALARM — Any device designed to detect and alert police
or fire of such occurrence and when activated gives a signal, either by
visual, audible, or transmitting or causing to be transmitted an alarm signal,
or the combination of any of the above.
SECURITY ALARM SYSTEM — Any device designed for the detection of
an unauthorized entry to the premises, an unlawful act or any emergency
that alerts the Police Department of its commission or occurrence and,
when activated, gives an internal or external signal, either visual, audible
or transmits or causes to be transmitted a signal, or any combination of the
above.
§ 82-2 HOBART CODE § 95-3
1:88
§ 95-3. Alarm permits.
§ 95-4. Operational requirements.
A. Required. No person shall install or cause to be installed any alarm
system, as defined above, for any premises in the Village until an alarm
permit therefor has been issued by the Village, with the following
exception: not to include detectors such as smoke detectors/carbon
monoxide detectors, medical alarms such as Lifeline, septic tank alarms
or electrical problem indicators. For the most part, these are
standalone alarms designed to warn persons inside the structure.
B. Application for permit. An application for an alarm permit shall be
provided by the Village and shall require an applicant to furnish
information sufficient to identify the applicant, the location of the
premises to be protected by the alarm system and such other
information as the Police or Fire Department may deem necessary for
safe and proper emergency response. The annual alarm permit fee for a
full or partial calendar year beginning January 1 and expiring
December 31 of each year, in an amount as set from time to time by
resolution of the Village Board, shall be collected at the time of
application. A permit shall be required for each premises alarmed or
each separate alarm system on a single premises.21
C. Issuance of alarm permit. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall issue an
alarm permit to the applicant upon approval of the Village
Administrator or his designee. The alarm permit shall be issued for a
period not to exceed 12 months, expiring on December 31 of each year.
Applicants that are denied alarm permits may appeal the denial to the
Village Board or a committee designated by the Village Board.
D. Existing alarm systems. For those systems installed on premises within
the Village prior to March 6, 2001, a permit shall be obtained within 60
days after the effective date of this chapter from which this article is
derived. With respect to any alarm system installed after the effective
date of this chapter, a permit must be issued before the alarm system is
installed.
A. Duty to maintain alarm system. The property owner shall be
responsible for maintaining the alarm system in proper working order.
B. Duty to respond to alarm. The owner of premises protected by an alarm
system must respond to the protected premises within 30 minutes of
notification of an alarm. The owner/key holder is to assist police officers
in gaining access to the building for the purpose of inspection. The
owner/key holder is also responsible for shutting off and/or resetting
the alarm system. Under no circumstances shall a member of the Police
Department or Fire Department reset an alarm. The owner of an
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 95-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-4
1:89
§ 95-5. False alarms.
§ 95-6. Permit cancellation; alarm disconnection; telephone dialers;
limitations of liability.
alarmed premise shall provide current information on persons/key
holders to be contacted in the owner's absence.
C. Time delay and shutoff. All security alarm systems shall be equipped
with a twenty-second time delay in cases where the alarm is
accidentally tripped. All local alarms shall be equipped with a fifteenminute
automatic shutoff or some other secure means of turning off the
alarm.
A. Special charge for false alarms:
(1) After the alarm system has been installed for 30 days, the owner
shall be subject to a special charge for each false alarm in a twelvemonth,
per calendar year, January 1 through December 31 of each
year, in such amounts as set from time to time by resolution of the
Village Board.22
(2) Exceptions:
(a) Municipal alarms.
(b) False alarms caused by outside sources.
(c) Any special charge may be waived by the Village Administrator
or his designee if the owner can show that the false alarm was
caused by an outside source beyond the owner's control. That
the alarm was properly maintained and not the result of
negligence on the part of the owner, his agent or employees.
(d) Not to include detectors such as smoke detectors/carbon
monoxide detectors, medical alarms (Lifeline) or electrical
problem indicators. For the most part, these are standalone
alarms designed to warn persons inside the structure.
(e) Motor vehicle alarms. This chapter shall not apply to audible
alarms affixed to motor vehicles.
(3) Collection of special charges. Special charges for false alarms, as
provided in Subsection A(1) above, shall be billed to the owner and,
if not timely paid, shall be placed on the tax roll pursuant to the
provisions of § 66.0627, for collection and settlement under Wis.
Stats. Ch. 74.
A. Permit cancellation; alarm disconnection. Whenever there is a record of
an excessive number of alarms or the operation of the alarm system is
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 95-4 HOBART CODE § 95-6
1:90
§ 95-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a
penalty as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-3.
Chapter 102
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 201.
Nuisances — See Ch. 207.
Zoning — See Ch. 295.
not consistent with the purpose of this chapter, the Village
Administrator or his designee may, in writing, require the owner to
repair or replace the alarm system within 10 days. If the repair or
replacement is not made within 10 days, the Village Administrator
or his designee may order the alarm permit canceled and the alarm
disconnected. No person shall continue to operate an alarm system for
which an alarm permit has been canceled.
B. Telephone alarm dialers. Telephone alarm dialers are not permitted to
be programmed to direct dial the Police or Fire Department, except by
special permission of the Village Administrator or his designee.
C. Limitations of liability. The Village shall not be liable for any defects in
any alarm system or the central board, or any transmission
malfunctions or delays.
§ 95-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-7
1:91

ARTICLE I
Barking Dogs
[Adopted as § 3.2 of the 2000 Code]
§ 102-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DOG — Any canine, regardless of age or sex.
OWNER — Any person owning, harboring or keeping a dog and the
occupant of any premises on which a dog remains or to which it customarily
returns daily for a period of 10 days is presumed to be harboring or keeping
the dog within the meaning of this section.
§ 102-2. Keeping barking dogs prohibited. [Added 1-6-2015 by Ord.
No. 01-2015]
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to keep or harbor any dog
which habitually barks, howls or yelps to the great discomfort of the peace
and quiet of the neighborhood or in such manner as materially to disturb or
annoy persons in the neighborhood who are of ordinary sensibilities. Such
dogs are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. A dog is considered to be
in violation of this section when two complaints are filed with the Chief of
Police, substantiated by a complainant.
§ 102-3. Enforcement.
A. Upon receiving a complaint from a person or persons of a barking dog,
the Police Department shall serve a written notice on the owner of said
dog, where the written notice shall indicate:
(1) Time and place of disturbance created by the dog.
(2) Description of dog.
(3) Action to be taken by the Village upon further complaint.
B. Impounding of animals. Upon receiving a second complaint from a
person or persons of the dog described in the written notice of
Subsection A, the police, the Village's designated animal control agent,
any authorized employee of the Village, or any county or Village law
enforcement officer may apprehend and impound the dog. The Police
Department shall serve written notice on the owner within 48 hours of
impounding. [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
C. Redeeming impounded animals. The owner may recover the dog within
the time period established by the Village and given in the written
notice. If the owner shall not recover the dog within the time period, the
dog shall be disposed of. [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
§ 102-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-4
1:93
§ 102-4. Violations and penalties.
Any owner who shall keep or harbor a barking dog after receiving the
second written notice as described in § 102-3B of this article shall be
subject to a forfeiture of not less than $5 and not more than $500 together
with the actual costs of prosecution, including attorney's fees. Each day of
continuing violation shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 102-4 HOBART CODE § 102-4
1:94
ARTICLE II
Prohibited and Protected Animals, Fowl, Reptiles and Insects
[Adopted 7-15-201423]
§ 102-5. Wild and exotic animals prohibited.
§ 102-6. Poultry and livestock prohibited.
A. No person shall keep, maintain, or have in such person's possession or
under such person's control any poisonous reptile, dangerous or wild
animal or insect, including, but not limited to, poisonous insects and
arachnids, all poisonous snakes, constrictor snakes, nonhuman
primates, bears, crocodiles, alligators, coyotes, elephants, gamecocks,
and other fighting birds, hippopotami, hyenas, jaguars, leopards, lions,
lynx, pumas, cougars, mountain lions, panthers, ocelots, tigers or other
wild feline species, wolves or hybrid wolf/dogs.
B. Exceptions. These prohibitions do not include captive-bred species of
caged birds, rodents, turtles, fish, and nonpoisonous, nonconstricting
snakes unless protected under § 102-7, Endangered species protected
and prohibited.
C. Prohibitions. The prohibitions set forth in Subsection A shall not apply
to licensed pet shops, zoological gardens, public or private educational
institutions, circuses and professional animal acts, provided that:
(1) The aforementioned have obtained the necessary licenses, permits,
and permissions required.
(2) All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and sanitary
condition and so maintained as to eliminate objectionable odors.
(3) Animals are maintained in quarters so constructed as to prevent
their escape.
A. Except as specifically permitted in a zoning district, no person shall
keep or maintain any poultry, pigeons or fowl, or any animal raised for
fur-bearing purposes, or any livestock, including, but not limited to,
horses, cattle, sheep, goats, pigs or swine, whether or not such animal
is domesticated, tamed, or a pet.
(1) The slaughter of chickens permitted in the R-2, R-2-R and R-3
Single-Family Residential Districts shall be prohibited. [Amended
6-7-2016 by Ord. No. 06-2016]
B. Any person keeping or maintaining such poultry, pigeons, fowl, animal
or livestock contrary to this subsection as of August 5, 2003, may
continue to keep or maintain such a nonconforming use upon receipt of
a permit from the Village Clerk-Treasurer in accordance with rules
23.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. II, Prohibited and Protected
Animals, adopted as § 3.5 of the 2000 Code.
§ 102-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-6
1:95
§ 102-7. Endangered species protected and prohibited. [Amended
1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity to buy, sell, or offer for
sale a native or foreign species or subspecies of mammal, bird, amphibian or
reptile, or the dead body or parts thereof, which appears on the endangered
species list published in the Code of Federal Regulations pursuant to the
Endangered Species Act of 1973 (Public Law 205, 93rd Congress), as
amended.
§ 102-8. Food and drink.
§ 102-9. Shelter.
established by resolution of the Village Board as long as a public
nuisance is not created.
C. Exceptions. The exceptions to this section shall apply as in § 102-5.
D. Prohibitions. The prohibitions of this section shall apply as in § 102-5.
A. No person owning or responsible for any animal may refuse or neglect
to supply the animal with a sufficient supply of good/wholesome food
and potable water as prescribed in this section.
B. The food shall be sufficient to maintain all animals in good health.
C. If potable water is not accessible to the animals at all times, it shall be
provided daily and in sufficient quantity for the health of the animal.
State law reference: § 951.13, Wis. Stats.
A. No person owning or responsible for any animal may fail to provide the
animal with proper shelter as prescribed in this section. No person shall
confine and/or allow said animals to remain outside during adverse
weather conditions, constituting a health hazard to such animal.
B. Minimum indoor standards of shelter shall include ambient
temperature compatible with the health of the animal and shall be
adequately ventilated by natural or mechanical means to provide for
the health of the animal.
C. Minimum outdoor standards of shelter shall include shelter from
sunlight when such is likely to cause heat exhaustion or other ill effects.
Natural or artificial shelter appropriate to the local climatic conditions
for the species shall be provided as necessary for the health of the
animal.
D. Minimum indoor and outdoor standards for enclosures and shelters
shall be constructed and maintained so as to provide sufficient space to
allow adequate freedom of movement and the retention of body heat for
the health of the animal.
§ 102-6 HOBART CODE § 102-9
1:96
(1) Shelter requirements for chickens required to be licensed per
§ 102-11A shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The shelter shall be structurally sound, moistureproof and
maintained in good repair;
(b) Chickens shall be provided shelters that are enclosed,
predatorproof, insulated and adequately ventilated;
(c) Shelters shall use exterior finish materials approved for
exterior use and shall be of a color which is substantially
similar to those used in the principal structure;
(d) A sufficient quantity of suitable clean bedding material, to
provide insulation and protection against the cold and
dampness and promote the retention of body heat, shall be
required;
(e) Shelters shall be provided an entrance covered by a selfclosing
swinging covering or an L-shaped entrance to prevent
the wind from blowing directly into the shelter;
(f) During the months of May through September, Subsection
D(1)(c) and (d) may be suspended;
(g) Chicken shelters shall measure a minimum of seven square
feet in area or three square feet in area per chicken, whichever
is greater;
(h) Chicken shelters shall be provided with one nest box per
chicken;
(i) Chicken shelters shall be provided with elevated perches to
ensure chickens are able to rest in their natural roosting
position;
(j) Chicken shelters shall be constructed and maintained so as to
prevent rodents from being harbored underneath, or within the
walls or roof of, said structure;
(k) Chicken shelters, food storage units, and waste compost shall
be placed to comply with the zoning district's principal
building setback standards and must be located in the rear
yard of the property as defined by the Zoning Ordinance;24
(l) Chickens shall be secured within the shelter during
nondaylight hours;
(2) Fence enclosure (run) requirements for chickens required to be
licensed per § 102-11A shall meet the following requirements:
24.Editor's Note: See Ch. 295, Zoning.
§ 102-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-9
1:97
§ 102-10. Violations and penalties; complaints.
(a) Chickens shall be provided with access to an outdoor fence
enclosure (run) measuring at least 10 square feet in area or six
square feet per chicken, whichever is greater, for the majority
of daylight hours, weather permitting.
(b) Chicken shelters shall provide direct access to the outdoor
fence enclosure (run).
(c) Fencing must have spacing of no more than one inch;
(d) Fencing shall be no less than three feet in height;
(e) The fence enclosure requirements must be maintained all year,
regardless of weather.
E. Minimum sanitation standards for both indoor and outdoor enclosures
shall include daily cleaning to remove excreta and other waste
materials, dirt, and trash so as to minimize health hazards.
F. No person may intentionally abandon any animal.
A. Violations of this article shall be subject to the penalties provided in
§ 1-3. Each day of continuing violation shall constitute a separate
offense. [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
B. Complaints.
(1) General nuisance complaints include any complaint not classified
as animal cruelty.
(2) Animal cruelty complaints consist of, but are not limited to:
(a) Inadequate food or water;
(b) Unkempt shelters and enclosures;
(c) Improperly sized shelters and enclosures;
(d) Inadequate shelter temperature, ventilation or bedding
conditions;
(e) Slaughter or killing of animals.
§ 102-9 HOBART CODE § 102-10
1:98
ARTICLE III
Licensing and Regulation of Animals
[Adopted 7-15-201425]
§ 102-11. Licensing.
§ 102-12. Number of animals limited.
A. License required.
(1) Every person residing in the Village who owns a dog which is more
than five months of age on January 1 shall annually at the time and
in the manner prescribed by law for the payment of personal
property taxes obtain a license therefor.
(2) Every person in the Village residing in the R-2, R-2-R or R-3 Single-
Family Zoning Districts who owns one or more chickens shall
secure an annual license in the same manner as required for dogs,
except that the license shall be required regardless of the age of
the chickens. The license and associated fee are to keep chickens
and not a "per chicken" license. [Amended 6-7-2016 by Ord. No.
06-2016]
(a) Initial license applications. All applicants must receive and
provide written approval from the owner and occupant(s) of all
neighboring residentially used properties within 100 feet of the
applicant's property lines, exclusive of street rights-of-way. The
applicant shall contact neighboring property owners and
occupants and provide to said parties information required for
the license in order that said parties may be informed as to the
requirements and regulations applicable to the keeping of
chickens. No initial license application for the keeping of
chickens may be considered unless said approvals have been
obtained and presented. This provision shall only apply for
approval of the initial license application and not for renewal of
consecutive licenses. In cases where the license lapses by more
than 30 days, any application shall be considered an initial
application.
B. Fees. The license fees will be as determined by resolution of the Village
Board. [Amended 6-7-2016 by Ord. No. 06-2016]
C. State law adopted. Chapter 174, Wis. Stats., pertaining to licensing of
dogs, is made part of this section by reference.
A. No person shall own, harbor, or keep in his possession more than two
dogs on property zoned residential, with the exception that a litter of
pups, or a portion of a litter, may be kept for not exceeding eight weeks
25.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. III, Licensing and Control of Dogs,
adopted as § 5.0 of the 2000 Code.
§ 102-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-12
1:99
§ 102-13. Animals not to run at large.
§ 102-14. (Reserved)26
from birth. As provided in Chapter 295, Zoning, additional dogs may
be a permitted use on property zoned ER and as conditional uses in
the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Residential Districts, and only as to property
containing a single-family residence. [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord.
No. 01-2015]
B. If a household owns or keeps more than two dogs on the premises for
which licenses are required, the owner shall, in addition to obtaining
the required license for each dog, file a statement with the Village
Clerk-Treasurer acknowledging he/she is aware of the Village's dog
limitation and that he/she agrees to reduce the number of licensed dogs
on the premises to two if the Police Department receives a nuisance
complaint against the premises caused by, or related to, the number of
dogs housed on the premises.
C. In addition to the license tax for each dog, an additional fee will be
charged for the third, and all subsequent, dog license(s) issued, not to
exceed four per household.
D. No person in the Village residing in the R-2, R-2-R or R-3 Single-Family
Zoning Districts shall own, harbor or keep in his or her possession more
than six chickens. For the purposes of this article, a "chicken" shall be
defined as a domestic hen or pullet of the subspecies Gallus gallus
domesticus. No roosters are allowed. [Amended 6-7-2016 by Ord.
No. 06-2016]
A. No person shall own, harbor or keep a dog which runs at large. Any dog
not on a leash, nor within the property limits of its owner or keeper, is
declared to be "at large," and is declared to be a public nuisance. A
"leash" shall be defined as a chain, cord or rope which is not more than
10 feet in length and which is of sufficient strength to control the
actions of the animal. Any police officer, humane officer or other
designated public official of the Village may enter any premises, except
that premises of the owner or keeper of such animal, and capture, by
any reasonable and necessary means, such animal.
B. A dog that is actively engaged in a legal hunting activity, including
training, is not considered to be running at large if a dog is monitored
or supervised by a person and the dog is on land that is open to hunting
or on land on which the person has obtained permission to hunt or to
train a dog.
C. No person in the Village residing in an R2 - Single-Family Zoning
District shall own, harbor or keep a chicken which runs at large. Any
chicken not secured within a fenced enclosure or equivalent within the
property limits of its owner or keeper is declared to be "at large," and is
declared to be a public nuisance.
§ 102-12 HOBART CODE § 102-15
1:100
§ 102-15. Dogs suspected of rabies. [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No.
01-2015]
If any dog is suspected of having rabies, the police may follow the
prescribed procedures found in Wis. Stats. § 95.21 to take possession of the
dog.
§ 102-16. Impounding fees.
§ 102-17. Vaccination of dogs required.
A. For impounding and taking care of dogs impounded, the following fees
shall be allowed:
(1) Board: as established by the Village Board by resolution.
(2) Inoculations: as established by the Village Board by resolution.
B. Any person wishing to reclaim a dog so impounded from the animal
shelter must pay the above charges against such dog.
C. Any dog not claimed within seven days may be disposed of by the
Village or given, upon payment of the fees imposed for the impounding
of such animal, to any person wishing to accept such animal.
A. "Owner" shall include any person owning, harboring, or keeping a dog
in the Village.
B. Every dog owner shall have any dog over five months old inoculated
with an anti-rabic vaccine by a veterinarian every three years.
[Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
C. Each veterinarian after inoculating a dog shall give a certificate of
inoculation to the owner of the dog, who shall mail or deliver a copy to
the Village Clerk-Treasurer within five days after inoculation.
[Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
D. No person shall own, harbor or keep any dog which has not been
inoculated as provided herein.
E. In addition to the penalties hereafter provided for a violation of this
subsection, any police officer, humane officer or Health Officer of the
Village may impound any dog which has not been inoculated as
required. Such dog shall not be released until proof has been furnished
to the police officer, humane office or Health Officer that the dog has
been inoculated with an anti-rabic vaccine. After such dog has been so
impounded for seven days without having been reclaimed by its owner
or anyone on behalf of such owner, the dog shall be destroyed under the
direction of a police officer, humane officer or Health Officer.
26.Editor’s Note: Former § 102-14, Mad or vicious dogs prohibited, was repealed 5-7-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-07.
§ 102-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-18
1:101
§ 102-18. Impounding.
§ 102-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No.
01-2015]
Violations of this article shall be subject to the penalties provided in § 1-3.
Each day of continuing violation shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 102-19.1. Revocation or refusal to issue annual license.
A. Any police officer, humane officer, or Health Officer may impound in the
animal shelter any dog found in violation of this section.
B. Notice of impounding shall be given to the owner of the dog, if known,
by the person or officer in possession of the dog, within 24 hours of
impounding.
C. Any person, police officer, humane officer or Health Officer who shall
kill or impound any dog shall make a report to the Village Clerk-
Treasurer stating when and under what conditions he seized, killed or
impounded such dog and the owner's name if known.
A. The Village of Hobart may revoke or may refuse any license required by
this article upon the conviction of any two offenses of provisions
contained in Article II or III of this chapter not classified as animal
cruelty or for any offense classified as animal cruelty as defined in
§ 102-10B(2).
B. Upon license revocation or refusal, status may be restored by
submitting a petition to the Village Board identifying what measures
have been taken to correct the concerns resulting in citation issuance,
and securing approval from the Village Board to restore license status.
§ 102-18 HOBART CODE § 102-19.1
1:102
ARTICLE IV
Vicious Animals Prohibited; Pigeons
[Adopted as § 3.808 of the 2000 Code; amended in its entirety
5-7-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-07]
§ 102-20. Animals suspected of biting people.
§ 102-21. Dangerous animal.
A. All incidents occurring in the Village where any animal bites a person or
is suspected of biting a person shall be reported immediately to the
Brown County Health Department or to the police department by any
person having knowledge of such incident.
B. Any animal which bites a person in the Village, if it can be found, shall
be quarantined for 10 days from the date of the bite for the purpose of
observation for the possibility of infection with the virus of rabies.
C. Such quarantine shall be effected as directed by the County Health
Commissioner or his representative and may be:
(1) Confinement of the animal to a structure or enclosure which is
adequate to restrain the animal on the premises of the owner or his
agent; or
(2) Confinement of the animal at the Village-designated pound; or
(3) Confinement of the animal with a licensed veterinarian; or
(4) Confinement of the animal at an animal hospital or boarding facility
approved by the County Health Commissioner.
D. No animal which is known or suspected to have bitten a person in the
Village shall be destroyed until after the ten-day quarantine period
required in Subsection B above has elapsed, unless it cannot be
apprehended safely, in which case destruction shall be accomplished
without damage to the head of the animal if at all possible. The County
Health Commissioner shall be immediately notified of such destruction
of an animal and the dead animal shall not be disposed of until such
specimens as the County Health Commissioner shall direct have been
obtained and permission is given to dispose of the dead animal.
E. If an animal which has been quarantined in accordance with this
section dies during the quarantine period, the person having custody of
the animal shall immediately notify the County Health Commissioner
and shall not destroy or dispose of the dead animal until after such
specimens as the County Health Commissioner shall direct have been
obtained and permission is given to dispose of the dead animal.
A. Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to the section only:
DANGEROUS ANIMALS — Shall be defined as any animal which:
§ 102-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-21
1:103
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Shall be defined as any livestock, domesticated
dogs and domesticated cats.
MENACING FASHION — Shall be defined as demonstrating an intent
or desire to cause injury by one or more of the following actions:
OFFICER — Shall be defined as any peace officer or a Brown County or
Village of Hobart humane animal control officer.
OWNER — Shall be defined as any person, firm, corporation or other
organization owning, keeping, possessing, harboring, controlling, or
having the care or custody, whether temporarily or permanently, of a
dog, dogs, cat, or other animal.
PROVOKED — Shall be defined as any attack by an animal or physical
injury caused by an animal shall be considered provoked if at the time
that the attack occurred or the injury is inflicted:
Without provocation, while not under the control of its owner,
chases, confronts, or approaches a person in a menacing fashion
while off its owner's property and it is clear that the animal is not
merely being protective in a particular set of circumstances.
(1)
When unprovoked and while off its owner's property, approaches
a domestic animal in a menacing fashion or injures/kills another
domestic animal.
(2)
When unprovoked and while off its owner's property, causes a
nonsevere, nonbite injury in a menacing fashion to any person or
domestic animal.
(3)
(4) Has been declared dangerous by at least one other municipality.
An attempt to bite a person or another animal in such a fashion to
show plainly to a reasonable person an unfriendly intent and put a
person in fear of attack.
(1)
Growling or barking, etc. in an unfriendly manner while
approaching or chasing a person or another animal.
(2)
Growling or barking in an unfriendly manner while making physical
contact with a person or another animal.
(3)
The person who was attacked or injured was teasing, tormenting,
abusing, or assaulting the animal; or
(1)
The animal was protecting a person, itself, its young or another
domestic animal from an attack by a human being or another
animal; or
(2)
The person who was attacked or injured was committing a crime
on the property of the animal's owner.
(3)
B. Dangerous animals prohibited.
§ 102-21 HOBART CODE § 102-21
1:104
(1) Possession of a dangerous animal prohibited. No person shall own,
keep, possess or return to, or harbor a dangerous animal within the
Village. Any animal considered or deemed dangerous or vicious by
any other community is considered vicious and dangerous in this
community and is therefore prohibited.
(2) If a business exists within the Village for the purpose of training or
rehabilitating animals deemed to be dangerous by the Village or
any other municipality, this business may possess such animal for
the purpose of rehabilitation and training but said animal must be
removed from the community immediately upon the completion of
the training or rehabilitation.
(3) Penalty. Any person who owns, keeps, possesses, harbors, or
returns any dangerous animal to the Village after it has been
declared to be dangerous by owner's omission, quasi-judicial
hearing, another community, or appeal, shall be subject to a
forfeiture of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000.
C. Procedure for declaring an animal as dangerous.
(1) A humane officer or police officer may determine an animal to be
"dangerous" whenever, upon investigation, that officer finds that
the animal meets the definition of dangerous as delineated in
Subsection A above.
(2) The humane officer or the police officer, upon making the
determination that an animal is dangerous, shall issue a written
order declaring the animal to be dangerous and demanding that
the owner remove it from the Village within five days.
(3) If the owner objects to the declaration of dangerousness, they may
file a written objection contesting the declaration with the Village
Clerk within five days of receiving the written declaration.
(4) Upon receipt of the owner's written objection within the prescribed
five days, the matter shall be placed on the next practiable Village
Board meeting agenda for review.
(5) The Village Board shall act as a quasi-judicial body allowing the
animal's owner an opportunity to present evidence as to why the
animal should not be declared a prohibited dangerous animal.
(6) Pending the outcome of the hearing or any subsequent appeal, the
animal may be confined subject to § 173.21, Wis. Stats., or held at a
location outside the Village limits at the owner's expense.
(7) After the hearing, and after the Village Board has made a decision
and its report has been approved, the owner shall be immediately
notified of the decision in writing by certified mail. If a decision is
made that the animal is a prohibited dangerous animal, the owner
shall comply with the order to remove the animal from the Village
§ 102-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-21
1:105
§ 102-22. Running at large prohibited.
No person owning, harboring or keeping any animal or fowl shall allow the
same to run at large within the Village. See also § 102-13 for dogs.
§ 102-23. Exception allowing the keeping of certain species of
pigeons.
within five days after receiving the written decision, if not already
removed.
(8) If the owner further contests the decision, he or she may, within
five days of receiving the written decision, seek review of the
decision by the Circuit Court.
(9) If the declared dangerous animal is not removed from the Village
within 10 days of it being declared dangerous by owner's omission,
quasi-judicial hearing, or appeal, it may be seized and ordered
destroyed pursuant to § 174.02(3), Wis. Stats., and in the manner
prescribed in Subsection D below of this chapter.
D. Manner and procedure for destruction of dangerous dogs/other
animals. Whenever an officer or veterinarian is required to destroy a
dangerous animal, the animal shall be destroyed in a humane manner
which avoids damage to the animal's head.
E. Exemption for police dogs. The provisions of this section regarding
dangerous dogs shall not apply to dogs owned by law enforcement
agencies and used for law enforcement purposes.
A. The definition of "fowl" shall include pigeons. However, the species
known as homing, carrier or racing pigeons shall be exempt from the
confinement regulations to the extent that such birds may be permitted
to fly for training purposes and races. The harboring of pigeons other
than in an approved pen or coop is declared a public nuisance.
B. No person shall operate or maintain a pen, coop, cote or other structure
for the purpose of keeping or raising of pigeons without obtaining a
permit therefor. The permit shall be obtained annually and shall expire
on December 31 of each year. Such permit shall be issued by the Village
Clerk-Treasurer upon payment of the annual fee in an amount as set
from time to time by resolution of the Village Board and certification by
a representative of the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector that
the structure housing the pigeons conforms to all local codes and
regulations. Failure to comply with any local codes or regulations
within 10 days' after notice by a representative of the Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector shall result in revocation of the permit
by the Village Board.
C. All coops and pens shall be constructed so as to be easily cleaned and
kept in good repair. The inside and outside of such structures shall be
whitewashed or painted as often as necessary to keep them clean or
§ 102-21 HOBART CODE § 102-23
1:106
§ 102-24. Keeping of livestock regulated.
finished with such material as can be easily cleaned. All such structures
shall be kept clean and sanitary and shall not cause any objectionable
odor. Accumulations of cleanings or excrement of more than one day's
operation in any such structure shall be deemed a violation of this
section.
A. Livestock. No person shall keep or maintain any livestock such as
horses, cattle, sheep or goats in any zoning district except as a
permitted or conditional use.
§ 102-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-24
1:107
Chapter 114
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 264.
§ 114-1. Definition.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
BICYCLE — Every device propelled by human power upon which any person
may ride, having two tandem wheels over 16 inches in diameter with tires
inflated.
§ 114-2. Registration.
A. Registration optional. Registration of bicycles within the Village of
Hobart is optional. Registration tags will be provided by the Village
through the Village Clerk-Treasurer.
B. Applications. Duplicate applications for registration shall be made by
the owner on forms provided by the Village. Said applications shall
contain name, age, address of the owner, and parent name, a
description of the bicycle, including the serial number thereof, and if
said bicycle has no serial number, the Village shall assign one to it. The
application shall contain such other information as the Village shall
deem pertinent.
C. Fees; records. Upon such application, the Village shall issue to the
applicant a registration tag for said bicycle. The Village shall keep a
record of the date of issuance of such registration tag, to whom issued,
and the number thereof.27
D. Tags. No bicycle shall be considered registered until a registration tag
shall be affixed to the frame of such bicycle, which shall remain so
affixed until reregistration or until removed by the court of local
jurisdiction for just cause.
E. Transfer of ownership. It shall be the duty of every person who
transfers the title of any bicycle to endorse upon the back of the
registration card on the form there provided the name and address of
the buyer, the date of the transfer, and the name of the seller. It shall be
the duty of the new owner of such bicycle to apply for transfer of
registration thereof within seven days of such transfer.
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 102-24 HOBART CODE § 114-2
1:108
Chapter 121
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Erosion control and stormwater
management — See Ch. 150.
Floodplain zoning — See Ch. 290.
Zoning — See Ch. 295.
§ 121-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish uniform construction standards
and inspection procedures for buildings and structures erected and altered
within the Village.
§ 121-2. Adoption of codes. [Amended 4-3-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-06]
A. Chapters SPS 320, 321, 322, 323, 324, 325, the State Uniform Dwelling
Code and all referenced codes and amendments thereto are adopted
and incorporated into this Code by reference.
(1) The following shall apply to all additions and alterations to one- and
two-family dwellings where initial construction and/or construction
permits were issued before June 1, 1980:
(a) Chapter SPS 320, § 320.07 (Definitions), and § 320.24
(Adoption of Industry Standards).
(b) Chapter SPS 321.
(c) Chapters SPS 322 (Energy Conservation), SPS 323 (HVAC),
SPS 324 (Electrical), and SPS 325 (Plumbing), shall apply to
new additions. Alterations to elements governed by the
referenced codes in homes built prior to June 1, 1980 shall
comply to the fullest extent practicable when walls, floors and
ceilings are open and reasonably accessible.
(2) Accessory structures, storage buildings and other structures built
in association with one- and two-family dwellings shall also comply
with Subsection A(1) with the following exceptions:
(a) Utility storage buildings as defined in Chapter 295, Zoning,
may be erected without a foundation if anchored in a manner
approved by the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector.
(b) Detached garages and storage buildings of frame construction
may be built on a continuous floating slab of reinforced
concrete not less than four inches in thickness. Reinforcement
shall be a minimum of six inches by six inches No. 10x10
§ 114-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-2
1:109
welded wire mesh. The slab shall be provided with a thickened
edge all around, eight inches wide and eight inches below the
top of the slab. Anchor bolts 3/8 inch in diameter with nuts
and washers attached shall be embedded a minimum of four
inches below the finished surface of the slab and no closer
than two inches to the bottom of the thickened edge, spaced in
compliance with § SPS 321.18. Detached garages and storage
buildings built with foundation walls or piers shall have walls
or piers as required by § SPS 321.18 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
B. Chapters SPS 360-366, the Wisconsin Commercial Building and HVAC
Code and all referenced codes and amendments thereto are adopted
and incorporated into this code by reference.
(1) This section shall also apply to private buildings and structures,
such as, but not limited to, private hangars and storage buildings
that are not built in association with one- and two-family dwellings.
(2) Agricultural buildings shall comply with the structural design
requirements of SPS 362.
C. Chapter SPS 316, the Wisconsin Electric Code and all referenced codes
and amendments thereto are adopted and incorporated into this code
by reference.
D. Chapters SPS 381-387, the Wisconsin Plumbing Code and all
referenced codes and amendments thereto are adopted and
incorporated into this code by reference.
(1) In buildings and structures connected to the municipal sanitary
sewerage system, where plumbing fixtures exist below road grade,
backwater valves shall be installed in the building sanitary drain
system as a prevention to keep backwater from flooding the area of
the building below road grade.
(2) Sanitary and storm sewers serving private or public property which
are removed from service shall be uncovered at the property line
adjacent to the utility easement or to the right-of-way in which the
sewer connects to a main and sealed against infiltration into the
public sewer system. Existing sanitary or storm sewers serving
private or public property that are going to be reactivated within
one year and meet the plumbing code requirements may be
temporarily sealed at any point on the property approved by the
Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector. Sealing of sewers shall be
permitted and inspected before covering and/or commencing
demolition of any building.
(3) Water services serving private or public property which are
removed from service shall be uncovered at the property line
adjacent to the utility easement or to the right-of-way in which the
water service connects to a main and capped to prevent leakage or
§ 121-2 HOBART CODE § 121-2
1:110
contamination of city water supply by backflow or siphonage.
Existing water services serving private or public property that are
going to be reactivated within one year and meet the plumbing
code requirements may be temporarily capped at any point on the
property accepted by the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector.
Capping of water services shall be permitted and inspected before
covering and/or commencing demolition of any building.
(4) Building clear water, stormwater and foundation drainage systems
shall discharge in accordance with the following:
(a) Shall drain in compliance with any approved stormwater
management plan when applicable.
(b) Shall flow to the municipal stormwater system when available.
(c) Shall utilize natural topography and land cover features such
as natural swales, natural depressions, native soil infiltrating
capacity, and natural groundwater recharge areas.
(d) Shall not discharge closer than 20 feet of a property line except
when connecting to a municipal stormwater system. Existing
building clear water, stormwater and foundation drainage
systems not in compliance with this provision on March 19,
2013 shall be brought into compliance with this section upon
notice by the Village.
(e) The size, type and installation of all laterals proposed to be
constructed shall be in accordance with plans and
specifications approved by the Department of Neighborhood
Services.
(f) The property owner shall be responsible for any maintenance
to facilities covered in this section if drained into a municipal
stormwater system. The Village is not responsible for any
damage to said facilities when placed in the right-of-way or
Village-owned easements or facilities.
E. Chapter SPS 305, §§ 305.30-305.999, the Wisconsin Licenses,
Certifications and Registrations Code, and all amendments thereto are
adopted and incorporated into this code by reference.
F. Modification of regulations. When there are practical difficulties
involved in carrying out provisions of this chapter or of an approved
rule, the Director of Neighborhood Services may vary or modify such
provision upon application of the owner or his representative, provided
that the spirit and intent of this chapter shall be observed and public
welfare and safety shall be ensured. The application for modification
and the final decision of the Director of Neighborhood Services shall be
in writing and shall be officially recorded with the permanent
application for the permit in the permanent records of the Village
property files.
§ 121-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-2
1:111
§ 121-3. Permits required.
G. Septic and solid waste collection receptacles required. The property
owner(s) and/or duly appointed agent(s) representing said owner(s) for
any property upon which a new residential dwelling or nonresidential
building is to be constructed shall provide temporary on-site septic, i.e.,
portable toilet, and solid waste containers, e.g., dumpster, for the
temporary storage of waste during and subsequent removal of waste
after building construction has been completed. Said containers shall
be installed prior to commencement of construction, maintained in
working condition and capacity throughout the duration of all
construction activities, and be removed from the property not later than
10 days after the date the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector has
completed final inspection.
A. Building permit required.
(1) No building or structure or any part thereof shall hereafter be
moved, built, enlarged, altered, or demolished within the Village,
except as hereinafter provided, unless a permit therefor shall first
be obtained by the owner, or his agent, from the Village. All work
which affects the occupancy, area, structural strength, fire
protection, exits, light, or ventilation of the building, requires a
building permit.
(2) Application for a building permit for a structure intended for
human occupancy on lands not served by public, municipal sewer
shall be approved only if said application is accompanied by a valid
holding tank permit or a valid septic tank permit. Validity of holding
tank permit or septic tank permit shall be based on state statutes or
county ordinances where appropriate.
(3) Application for a building permit for any structure shall require
approval of the road offering access to said structure, whether said
structure is erected on public roads or private roads.
(4) Exceptions.
(a) No permit shall be required for minor repairs or alterations
which in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator/Building
Inspector do not affect the occupancy, area, structural
strength, fire protection, exits, light, or ventilation of a
building.
B. HVAC permit required.
(1) No heating, ventilating, or air-conditioning system, or a part of a
system shall hereafter be constructed, installed, erected, altered or
unless a permit therefor shall first be obtained by the owner, or his
agent, from the Village.
(2) Exceptions.
§ 121-2 HOBART CODE § 121-3
1:112
(a) No permit shall be required for minor repairs or alterations to
any heating, ventilating or air-conditioning system which does
not, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator/Building
Inspector, involve any changes in the heating or ventilating of
the building.
C. Electrical permit required.
(1) No electrical equipment shall be installed, altered, renewed,
replaced or connected unless a permit therefor shall first be
obtained by the owner, or his agent, from the Village.
(2) Exceptions.
(a) No permit shall be required for low-voltage installations in oneand
two-family dwellings.
(b) No permit shall be required for the reconnection of existing
power supplies to replacement heating plants, water heaters
and other appliances.
(c) No permit shall be required for the repair, removal,
disturbance or disconnection of any existing electrical
equipment or the renewal or replacement of any existing
lighting, switches, sockets, or receptacles.
(d) No permit shall be required for minor repairs or alterations to
any electrical distribution system which does not, in the
opinion of the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector, involve
any changes in the electrical distribution of the building.
D. Plumbing permit required.
(1) No person shall perform or permit the performance of any
plumbing work, as defined by state statute or regulation adopted by
reference as a part of this code, unless a permit therefor shall first
be obtained by the owner, or his agent, from the Village.
(2) Exceptions.
(a) No permit shall be required for the repair, removal,
disturbance, disconnection or replacement of any existing
plumbing fixture or appliance.
(b) Minor repairs as defined in § 145.06(4)(d), Wis. Stats., as may
be amended from time to time, shall be exempt from the permit
requirement.
E. Building permit fee. The building permit fee shall be paid to the Village
Clerk-Treasurer and shall be in an amount as established by the Village
Board by resolution, a schedule of which fees shall be published by the
Village Board and available at the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer.
§ 121-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-4
1:113
§ 121-4. Application for permits.
Application for a permit shall be made in writing to the Village providing
all information necessary to reasonably determine the proposed project
complies with all applicable codes.
§ 121-5. Plans to be submitted.
§ 121-6. Alteration of plans.
After being approved, the plans and specifications shall not be altered
in any respect which involves any ordinances, laws or orders, or which
involves the safety of the building, except with the written consent of the
Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector.
§ 121-7. Posting permit on construction site required.
With every building permit issued, the Zoning Administrator/Building
Inspector shall issue to the applicant a placard signifying the required
permit has been secured. It shall be the duty of such applicant to place
such card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The placard shall be
unobstructed from public view and shall be located not more than 15 feet
above grade. It shall also be the duty of the applicant to take appropriate
measures to prevent the card from being destroyed by the weather.
§ 121-8. Lapse of permit upon failure to commence work.
A. With such permit application, there shall be submitted two complete
sets of plans and specifications, including a plot plan showing the
location of the proposed building with respect to adjoining property
lines, buildings and rights-of-way. All plans shall be drawn using
commonly accepted architectural or engineering scales. Drawings that
do not show all necessary details to enable the Village to reasonably
inspect the same shall be rejected.
B. Exception. If, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator/Building
Inspector, the character of the work is sufficiently described in the
application, the filing of plans may be waived.
A. Permits shall have lapsed and be void unless building operations are
commenced within six months from the date thereof.
B. Permits for building shall lapse and be void from and after 12 months
from the date of issuance, except for projects where the applicant
advises the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector the permitted
project will exceed 12 months in duration. In such case, the applicant
shall advise the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector of the
estimated completion date, which then will become the expiration
date.28
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 121-4 HOBART CODE § 121-9
1:114
§ 121-9. Revocation of permit.
If the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector shall find at any time that
the ordinance, laws, orders, plans and specifications are not being complied
with, he shall revoke the permit by written notice posted at the site of
the work or mailed to the permit applicant. When any such permit is
revoked it shall be unlawful to do any further work upon such building until
the permit is reissued, excepting such work as the Zoning Administrator/
Building Inspector shall order to be done as a condition precedent to the
reissuance of the permit.
§ 121-10. Required inspections.
A. The permit applicant or an authorized representative shall, in writing or
orally, request inspections of the following applicable phases of any
building or structure:
(1) Footings. After the placement of forms, shoring, and reinforcement,
where required, and prior to the placement of concrete.
(2) Foundation backfill. After the placement, installation of drain tiles,
stone covering drain tiles, waterproofing, exterior insulation if
required, prior to backfilling.
(3) Interior drain tiles, stone and vapor barrier. After placement and
prior to covering.
(4) Electric service installations. After installation and prior to
energizing.
(5) Buried installations. After the placement of plumbing, HVAC and
electric installations (including, but not limited to, water service
laterals, storm sewer laterals, sanitary sewer laterals, underground
plumbing, underground electrical distribution, and underground
HVAC ducting) and prior to covering or enclosing in any manner.
(6) Rough inspection of general construction including framing,
electric, HVAC and plumbing after completion of this phase and
prior to installing insulation.
(7) Insulation and vapor barrier. After placement and prior to covering.
(8) Final inspection after completion of all code requirements and
prior to occupancy to determine compliance with all requirements
of this code and terms of the permit.
B. Notice of compliance or noncompliance shall be posted at the site.
Upon finding noncompliance, the Zoning Administrator/Building
Inspector shall notify the applicant and/or the owner in writing, of the
violations to be corrected. No work shall be concealed until approved
by the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector. When compliance with
any noted violations has been provided, the owner/applicant/agent shall
§ 121-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-10
1:115
§ 121-11. Disposal of debris and damages to curbs at construction
sites.
provide written documentation that the noted violations have been
corrected in compliance with the applicable code sections.
C. Upon reinspection of a violation, if the inspector finds that the
violations have not been corrected, the Zoning Administrator/Building
Inspector may require the owner, contractor or agent responsible for
the violations pay a reinspection fee.
D. When the building or structure is ready for inspection, the contractor,
owner or agent shall make such arrangements as necessary to enable
the inspector to inspect all parts of the building or structure.
E. Construction may proceed if the requested inspection has not taken
place by the end of the second business day following the day of
notification or as otherwise agreed between the applicant and the
Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector.
A. Preamble. The Village wishes to protect its streets, curbs, sewers and
sidewalks from damage due to construction. We wish to protect
pedestrians and motor vehicle traffic from construction debris during
and after construction projects. This section is written to require proper
construction practices and to assure that the above mentioned goals
are met.
B. Mud, dust, brush, stumps, etc. No general contractor, building permit
holder or owner shall cause, maintain or permit the littering of any
public or private property or streets with mud, dust, brush, stumps, tree
limbs, construction, piles of dirt after building landscaping is completed
or other types of debris, nor shall such person cause damage to any
public street, sidewalk, curb, gutter, sewerage system or property.
C. Daily cleanup. A general contractor, building permit holder or owner
must clean up by 8:00 p.m. each day or at the end of the workday on
that site, whichever occurs earlier, and the site must be kept clean as
much as feasible during the day.
D. Debris in street or on sidewalk. Debris in the street or on the sidewalk
that would injure a motor vehicle, pedestrian or cyclist must be
removed immediately.
E. Disposal of debris at construction sites.
(1) No general contractor, subcontractor, owner, permit holder,
municipality or municipal subcontractor shall allow any person to
leave litter or building debris at a construction site which creates a
nuisance. During the course of any construction which requires a
permit within the Village, the contractor shall be responsible for
having a dumpster or other suitable method to properly contain any
§ 121-10 HOBART CODE § 121-11
1:116
construction related debris on the site at all times while
construction is conducted on the site.
(2) If a general contractor, permit holder or owner does create a
nuisance, the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector shall revoke
the building permit until they have complied with this section.
F. Damaging curbs or sidewalks. It is the responsibility of the general
contractor, permit holder or owner to inspect all sidewalks and curbs
prior to commencement of work. Any such damage must be reported to
the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector or his designated agent
prior to commencement of work. Any damage not reported in that time
period will be attributed to the general contractor, building permit
holder or owner. No general contractor, building permit holder or
owner shall allow any person to run a vehicle over a curb in the Village,
unless that curb shall have been properly blocked or ramped to ensure
no damage to the curb. Properly blocked means adequately covered
behind the curb with crushed stone to a sufficient depth to protect the
back of the curb and a four-by-four planking in front of the curb. All
tires crossing the curb shall be supported in this manner. This
requirement may be waived by the Zoning Administrator/Building
Inspector for good cause.
G. Violations.
(1) If any general contractor, building permit holder or owner is
convicted of three or more violations of this section within a sixmonth
period, the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector shall
have authority to withhold building permits from such general
contractor, building permit holder or owner for a period of six
months.
(2) If any general contractor, building permit holder or owner shall fail
to pay any costs of any curb repair for damage to curbs caused by
such person, the Village shall have the right to withhold the
issuance of building permits to that general contractor, building
permit holder or owner until such time as all bills are paid.29
(3) In addition to any other penalties imposed by this chapter, any
general contractor, building permit holder or owner convicted of a
violation of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less
than $100 plus costs for a first offense and not less than $500 plus
costs for the second offense.30
(4) In addition to the penalty provided in § 1-3 of this Code, the Village
may clean up or contract to clean up and charge the cost to the
general contractor, building permit holder or owner who is found in
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 121-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-11
1:117
§ 121-12. Appeals from rulings of Zoning Administrator/Building
Inspector.
Any person feeling aggrieved by any order or ruling of the Director of
Neighborhood Services or designee may appeal from such order or ruling to
the Board of Appeals as provided in Subsection A of this section. An order
or ruling written for one- and two-family homes built on or after June 1,
1980, is not appealable under this chapter. An order or ruling written under
Chapters SPS 360–366 is not appealable under this chapter.
violation of this section. If the bills are not paid for, the occupancy
permit will be withheld.
H. Village compliance. The Village will comply with this section, but no
penalties shall apply to the Village.
I. Liability. The general contractor, permit holder and owner are jointly
and severally liable for violations of this section. It is the Village's
intention to prosecute violations in the following order:
(1) First: general contractor.
(2) Second: permit holder.
(3) Third: owner.
A. Any person feeling aggrieved by any order or ruling of the Director of
Neighborhood Services or designee may appeal from such order or
ruling to the Board of Appeals within 15 calendar days after written
notice of such order or ruling. The date of written notice or ruling shall
be the date of mailing of the official notice or the date of personal
service of the official notice. The notice of appeal shall be in writing and
specify the reasons for the appeal. The Board of Appeals shall act upon
the appeal within 60 days of the filing of the notice of appeal.
B. Application for appeal may be made when it is claimed that the true
intent of the codes or the rules legally adopted thereunder has been
incorrectly interpreted; the provisions of the codes do not apply; or an
equally good or better form of construction or repair can be used. All
appeals shall be accompanied by supporting data.
C. An appeal shall stay all enforcement activities and all legal proceedings
in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from
whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Appeals that by
reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would in the opinion of
the officer, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order
which may be granted by a court of record on application, on notice to
the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and upon due cause shown.
§ 121-11 HOBART CODE § 121-13
1:118
§ 121-13. Violations and penalties.31
Any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall subject the
violator to the penalties provided in § 1-3. Each day a violation continues,
unless otherwise specified in this chapter, shall constitute a separate
offense. Where the violator has been issued a permit or is a licensee under
the provisions of this chapter, such permit or license shall be subject to
revocation in the discretion of the court.
Chapter 127
BURNING, OPEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Outdoor furnaces — See Ch. 177.
Nuisances — See Ch. 207.
Solid waste — See Ch. 248.
Zoning — See Ch. 295.
§ 127-1. Title; adoption of applicable Wisconsin Administrative
Code and Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 127-2. Purpose.
Whereas, the Wisconsin Administrative Code and the Wisconsin Statutes
grant the Village the power to regulate the prevention of fire and burning;
and whereas the Village of Hobart is predominantly a residential community
with a small business district and provides its own fire and police
protection; now then, the Village Board deems it to be in the best interests
of the Village of Hobart and for the health, safety, and welfare of the public
to continue promoting fire prevention and regulate open burning, cooking
fires and recreational fires in the Village of Hobart.
A. The title of this chapter shall be "Fire Prevention, Regulation of Open
Burning, Cooking Fires and Recreational Fires."
B. Adoption. The provisions of the applicable Wisconsin Administrative
Code and Wisconsin Statutes, as now existing and as the same may
hereafter be amended, are hereby adopted and made part of this
chapter by reference. In the event a conflict exists between the
Wisconsin Administrative Code or the Wisconsin Statutes and this
chapter, the Wisconsin Administrative Code and/or Wisconsin Statutes
shall control.
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 121-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-3
1:119
§ 127-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BURNING PERMIT — A permit issued by the Village of Hobart to a
residential property owner within the Village of Hobart that allows the
property owner to burn certain materials on the property owner's property,
within the restrictions and limitations set forth in this chapter.
OPEN BURNING — Any open burning on residential property within the
Village of Hobart and, for the purpose of this chapter only, excludes outdoor
burning that is permitted pursuant to this chapter.
OUTDOOR BURNING — Any burning outside on residential property within
the Village of Hobart that is considered a cooking fire or recreational fire
pursuant to § 127-6.
REFUSE — Any waste material except clean wood.
VILLAGE — The Village of Hobart.
VILLAGE FIRE DEPARTMENT — The Village of Hobart Fire Department
located at 2703 South Pine Tree Road, Hobart, Wisconsin, and 482 County
Court, Hobart, Wisconsin.
§ 127-4. Open burning prohibition.
Open burning, outdoor burning and refuse burning are prohibited in the
Village unless specifically permitted by this chapter.
§ 127-5. Burning permit provisions.
A. Except as provided in this chapter, specifically including § 127-6, no
open burning, outdoor burning or refuse burning is permitted without
first obtaining a burning permit from the Village.
B. A burning permit shall be applied for at the Village, which is located at
2990 South Pine Tree Road, in the Village of Hobart, Wisconsin,
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday,
except holidays.
C. All burning permits must be requested in person, although burning
permit forms may be obtained from the Village official website, filled
out in advance, and brought to the Village during the requisite time
periods.
D. A burning permit shall only be issued for property located within
agricultural districts, which are the A-1 and A-2 Districts, or property
that consists of a minimum of 2.5 acres and as set forth herein.
E. A burning permit is subject to the Village's discretion. The Village
reserves the right to deny any requested permit if, in the judgment of
the Village Public Works Director, Village Fire Chief, Village Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector, or a Village Police Officer, hazardous
§ 127-3 HOBART CODE § 127-5
1:120
§ 127-6. Exceptions to burning permit requirement.
A burning permit is not required as follows:
§ 127-7. Restrictions on cooking fires and recreational fires.
conditions exist. Note: If the owner or occupant of the property denies
access to the property for the purpose of an inspection to determine
whether hazardous conditions exist, the burning permit will be denied
as presumed hazardous.
F. A burning permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be posted or
carried pursuant to § 127-9.
G. While the use of solid-fuel-fired heating devices may fall within the
definition of open burning pursuant to the Administrative Code and
Wisconsin Statutes, for the purposes of this chapter only, such devices
do not fall within the definition of "open burning." For regulation of
solid fuel-fired heating devices, refer to Chapter 177, Furnaces,
Outdoor.
A. Subject to the prohibitions set forth in § 127-7, fires intended for
cooking purposes are permitted without a burning permit in
appropriate cooking grills and at a single or multifamily residence
(hereinafter "cooking fire").
B. Subject to the prohibitions set forth in § 127-7, fires less than four feet
in diameter and intended for recreation purposes are permitted without
a burning permit (hereinafter "recreational fire").
C. Burning conducted by the Village of Hobart Fire Department is
permitted without a burning permit, provided such burning is
necessary for firefighting practice or instruction and such practice burn
complies with the requirements of the Department of Natural
Resources and other applicable laws.
A. No cooking fire is permitted on balconies above a first floor that is part
of a multistory unit, which is defined as a dwelling unit or sleeping unit
with habitable space located on more than one story.
B. All recreational fires must be limited to a maximum diameter of four
feet.
C. All recreational fires must be a minimum of 15 feet from any building,
structure, shed, garage, property line and a minimum of five feet from
any tree, shrub, brush, fence, or combustible material.
D. All recreational fires must be either surrounded on the outside by above
ground noncombustible material, such as concrete, rock, or metal and
have a noncombustible cover or be in a portable Weber-type device that
is placed upon a noncombustible surface and secured and also has a
noncombustible cover.
§ 127-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-7
1:121
§ 127-8. Restrictions and limitations on open burning.
Notwithstanding obtaining a burning permit, the following restrictions and
limitations apply to all open burning:
E. Other than using paper or cardboard products as starter fuel for a fire,
no cooking fire or recreational fire may burn any material set forth in
§ 127-8F and/or G, which includes, but is not limited to, rubbish,
garbage, recyclable items, trash, yard waste, asphalt, treated or
painted wood, materials containing rubber, plastic, leather, oily
substances or petroleum-based materials, or materials containing any
flammable or combustible liquids.
F. No cooking fire or recreational fire is permitted unless the property
owner and/or person controlling the fire has adequate fire-suppression
equipment present to extinguish or control the fire.
G. Smoke from any cooking fire or recreational fire may not create a
nuisance for neighboring property owners. Refer to Chapter 207,
Nuisances, Article I, for definition of "nuisance."
H. Burning ban.
(1) No recreational fire or cooking fire shall be permitted during
periods when either the Village, the Department of Natural
Resources or the Village of Hobart Fire Department has issued a
burning ban (the "burning ban"), which may be issued based upon
one or more of the prior party's discretion. Any imposed burning
ban shall be immediately posted in writing at the Village of Hobart
Hall and the Village of Hobart Fire Department as follows:
Village of Hobart
2990 South Pine Tree Road
Hobart, WI 54155
Village of Hobart Fire Department No. 1
2703 South Pine Tree Road
Hobart, WI 54155
Village of Hobart Fire Department No. 2
482 County Court
Hobart, WI 54155
(2) Any imposed burning ban shall also be posted within 24 hours on
the Village of Hobart official website.
A. No open burning shall be permitted on property less than 2.5 acres.
§ 127-7 HOBART CODE § 127-8
1:122
B. Monday through Friday: no open burning shall be permitted before
4:00 p.m. or after 8:00 p.m.; Saturday: no open burning shall be
permitted before 8:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m.; Sunday: no open burning
shall be permitted on Sunday or a holiday. All open burning shall be
completely extinguished before being left unattended.
C. No open burning shall be permitted during periods when a party
described in § 127-7H has issued a burning ban or when an emergency
burning ban has been issued pursuant to § 127-12.
D. No open burning shall be permitted at any time the weather conditions
are not favorable for open burning. For example, high wind speeds or
wind direction may make the weather conditions not favorable for open
burning.
E. Excluding Agricultural Districts, no open burning shall be permitted in
an area larger than 10 feet by 10 feet.
F. No open burning shall be permitted within 30 feet from any building,
structure, shed, garage, property line, flammable liquid, or other
material constituting a potential fire hazard.
G. No open burning may include burning trees or shrubs, unless such
trees or shrubs have been cut down and cut into segments 4 feet or
smaller.
H. Excluding Agricultural Districts, open burning of wood, brush or
demolition material, excluding items set forth in Subsection K, is
permitted, provided methods approved by the DNR are used.
I. Excluding Agricultural Districts, open burning of small amounts of dry
leaves and dry plant clippings are permitted.
J. Open burning of brush or weeds on Agricultural Districts are permitted.
K. The Village will not issue a burning permit for burning any of the
following materials without air pollution control devices and a written
copy of an approval by the Department of Natural Resources:
(1) Rubbish or garbage, including, but not limited to, food wastes, food
wraps, packaging, animal carcasses, paint or painted materials,
furniture, composite shingles, construction or demolition debris or
other household or business wastes.
(2) Waste oil or other oily wastes, except used oil burned in a heating
device for energy recovery subject to the restrictions in Chapter
NR 679 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(3) Asphalt and products containing asphalt.
(4) Treated or painted wood, including, but not limited to, plywood,
composite wood products or other wood products that are painted,
varnished or contain treated preservations.
§ 127-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-8
1:123
§ 127-9. Proof of burning permit.
Every burning permit granted by the Village shall be either posted and at all
times displayed in a conspicuous place on the property where such burning
shall occur or carried on the property owner (the permittee) during the
open burning process.
§ 127-10. Transfer of licenses.
A burning permit granted by the Village shall be granted to an individual
person who is the owner of the property where such burning shall occur
and is not transferable to any other person. In the event an entity owns the
property where such burning shall occur, a burning permit shall be issued to
an owner of the entity, provided such owner agrees to be individually, jointly
and severally liable with the entity for any violation of this chapter.
§ 127-11. Violations and penalties.
(5) Any plastic material, including, but not limited to, nylon, PVC, ABS,
polystyrene or urethane foam, and synthetic fabrics, plastic films
and plastic containers.
(6) Rubber, including tires and synthetic rubberlike products.
(7) Newspaper, corrugated cardboard, container board, office paper
and other materials that must be recycled in accordance with
Chapter 248, Solid Waste, Article I, Recycling, of this Code.
(8) No open burning may include dry leaves and/or dry plant clippings,
or other items that should be recycled, unless expressly set forth
within this chapter (see Subsection I of this section for permitted
open burning of small amounts of dry leaves and dry plant
clippings).
A. Each act constituting a violation and every day upon which a violation
occurs or continues constitutes a separate violation; and
B. Any person found to have violated this chapter, in addition to the other
costs set forth in this section, shall be subject to the following
forfeiture:
(1) First offense. Forfeiture of not less than $50 and not more than
$500; and
(2) Second and subsequent offenses. Forfeiture of not less than $100
and not more than $1,000.
C. Any person found to have violated this chapter, in addition to the other
costs set forth in this section, shall reimburse the Village for the
reasonable cost incurred due to the violation including, but not limited
to, cost of fire protection services, costs associated with investigation of
the violation, and other miscellaneous Village and Village Fire
§ 127-8 HOBART CODE § 127-11
1:124
§ 127-12. Power of Fire Chief.
§ 127-13. Inspection.
The Village Fire Chief, Village Public Works Director, Village Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector, Village Police Officer, or any authorized
officer, agent, employee or representative of the Village who presents
credentials, may inspect any property for the purpose of ascertaining
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Note: If the owner or
occupant of the property denies access to the property for this purpose, a
special inspection warrant may be obtained in accordance with § 66.0119 of
the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 127-14. Liability.
The person to whom the burning permit is issued and/or the person utilizing
or maintaining a recreational fire or cooking fire, whatever the case may be,
shall be responsible jointly and severally for all costs resulting from damage
caused by such fire, including those costs allowed by law and those costs
set forth in § 127-11.
Chapter 142
Department fees, including costs associated with confinement of the
fire.
D. Any person found to have violated this chapter, in addition to the other
costs set forth in this section, shall also forfeit the reasonable costs of
prosecution and, in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs set
forth herein, may be imprisoned in the county jail until the costs set
forth herein are made. Any imposed confinement in the county jail shall
not exceed 30 days for one offense.
A. When the Village of Hobart Fire Chief determines there are
environmental conditions likely to produce a serious threat of fire to life
or property, in addition to the burning ban set forth in § 127-7H the Fire
Chief may issue an emergency burning ban (the "emergency burning
ban"). An emergency burning ban may require that no person do the
following:
(1) Throw, discard or drop matches, ashes, or other burning material
while outdoors and in the immediate vicinity of combustible natural
vegetation; and/or
(2) Light or use any fireworks, as defined by the Wisconsin Statutes or
the Wisconsin Administrative Code, including, but not limited to,
caps, toy snakes, sparklers, smoke bombs, or cylindrical or cone
fountains that emit sparks and smoke.
B. Any imposed emergency burning ban shall be immediately posted as set
forth in § 127-7H.
§ 127-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-14
1:125
DIRECT SELLERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 201.
Nuisances — See Ch. 207.
Zoning — See Ch. 295.
§ 142-1. Permit required.
No direct seller, as defined herein, shall engage in such business within
the Village without first obtaining a permit therefor in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 142-2. Definitions.
CANVASSING MERCHANT — A person who on behalf of another person is
licensed to do business in the state or other entity licensed to do business
in the state engages in direct sales activity in the form of sale or solicitation
A. Direct sales in conformity with application. All direct sales pursuant to
a permit issued under this chapter shall be executed in strict conformity
with the representations on the application for such permit, including
without limitation by enumeration the time, place, nature and amount
of goods involved in the permit activity. Any direct sale activity not in
conformity with the representations on the application and the other
provisions of this chapter is hereby declared a public nuisance.32
B. Duration. The duration of the direct sellers permit under this chapter
shall be as follows:
(1) Transient merchants. All transient merchant direct sales permits
shall be effective for a period of not more than 10 days from the
date of issuance.
(2) Other direct sales activities. All other permits for direct sale
activities shall be effective from date of issuance until December 31
of the year of the application.
C. Processing. All applications for direct sales permits must be made at
least five days prior to the intended activity.
D. Sponsoring merchants. Either a permanent merchant who sponsors a
transient merchant or the sponsored transient merchant shall obtain a
direct seller's permit unless the display of goods and/or any sale
therefrom are at the permanent merchant's established place of
business.
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 127-14 HOBART CODE § 142-2
1:126
of orders for goods or services, by door-to-door or canvassing sales
techniques.
CLERK-TREASURER — The Village Clerk-Treasurer.
DIRECT SELLER — Any individual who for him/herself or for a partnership,
association, corporation, or LLC, sells goods or takes sale orders for the
later delivery of goods at any location other than the permanent business
place or residence of such individual, partnership, association, or
corporation and shall include, but not be limited to, canvassers, peddlers,
solicitors, and transient merchants. The sale of goods includes donations
required by the direct seller for the retention of goods by a donor or
prospective customer.
GOODS — Includes personal property of any kind and shall also include
personal services offered or sold independently of, in conjunction with, or
incidental to any personal property offered or sold.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — A person, corporation, or other business entity
who engages in direct sales activity in the form of the sale of goods or
solicitation of orders therefor and who does not intend to become a
permanent merchant in the Village.
§ 142-3. Application.
An applicant for a permit under this chapter must file with the Village
Clerk-Treasurer a sworn application in writing (in duplicate) on a form to
be furnished by the Village Clerk-Treasurer which shall give the following
information:
A. Name and description of the applicant.
B. Address and telephone number (permanent and temporary).
C. Description of direct sales activity including the goods to be sold,
offered, or given away, or the nature and purpose of the solicitation.
(1) Transient merchant. Transient merchants shall be required to
supply and itemize a list of goods to be offered for sale and the
retail value thereof. Any items not so listed shall not be offered for
sale under such permit.
(2) Canvassing merchants. Canvassing merchants shall supply an
itemized list of items to be sold directly to the public and the retail
value thereof. Any items not so listed shall not be offered for sale;
where orders are to be taken for the future delivery, an itemized list
of the items offered for sale and their retail value shall be supplied.
D. If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing the exact relationship.
(1) Transient merchant. Transient merchants will also be required to
provide a list of all employees or other persons who will be engaged
§ 142-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-3
1:127
§ 142-4. Investigation and issuance.
in the direct sales activity. Such list shall include the date of birth
of any such person.
(2) Canvassing merchants. Canvassing merchants shall be required to
provide the name of their employer together with their employer's
permanent address and a permanent address and person upon
whom civil process can be served in case of complaint concerning
any merchandise sold under a direct sales permit.
E. The time, date, and location of the direct sales activity.
(1) Where the applicant engages in direct sales as a transient
merchant, the applicant shall state on the application the specific
time(s), date(s), and location of said direct sales activity. Any direct
sales activity not so specified is prohibited.
(2) Where the applicant engages in canvassing merchant or door-todoor
direct sales activities, the applicant shall state on the
application the duration of such activity and the areas to be
included in the direct sales activity.
F. If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with the
license number or other means of identification.
G. The last cities, villages, towns, not to exceed three, where applicant
conducted similar business.
H. Statement as to whether applicant has been convicted of any crime or
ordinance violation related to applicant's direct sales merchant
business within the last five years; the nature of the offense and the
place of conviction.
I. Applicants shall present to the Clerk-Treasurer for examination:
(1) A driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be
reasonably required.
(2) A state certificate of examination and approval from the sealer of
weights and measures where applicant's business requires use of
weighing and measuring devices approved by state authorities.
(3) A retail food permit from the County Health Department where the
applicant's business involves the handling of food.33
J. Where sale of tangible personal property is involved, proof of seller's
permit, as required by § 77.52, Wis. Stats.
A. Upon receipt of such application, the original shall be referred to the
Village Administrator, who shall cause an investigation of all
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 142-3 HOBART CODE § 142-4
1:128
§ 142-5. Fees.34
§ 142-6. Exemptions.
The following activities shall be exempted from the provisions of this
chapter:
representations on said application. The Village Administrator shall
investigate the business and moral character of the applicant as well as
the time and location of the direct sales activity where applicable. The
Village Clerk-Treasurer shall not issue any permit under this chapter
until the Village Administrator has investigated the application. The
Village Administrator shall inform the Clerk-Treasurer of the decision
concerning the application within 14 days of the date that appears on
the application.
B. If, as a result of such investigation, the Village Administrator believes in
the interest of the protection of the public good that the applicant's
character or business responsibility is unsatisfactory, or that the time
and location of the sale is likely to disturb public peace or traffic flow, or
that any representation on the application is false, the Village
Administrator shall endorse on the application the disapproval and
state the reasons for the same, and return the application to the Village
Clerk-Treasurer, who shall notify the applicant that the application was
disapproved and that no permit shall be issued. Any person aggrieved
may appeal denial of the permit within seven days of notice to the
Village Board.
C. If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business
responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the Village
Administrator shall endorse approval on the application and return
such application to the Village Clerk-Treasurer, who shall, upon
payment of the prescribed fee, deliver a permit to the applicant. Such
permit shall contain the signature and seal of the issuing officer, and
shall show the name, address, and photograph of the holder, the class of
permit issued, and the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the amount
of fee paid, the date of issuance, and the length of time the same shall
be operative, as well as the permit number and other identifying
description of any vehicle used in such peddling. The Village Clerk-
Treasurer shall keep a permanent record of all permits issued.
A. Transient merchant. Transient merchants issued a permit under this
chapter shall be required to pay a fee in an amount as set from time to
time by the Village Board.
B. Other direct sales activity. The fee for any other direct sales activity
shall be in an amount as set from time to time by the Village Board.
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 142-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-6
1:129
§ 142-7. Special permit without fee.
A. Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products, or bakery
goods to regular customers on established routes.
B. Any person selling goods at wholesale to dealers in such goods.
C. Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders away
from an established place of business for goods regularly offered for
sale by such merchant within the county, and who delivers such goods
in their regular course of business.
D. Any person who has an established place of business where goods being
sold are offered for sale on a regular basis and in which the buyer has
initiated contact with and specifically requested the business of said
person.
E. Any person holding a sale required by statute or order of any court and
any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law.
A. Except as provided at § 142-6B above, any nonprofit organization
desiring to solicit money or property or desiring to sell or distribute any
item of literature or merchandise for which a fee is charged or solicited
from persons other than members of such organization upon the
streets, in office or business buildings, by house-to-house canvass or in
public places, for a charitable, fraternal, labor, religious, patriotic, or
political purposes shall be exempt from the provisions of §§ 142-1
through 142-5 and 142-15, provided there is a written application
furnished by and filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer, which shall
include the following information:
(1) Name and purpose of the cause for which permit is sought.
(2) Names and addresses of the officers and directors of the
organization.
(3) Period during which solicitation is to be carried on.
(4) Whether or not any commission, fees, wages, or emoluments are to
be expended in connection with such solicitation and the amount
thereof.
(5) The anticipated use of the funds collected and estimates of the
amounts to be retained at the local, state, and national level.
B. Before approval of the special permit under this chapter, the nonprofit
organization shall furnish a list of all persons who shall be canvassing,
selling, or distributing in the name of the organization. Such list shall
include the name and date of birth of every such person and shall be
reviewed as provided at § 142-4 of this chapter.
C. If such organization is a charitable, fraternal, labor, religious, patriotic,
or political organization, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall issue without
§ 142-6 HOBART CODE § 142-7
1:130
§ 142-8. Exemptions.
The following activities shall be exempted from fee and bond otherwise
required by this provision:
§ 142-9. Regulation of direct sellers.
The Village Board, pursuant to § 61.34, Wis. Stats., and in the interest
of promoting free enterprise and exchange of information, informing the
consuming public, and effective law enforcement, hereby declare the direct
sellers and solicitors regulations shall disclose the name of the organization
engaging in the direct sales activity.
charge to such organization a special permit to solicit in the Village.
Such organization shall furnish all of its members, agents, or
representatives conducting this solicitation credentials in writing
stating the name of the organization, the name of the agent, and the
purpose of the solicitation.
A. Any person selling agricultural products which such person has grown.
B. Artists and craftsmen selling their own creations.
C. Hobby collectors engaging, trading, and/or selling personal collections
or portions thereof at an exhibit, exhibition, or trade show sponsored by
a permanent merchant.
A. Disclosure requirements.
(1) After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to
a prospective customer, a direct seller shall identify himself/herself
and display the permit issued by the Clerk-Treasurer. Additionally,
the direct seller shall disclose the name of the company or
organization he/she is affiliated with, if any, and the identity of
goods or services offered for sale.
(2) If any sale of goods is made by a direct seller, or any sales order for
the later delivery of goods is taken by the seller, the buyer shall
have the right to cancel the transaction if it involves the extension
of credit or is a cash transaction of more than $25, in accordance
with the procedures as set forth in § 423.203, Wis. Stats., the seller
shall give the buyer two copies of a typed or printed notice of that
fact. Such notice shall conform to the requirements of
§ 423.203(1)(a)(b) and (c), (2), and (3), Wis. Stats.
(3) If the direct seller takes a sales order for the later delivery of
goods, he/she shall, at the time the order is taken, provide the
buyer with a written statement containing the terms of the
agreement, the amount paid in advance whether full, partial, or no
advance payment is made, the name, address, and telephone
number of the seller, the delivery or performance date, and
§ 142-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-9
1:131
whether a guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so, the terms
thereof.
B. Signs. All transient merchants as defined herein, shall be permitted to
post signs pursuant to § 295-361 of Chapter 295, Zoning, for advertising
purposes. In addition to any such advertising sign, if any, all transient
merchants shall post in a conspicuous manner at least one identification
sign containing only the following information, and in conformity with
all of the following specifications:35
(1) Specifications. The sign shall be not more than four square feet by
four square feet and not less than two square feet by two square
feet, having the information required by Subsection B(2) legibly
printed in letters conforming to the following specifications:
(a) All letters shall be not less than 2 1/2 inches in height.
(b) All letters shall be not less than 1 1/4 inches in width.
(c) All letters shall be printed in standard block style with the
letter thickness of not less than 1/4 inches.
(d) All letters shall be in substantial conformity with the minimum
requirements displayed in Exhibit "A."
Exhibit "A"
(2) Information. The identification sign shall contain only the following
information, which shall be displayed in the following order:
(a) The name of the organization, or business entity, or person who
is issued a permit pursuant to this chapter.
(b) The address of the organization, or business entity, or person
who is issued a permit pursuant to this chapter.
(c) The name of the person in charge of or supervising the direct
sales activity at the particular location.
(d) The dates which the direct sales activities have been approved.
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 142-9 HOBART CODE § 142-9
1:132
(e) The sign shall be in substantial compliance with the drawing
marked Exhibit "B."
Exhibit "B"
NAME OF ORGANIZATION
ADDRESS OF ORGANIZATION
NAME OF SUPERVISOR
DATE(S) PERMIT VALID
(3) Identification sign required. At least one identification sign must be
posted at each place of sale. In addition to this requirement, one
identification sign shall be required for each advertising sign.
(4) Direct seller to maintain sign. It shall be the duty of the permitted
organization, business entity, or person to post and maintain the
sign(s) in a manner in which they are easily and readily noticeable
to the general public and to post the sign in a conspicuous manner.
C. Prohibited practices.
(1) A direct seller shall be prohibited from:
(a) Calling at any dwelling or other place between 9:00 p.m. and
9:00 a.m., except by appointment;
(b) Calling at any dwelling or other place where a sign is displayed
bearing the words "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors," or words of
similar meaning;
(c) Calling at the rear door of any dwelling place or remaining on
any premises after being asked to leave by the owner,
occupant, or other person having authority over such
premises.
(2) A direct seller shall not misrepresent or make false, deceptive, or
misleading statements concerning the quality, quantity, or
character of any goods offered for sale; the purpose of his/her visit;
his/her identity or the identity of the organization he/she
represents. A charitable organization direct seller shall specifically
disclose what portion of the sale price of goods being offered will
actually be used for the charitable purpose for which the
organization is soliciting. Such portion shall be expressed as a
percentage of the sale price of the goods.
(3) No direct seller shall impede the free use of sidewalks and streets
by pedestrians and vehicles. Where sales are made from vehicles,
all traffic and parking regulations shall be observed.
(4) No direct seller shall make any loud noises or use any soundamplifying
device to attract customers if the noise produced
§ 142-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-9
1:133
§ 142-10. Records.
The Village Administrator or a designee shall report to the Clerk-Treasurer
all convictions for violation of this chapter, and the Clerk-Treasurer shall
note any such violation on the record of the registrant convicted.
§ 142-11. Statutes controlling.
If any section, sentence, or clause of this chapter is in conflict with any
provision of or exception granted by the Wisconsin Statues, the provisions
or exceptions as set forth in the statutes shall be controlling.
§ 142-12. Violations and penalties.
violates any Village noise control ordinance or Village nuisance
ordinance; see Chapter 201, Noise, and Chapter 207, Nuisances,
respectively.
(5) No direct seller shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in or
around the area in which he/she is conducting business.
(6) Permits issued under this chapter are not transferable.
A. Forfeiture. Any person, firm or corporation, or agent, employee or
contractor of such who violates, destroys, omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with, or who resists enforcement of any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties provided in
§ 1-3. Each violation and each day of violation shall constitute a
separate offense. this chapter shall not preclude the Village of Hobart
from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a
violation of this chapter.36
B. Revocation.
(1) The permit of a direct seller may be revoked by the Village Board
after notice and hearing, if the registrant made any material
omission or materially inaccurate statement in the application for
registration, made any fraudulent, false, deceptive, or misleading
statement or representation in the course of engaging in direct
sales, violated any provision of this chapter, or was convicted of any
crime or ordinance or statutory violation which is directly related
to the registrant's fitness to engage in direct selling.
(2) Written notice of the hearing shall be served personally on the
registrant at least 72 hours prior to the time set for the hearing;
such notice shall contain the time and place of hearing and a
statement of the acts upon which the hearing will be based.
(3) Appeal shall be by writ of certiorari to the Circuit Court.
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 142-9 HOBART CODE § 142-13
1:134
§ 142-13. Hearing and review.
The Village Board hereby designates the Village Board as the hearing and
review body on all matters arising pursuant to this chapter. Appeal from
the decision of the Village Board shall be by writ of certiorari to the Circuit
Court.
§ 142-14. Public property.
No direct seller, as defined herein, shall engage in such business upon
any public property within the Village without first obtaining permission
to engage in such business from the Village Administrator, or other
appropriate committee, agency, or commission as circumstances dealing
with such sales activity upon public property dictate.
§ 142-15. Clerk-Treasurer as attorney-in-fact and bond.
§ 142-16. Sales on public property during special events.
A. Appointment of Clerk-Treasurer as attorney. Before receiving a permit
under this chapter, the applicant shall appoint in writing the Village
Clerk-Treasurer as such person's attorney-in-fact to accept service of
process in any action commenced against the applicant arising out of
any direct sales activity under this chapter. Such action shall be
brought in Brown County, Wisconsin.
B. Bond. Any transient merchant, before being entitled to a permit under
this chapter, shall post a corporate surety or cash bond with the Village
Clerk-Treasurer. The surety shall be approved of by the Clerk-Treasurer
and the aggregate liability of the surety for all losses shall in no event
exceed the face amount of the bond. The bond or surety shall be
conditioned upon compliance with this chapter and on compliance with
all material, oral or written statements, and representations made by or
in behalf of the direct seller with reference to the merchandise sold or
offered for sale or the faithful performance under all warranties made
with reference thereto. The bond shall be effective for one year after
the date of issuance. In the event that the bond is a corporate surety
bond, the amount thereof shall be equal or exceed the total amount of
inventory listed in the application. If the surety is in the form of cash
bond, it shall be 10% of the amount indicated as the total amount of
inventory.
A. Purpose. It is hereby determined and declared that the use of certain
public premises for the specific public purposes to which such premises
are intended is preeminent. It is further determined and declared that
sales on the designated public premises interfere with their use for
their intended purposes.
B. Regulations.
§ 142-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-16
1:135
Chapter 150
EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 121.
Agricultural shoreland management — See
Ch. 288.
Floodplain zoning — See Ch. 290.
Shoreland zoning — See Ch. 293.
Zoning — See Ch. 295.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, without permission of the
organization sponsoring the event, to sell or offer for sale any
goods, merchandise, foodstuffs, tickets or any other articles of any
kind on public premises reserved for special events. Direct seller
permits issued under this chapter are not valid on public premises
reserved for special events.37
(2) For purposes of this chapter "special events" are as designated
from time to time by the Village Board.
(3) The boundaries of each public premises reserved for "special
events" shall be designated or rescinded by resolution.
(4) The Village may review, investigate, and disapprove any vendor
approved for a "special event" subject to the standards set forth in
this chapter.
C. Appeal procedure. Any person denied permission to sell or offer for sale
any goods, merchandise, foodstuffs, tickets, or any other article of any
kind on public premises reserved for "special events" may appeal the
denial to the Village Board.
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 142-16 HOBART CODE § 142-16
1:136
ARTICLE I
Stormwater Runoff
[Adopted as § 4.2 of the 2000 Code]
§ 150-1. Authority.
§ 150-2. Findings of fact.
The Village Board finds that uncontrolled stormwater runoff from land
development activity has a significant impact upon water resources and
the health, safety, general welfare of the community and diminishes the
public enjoyment and use of natural resources. Specifically, uncontrolled
stormwater runoff can:
A. This article is adopted by the Village Board under the authority granted
by §§ 61.35 and 61.354, Wis. Stats. This article supersedes all
conflicting and contradictory stormwater management regulations
previously enacted.38
B. The provisions of this article are deemed not to limit any other lawful
regulatory powers of the same governing body.
C. The Village Board hereby designates the administering authority to
administer and enforce the provisions of this article.
D. The requirements of this article do not preempt more stringent
stormwater management requirements that may be imposed by WPDES
stormwater permits issued by the Department of Natural Resources
under § 283.33, Wis. Stats.
A. Degrade physical stream habitat by increasing stream bank erosion,
increasing stream bed scour, diminishing groundwater recharge, and
diminishing stream base flows;
B. Diminish the capacity of lakes and streams to support fish, aquatic life,
recreational, and water supply uses by increasing loadings of nutrients
and other urban pollutants;
C. Alter wetland communities by changing wetland hydrology and by
increasing pollutant loads;
D. Reduce the quality of groundwater by increasing pollutant loading;
E. Threaten public health, safety, property, and general welfare by
overtaxing storm sewers, drainageways, and other minor drainage
facilities;
F. Threaten public health, safety, property, and general welfare by
increasing major flood peaks and volumes;
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 150-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-2
1:137
§ 150-3. Purpose and intent.
§ 150-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTERING AUTHORITY — The governmental employee, or a
regional planning commission empowered under § 61.35, Wis. Stats.,
designated by the Village Board to administer this article.
G. Undermine floodplain management efforts by increasing the incidence
and levels of flooding.
A. Purpose. The general purpose of this article is to set forth stormwater
requirements and criteria which will diminish the threats to public
health, safety, welfare, and the aquatic environment due to runoff of
stormwater from land development activity. Specific purposes are to:
(1) Further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions;
(2) Prevent and control the adverse effects of stormwater, prevent and
control soil erosion, prevent and control water pollution, protect
spawning grounds, fish, and aquatic life;
(3) Control exceedance of the safe capacity of existing drainage
facilities and receiving water bodies; prevent undue channel
erosion; control increases in the scouring and transportation of
particulate matter; prevent conditions that endanger downstream
property;
(4) Control building sites, placement of structures, and land uses, and
promote sound economic growth.
B. Intent. It is the intent of the Village Board that this article manage the
long-term, postconstruction stormwater discharges from land
development activities. The Village Board recognizes that the preferred
method of addressing stormwater management problems and needs is
through the preparation of comprehensive stormwater management
system plans for sub-watershed areas which are designed to meet the
purpose and intent of this article. Where such system plans have been
developed and approved by the Village Board, it is the intent that all
land development activities will include stormwater management
measures that meet performance standards set forth in those approved
plans. Where such stormwater management system plans have not
been developed or approved by the Village Board, it is the intent of the
Village Board that the generic stormwater management standards set
forth in § 150-7A and B of this article be applied unless otherwise
excepted by the administering authority.
§ 150-2 HOBART CODE § 150-4
1:138
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The planting, growing, cultivating, and
harvesting of crops; growing and tending of gardens, and trees; harvesting
of trees.
BUSINESS DAY — A day on which both the offices of the administering
authority of the permit holder are routinely and customarily open for
business.
CEASE-AND-DESIST ORDER — A court-issued order to halt land developing
activity that is being conducted without the required permit.
COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE — All lands included within
the boundary of a certified survey or subdivision plat created for the
purpose of development or sale of property where multiple separate and
distinct land developing activity may take place at different times and on
different schedules.
DESIGN STORM — A hypothetical discrete rainstorm characterized by a
specific duration, temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return frequency,
and total rainfall depth.
DISCHARGE VOLUME — The quantity of runoff discharged from the land
surface as the result of a rainfall event.
DIVISION OF LAND — The creation from one parcel of five or more parcels
or building sites of five or fewer acres each in area where such creation
occurs at one time or through the successive partition within a five-year
period.39
FEE IN LIEU — A payment of money to the Village Board in place of meeting
all or part of the stormwater performance standards required by the article.
FINANCIAL GUARANTEE — A performance bond, maintenance bond,
surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or similar guarantees submitted
to the administering authority by the permit holder to assure that
requirements of the this article are carried out in compliance with the
stormwater management plan.
GOVERNING BODY — Village Board.
GROSS AGGREGATE AREA — The total area, in acres, of all land located
within the property boundary containing the land development activity.
GROUNDWATER ENFORCEMENT STANDARD — A numerical value
expressing the concentration of a substance in groundwater which is
adopted under § 160.07, Wis. Stats., and Wis. Adm. Code § NR 140.10, or
§ 160.09, Wis. Stats., and Wis. Adm. Code § NR 140.12.
GROUNDWATER PREVENTIVE ACTION LIMIT — A numerical value
expressing the concentration of a substance in groundwater which is
adopted under § 160.15, Wis. Stats., and § NR 140.10, 140.12, or 140.20,
Wis. Adm. Code.
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 150-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-4
1:139
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that releases the rainfall as surface
runoff during a large portion of the design rainfall event. Rooftops,
sidewalks, parking lots, and street surfaces are examples of impervious
surfaces.
INFILTRATION — The process by which rainfall or surface runoff percolates
or penetrates into the underlying soil.
LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY — Any construction or redevelopment of
buildings, roads, parking lots, paved and unpaved storage areas, and similar
facilities, but not including agricultural activity.
LOCAL MUNICIPALITY — A town, county, Village, or city.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legal document that is filed with the
County Register of Deeds as a property deed restriction, and which provides
for long-term maintenance of stormwater management practices.
NON-STORM DISCHARGE — A discharge to the storm sewer system
created by some process other than stormwater runoff.
NONSTRUCTURAL MEASURE — A practice, technique, or measure to
reduce the volume, peak flow rate, or pollutants in stormwater that does not
require the design or installation of fixed stormwater management facilities.
OFF-SITE — Located outside the property boundary described in the permit
application for land development activity.
ON-SITE — Located within the property boundary described in the permit
application for the land development activity.
OTHER THAN RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — Development of the
following land uses: commercial; industrial; government and institutional;
recreation; transportation; communication; and utilities.
PEAK FLOW DISCHARGE RATE — The maximum rate at which a unit
volume of stormwater is discharged.
PERMIT — A written authorization made by the administering authority to
the applicant to conduct land development activities.
PERMIT ADMINISTRATION FEE — A sum of money paid to the
administering authority by the permit applicant for the purpose of
recouping the expenses incurred by the authority in administering the
permit.
PERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that infiltrates rainfall during a large
portion of the design rainfall event. Well-managed lawns, fields and
woodlands are examples of pervious surfaces.
POSTCONSTRUCTION STORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any stormwater
discharged from a site following the completion of land disturbing
construction activity and final site stabilization.
POSTDEVELOPMENT CONDITION — The extent and distribution of land
cover types, anticipated to occur under conditions of full development, that
will influence stormwater runoff and infiltration.
§ 150-4 HOBART CODE § 150-4
1:140
PREDEVELOPMENT CONDITION — The extent and distribution of land
cover types present before the initiation of land development activity,
assuming that all and uses prior to development activity are managed in an
environmentally sound manner.
PRETREATMENT — The treatment of stormwater prior to its discharge to
the primary stormwater treatment practice in order to reduce pollutant
loads to a level compatible with the capability of the primary practice.
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — That which is created to house people,
including the residential dwellings as well as all attendant portions of the
development including lawns, driveways, sidewalks, garages, and access
streets. This type of development includes single- family, multifamily,
apartments, and trailer parks.
SITE RESTRICTION — Any physical characteristic which limits the use of
a stormwater best management practice as prescribed in the Wisconsin
Stormwater Manual.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued by the administering authority
which requires that all construction activity on the site be stopped.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A document that identifies what
actions will be taken to reduce stormwater quantity and pollutant loads
from land development activity to levels meeting the purpose and intent of
this article.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM PLAN — A Comprehensive Plan
developed to address stormwater drainage and nonpoint source pollution
control problems on a watershed or subwatershed basis, and which meets
the purpose and intent of this article.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — That portion of the precipitation falling during
a rainfall event, or that portion of snowmelt, that runs off the surface of the
land and into the natural or artificial conveyance or drainage network.
STRUCTURAL MEASURE — Source area practices, conveyance measures,
and end-of-pipe treatment that are designed to control stormwater runoff
pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and peak flow discharge rates.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Those portions of Lake Michigan and Lake
Superior within the boundaries of Wisconsin, and all lakes, bays, rivers,
streams, springs, ponds, wells, impounding reservoirs, marshes,
watercourses, drainage systems and other surface water or groundwater,
natural or artificial, public or private, within the state or its jurisdiction.
WETLAND FUNCTIONAL VALUE — The type, quality, and significance of
the ecological and cultural benefits provided by wetland resources, such
as: flood storage, water quality protection, groundwater recharge and
discharge, shoreline protection, fish and wildlife habitat, floral diversity,
aesthetics, recreation, and education.
WETLANDS — An area where water is at, near, or above the land surface
long enough to be capable of supporting aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation
§ 150-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-4
1:141
and which has soils indicative of wet conditions. These wetlands include
natural, mitigation, and restored wetlands.
WPDES STORMWATER PERMIT — A permit issued by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources under § 288.33, Wis. Stats. that
authorizes the point source discharge of stormwater to waters of the state.
§ 150-5. Applicability and jurisdiction.
§ 150-6. Design criteria, standards and specifications.
Unless prior authorization is given by the administering authority, the
following methods shall be used in meeting the requirements of this article:
A. Applicability. This article applies to land development activities which
meet the applicability criteria specified in this section. This article also
applies to land development activities that are smaller than the
minimum applicability criteria if such activities are part of a larger
common plan of development or sale, even though multiple separate
and distinct land development activities may take place at different
times on different schedules. The applicability criteria are:
(1) Residential land development with a gross aggregate area of five
acres or more;
(2) Residential land development with a gross aggregate area of at
least three acres, but less than five acres, if there are at least 1.5
acres of impervious surfaces;
(3) Land development, other than a residential land development, with
a gross aggregate area of 1.5 acres or more, or any nonresidential
land development which creates an impervious area of 0.5 acres or
more;
(4) Land development activity of any size that, in the opinion of the
administering authority, is likely to result in stormwater runoff
which exceeds the safe capacity of the existing drainage facilities
or receiving body of water, which causes increased channel
erosion, which increases water pollution by scouring or the
transportation of particulate matter or which endangers property
or public safety.
B. Jurisdiction. This article applies to land development activities within
the boundaries of the Village of Hobart.
C. Exemptions. This article does not apply to land development activities
conducted or contracted for by any state agency, as defined under
§ 227.01(1), Wis. Stats., but also including the office of district attorney.
A. Water quality components. The following methods shall be used in
designing components of stormwater structures needed to meet the
water quality standards of this article:
§ 150-4 HOBART CODE § 150-6
1:142
§ 150-7. Stormwater management standards.
(1) Practices shall be designed in accordance with the methods set
forth in the latest edition of the "Wisconsin Stormwater Manual,
Part 2: Technical Design Guidelines for Stormwater BMPs" as
published and amended from time to time by the State of Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources.
(2) Runoff volumes and peak flow rates used in designing the water
quality components of stormwater structures shall be calculated
using the "Small Storm Hydrology" method set forth in the latest
edition of the "Wisconsin Stormwater Manual, Part 2: Technical
Design Guidelines for Stormwater BMPs" as published and
amended from time to time by the State of Wisconsin Department
of Natural Resources.
B. Water quantity components. The following methods shall be used in
designing components of stormwater structures needed to meet the
water quantity standards of this article:
(1) Peak flow shaving components of stormwater structures shall be
designed in accordance with standard engineering practice.
(2) Runoff volumes and peak flow rates used in designing the water
quantity components of stormwater structures shall be based on
the principles of the document entitled "Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds" (Technical Release 55; Engineering Division, Soil
Conservation Service, United States Department of Agriculture,
June 1992).
A. Stormwater discharge quantity. Unless otherwise provided for in this
article, all land development activities subject to this article shall
establish on-site management practices to control the peak flow rates of
stormwater discharged from the site. Infiltration of stormwater runoff
from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, and landscaped areas shall be
incorporated to the maximum extent practical to provide volume
control in addition to control of peak flows. On-site management
practices shall be used to meet the following minimum performance
standards:
(1) The peak flow discharge rates of stormwater runoff from the
development shall not exceed those calculated for the series of
design storms specified in Subsection A(2) and predevelopment
conditions specified in Subsection A(3). Discharge velocities must
be nonerosive to discharge locations, outfall channels, and
receiving streams.
(2) At a minimum, the two-year/twenty-four-hour, the ten-year/twentyfour-
hour, and twenty-five-year/twenty-four-hour design storms
shall be used in comparing peak flow discharge rates for
predevelopment and postdevelopment conditions.
§ 150-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-7
1:143
(3) Predevelopment conditions for land developing activities shall
assume a "good" level of land management. When the Soil
Conservation Service TR-55 Method is used to calculate peak flow
discharge rates and runoff volumes for the predevelopment
condition, NRCS curve numbers shall not exceed the following for
the given soil hydrologic groups. When other methods for
computing runoff are used, they shall assume a comparable
predevelopment condition.
Soil Hydrologic Group: A B C D
NRCS curve number for
meadow
30 58 71 78
NRCS curve number for
woodland
30 55 70 77
NRCS curve number for grain 55 68 77 80
NRCS curve number for
pasture
39 61 74 80
NRCS curve number for
paved roadways with open
ditches*
83 89 92 93
NRCS curve number for
commercial/business
districts*
89 92 94 95
NRCS curve number for
industrial districts*
81 88 91 93
NOTES:
* For use with redevelopment projects only.
(4) Increases or decreases in the hydrology of wetlands shall be
minimized to the extent practical. Where such changes are
proposed, the impact of the proposal on wetland functional values
shall be assessed using a methodology acceptable to the
administering authority. Significant degradation of wetland
functional values shall be avoided.
B. Stormwater discharge quality. Unless otherwise provided for in this
article, all land development activities subject to this article shall
establish on-site management practices to control the quality of
stormwater discharged from the site. On-site management practices
shall be used to meet the following minimum standard:
(1) Stormwater discharges shall be treated to remove, on an average
annual basis, a minimum of 80% of the total suspended solids load.
To achieve this level of control, stormwater practices shall be
designed to accommodate, at a minimum, the runoff volume
resulting from 1.5 inches of rainfall.
§ 150-7 HOBART CODE § 150-7
1:144
(2) Discharge of urban stormwater pollutants to wetlands shall be
minimized to the extent practical. Where such discharges are
proposed, the impact of the proposed discharge on wetland
functional values shall be assessed using a method acceptable to
the administering authority.
(3) At a minimum, stormwater discharges shall be pretreated prior to
discharge to wetlands. Significant degradation of wetland
functional values due to stormwater pollutant loads shall be
avoided.
(4) Stormwater discharges shall be pretreated prior to infiltration
where necessary to prolong maintenance of the infiltration practice
and to prevent discharge of stormwater pollutants at
concentrations that will result in exceedances of groundwaterpreventive
action limits or enforcement standards established by
the Department of Natural Resources in Ch. NR 140, Wisconsin
Administrative Code. Stormwater shall not be injected
underground through excavations or openings that would violate
§ NR 812.05, Wis. Admin. Code.
(5) Stormwater ponds and infiltration devices shall not be located
closer to water supply wells than indicated below without first
notifying the administering authority:
(a) One hundred feet from a well serving a private water system or
a transient, noncommunity public water system;
(b) One thousand two hundred feet from a well serving a
municipal public water system, and other than municipal
public water system, or a nontransient noncommunity public
water system;
(c) The boundary of a recharge area to a wellhead identified in a
wellhead area protection plan.
C. Exceptions. The administering authority may establish stormwater
management requirements either more stringent or less stringent than
those set forth in Subsections A and B of this section, provided that at
least one of the following conditions applies.
(1) The administering authority determines that an added level of
protection is needed to protect sensitive resources.
(2) The administrating authority determines that the land development
activity is covered by an approved stormwater management system
plan that contains management requirements consistent with the
purpose and intent of this article.
(3) Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility,
provided that all of the following conditions for the off-site facility
are met:
§ 150-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-7
1:145
§ 150-8. Permitting requirements, procedures and fees.
(a) The facility is in place;
(b) The facility is designed and adequately sized to provide a level
of stormwater control equal to or greater than that which
would be afforded by on-site practices meeting the
requirements of this article;
(c) The facility has an entity responsible for its long-term
operation and maintenance.
(4) The administering authority finds that meeting the minimum onsite
management requirements of this article is infeasible due to
space or site restrictions.
D. Fee in lieu of on-site stormwater management practices. Where the
administering authority waives all or part of the minimum on-site
stormwater management requirements under Subsection C, the
applicant may be required to pay a fee in an amount determined in
negotiation with the administering authority. In setting the fee for land
development projects, the administering authority shall consider an
equitable distribution of the cost for land, engineering design,
construction, and maintenance of stormwater management practices
needed to serve the land development.
E. General considerations for on-site and off-site stormwater management
measures. The following considerations shall be observed in managing
stormwater runoff:
(1) Natural topography and land cover features such as natural swales,
natural depressions, native soil infiltrating capacity, and natural
groundwater recharge areas shall be preserved and used, to the
extent possible, to meet the requirements of this section.
(2) Emergency overland flow shall be configured at a high level for all
stormwater facilities so that the safe capacity of downstream
drainage facilities will not be exceeded; thus, preventing
endangerment of downstream property or public safety.
(3) Sump pump discharge shall:
(a) Drain toward the ditch.
(b) Permit must be obtained for any work within the Village rightof-
way.
(c) Owner is responsible for any maintenance to his drain pipe if
drained into the right-of-way. Village is not responsible for any
damage to discharge pipe if it is placed in the right-of-way.
(d) Water must pump out and stop within 20 feet of the property
line to sheet off of lot.
§ 150-7 HOBART CODE § 150-8
1:146
A. Permit required. No landowner or land operator may undertake a land
development activity subject to this article without receiving a permit
from the administering authority prior to commencing the proposed
activity.
B. Permit application and fee. Unless specifically excluded by this article,
any landowner or operator desiring a permit shall submit to the
administering authority a permit application made on a form provided
by the administering authority for that purpose.
(1) Unless otherwise excepted by this article, a permit application
must be accompanied by the following in order that the permit
application be considered by the administering authority: a
stormwater management plan, a maintenance agreement, and a
nonrefundable permit administration fee.
(2) The stormwater management plan shall be prepared to meet the
requirements of § 150-9 of this article, the maintenance agreement
shall be prepared to meet the requirements of § 150-10 of this
article, the financial guarantee shall meet the intent of § 150-11 of
this article, and fees shall be those established by the Village Board
as set forth in § 150-12 of this article.
C. Review and approval of permit application. The administering authority
shall review any permit application that is submitted with a stormwater
management plan, maintenance agreement, and the required fee. The
following approval procedure shall be used:
(1) Within seven business days of the receipt of a complete permit
application, including all items as required by Subsection B(1), the
administering authority shall inform the applicant whether the
application, plan and maintenance agreement are approved or
disapproved. The administering authority shall base the decision on
requirements set forth in §§ 150-7, 150-9 and 150-10 of this article.
(2) If the stormwater permit application, plan and maintenance
agreement are approved, or if an agreed upon payment of fees in
lieu of stormwater management practices is made, the
administering authority shall issue the permit.
(3) If the stormwater permit application, plan or maintenance
agreement are disapproved, the Village Board shall detail in
writing of the reasons for disapproval.
(4) If additional information is submitted, the administering authority
shall have seven business days from the date the additional
information is received to inform the applicant that the plan and
maintenance agreement are either approved or disapproved.
(5) Failure by the administering authority to inform the permit
applicant of a decision within seven business days of a required
§ 150-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-8
1:147
submittal shall be deemed to mean approval of the submittal and
the applicant may proceed as if a permit had been issued.
D. Permit conditions. All permits issued under this article shall be subject
to the following conditions, and holders of permits issued under this
article shall be deemed to have accepted these conditions. The
administering authority may suspend or revoke a permit for violation of
a permit condition, following written notification of the permittee. An
action by the administering authority to suspend or revoke this permit
may be appealed in accordance with § 150-14 of this article.
(1) Compliance with this permit does not relieve the permit holder of
the responsibility to comply with other applicable federal, state,
and local laws and regulations.
(2) The permit holder shall design and install all structural and
nonstructural stormwater management measures in accordance
with the approved stormwater management plan and this permit.
(3) The permit holder shall notify the administering authority at least
three business days before commencing any work in conjunction
with the stormwater management plan, and within three business
days upon completion of the stormwater management practices. If
required as a special condition, the permit holder shall make
additional notification according to a schedule set forth by the
administering authority so that practice installations can be
inspected during construction.
(4) Practice installations required as part of this article shall be
certified "as built" by a licensed professional engineer. Completed
stormwater management practices must pass a final inspection to
determine if they are in accordance with the approved stormwater
management plan and this article. The administering authority
shall notify the permit holder in writing of any changes required in
such practices to bring them into compliance with the conditions of
this permit.
(5) The permit holder shall notify the administering authority of any
significant modifications it intends to make to an approved
stormwater management plan. The administering authority may
require that the proposed modifications be submitted for approval
prior to incorporation into the stormwater management plan and
execution.
(6) The permit holder shall maintain all stormwater management
practices in accordance with the stormwater management plan
until the practices either become the responsibility of the Village
Board, or are transferred to subsequent private owners as specified
in the approved maintenance agreement.
(7) The permit holder authorizes the administering authority to
perform any work or operations necessary to bring stormwater
§ 150-8 HOBART CODE § 150-8
1:148
§ 150-9. Stormwater management plans.
management measures into conformance with the approved
stormwater management plan, and consents to a special
assessment or charge against the property as authorized under
§§ 66.0627 and 66.0703, Wis. Stats., or to charging such costs
against the financial guarantee posted under § 150-11 of this
article.40
(8) If so directed by the administering authority, the permit holder
shall repair at the permit holder's own expense all damage to
adjoining municipal facilities and drainage ways caused by
stormwater runoff, where such damage is caused by activities that
are not in compliance with the approved stormwater management
plan.
(9) The permit holder shall permit property access to the
administering authority for the purpose of inspecting the property
for compliance with the approved stormwater management plan
and this permit.
(10) Where a stormwater management plan involves changes in
direction, increases in peak rate and/or total volume of runoff from
a site, the administering authority may require the permittee to
make appropriate legal arrangements with adjacent property
owners concerning the prevention of endangerment to property or
public safety.
(11) The permit holder is subject to the enforceable actions detailed in
§ 150-13 of the stormwater management ordinance if the permit
holder fails to comply with the terms of this permit.
E. Permit duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid from
the date of issuance through the date of administering authority notifies
the permit holder that all stormwater management practices have
passed the final inspection required under Subsection D(4).
A. Plan requirements. The stormwater management plan required under
§ 150-8B of this article shall contain any information the administering
authority may need to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the
area affected by land development activity, the potential impacts of the
proposed development upon the quality and quantity of stormwater
discharges, the potential impacts upon water resources and drainage
utilities, and the effectiveness and acceptability of proposed
stormwater management measures in meeting the performance
standards set forth in this article. Unless specified otherwise by this
article, stormwater management plans shall contain at a minimum the
following information:
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 150-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-9
1:149
(1) Name, address, and telephone number for the following or their
designees: landowner, developer; project engineer for practice
design and certification; person(s) responsible for installation of
stormwater management practices; person(s) responsible for
maintenance of stormwater management practices prior to the
transfer, if any, of maintenance responsibility to another party.
(2) A proper legal description of the property proposed to be
developed referenced to the U.S. Public Land Survey system or to
block and lot numbers within a recorded land subdivision plat.
(3) Predevelopment site conditions, including:
(a) One or more site maps at a scale of not less than one inch
equals 50 feet. The site maps shall show the following: site
location and legal property description; predominant soil types
and hydrologic soil groups; existing cover type and condition;
topographic contours of the site at a scale not to exceed two
feet; topography and drainage network including enough of the
contiguous properties to show runoff patterns onto, through,
and from the site; watercourses that may affect or be affected
by runoff from the site; flow path and direction for all
stormwater conveyance sections, including time of travel and
time of concentration applicable to each; watershed
boundaries used in determinations of peak flow discharge
rates and discharge volumes from the site; lakes, streams,
wetlands, channels, ditches, and other watercourses on and
immediately adjacent to the site; limits of the one-hundredyear
floodplain; location of wells located within 1,200 feet of
stormwater detention ponds, infiltration basins, or infiltration
trenches; delineation of wellhead protection areas delineated
pursuant to § NR 811.16, Wis. Admin. Code.
(b) Computations of peak flow discharge rates and discharge
volumes for the two-year/twenty-four hour, ten-year/twentyfour-
hour, and twenty-five-year/twenty-four-hour storm events.
All major assumptions used in developing input parameters
shall be clearly stated. The computations shall be made for
each discharge point in the development, and the geographic
areas used in making the calculations shall be clearly crossreferenced
to the required map(s).
(4) Postdevelopment site conditions, including:
(a) Explanation of the provisions to preserve and use natural
topography and land cover features to minimize changes in
peak flow runoff rates and volumes to surface waters and
wetlands.
(b) Explanation of any restrictions on stormwater management
measures in the development area imposed by wellhead
protection plans and ordinances.
§ 150-9 HOBART CODE § 150-9
1:150
(c) One or more site maps at a scale of not less than one inch
equals 50 feet showing: revised pervious land use including
vegetative cover type and condition; impervious land use
including all buildings, structures, and pavement; revised
topographic contours of the site at a scale not to exceed two
feet; revised drainage network including enough of the
contiguous properties to show runoff patterns onto, through,
and from the site; locations and dimensions of drainage
easements; locations of maintenance easements specified in
the maintenance agreement; flow path and direction for all
stormwater conveyance selections, including time of travel and
time of concentration applicable to each; location and type of
all stormwater management conveyance and treatment
practices, including the on-site and off-site tributary drainage
area; location and type of conveyance system that will carry
runoff from the drainage and treatment practices to the
nearest adequate outlet such as a curbed street, storm drain,
or natural drainageway; watershed boundaries used in
determinations of peak flow discharge rates and discharge
volumes; any changes to lakes, streams, wetlands, channels,
ditches, and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent
to the site.
(d) Computation of the runoff volume resulting from the 1.5 inch
rainfall, and computations of peak flow discharge rates and
discharge volumes for the two-year/twenty-four-hour, ten-year/
twenty-four-hour, and twenty-five-year/twenty-four-hour storm
events. All major assumptions used in developing input
parameters shall be clearly stated. The computations shall be
made for each discharge point in the development, and the
geographic areas used in making the calculations shall be
clearly cross-referenced to the required map(s).
(e) Results of investigations of soils and groundwater required for
the placement and design of stormwater management
measures.
(f) Results of impact assessments on wetland functional values.
(g) Design computations and all applicable assumptions for the
stormwater conveyance (open channel, closed pipe) system.
(h) Design computations and all applicable assumptions for
stormwater quality practices (sedimentation type, filtrationtype,
infiltration-type) as needed to show that practices are
appropriately sized to accommodate runoff from the 1.5 inch
rainfall. For practice designs that depart from those specified
in the "Wisconsin Stormwater Manual, Part 2," the results of
continuous simulation modeling, conducted according to the
guidelines established in this manual, shall be presented in
§ 150-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-9
1:151
§ 150-10. Maintenance agreement.
such a way as to show the reduction in average annual total
suspended solids loading from the developed site.
(i) Detailed drawings including cross-sections and profiles of all
permanent stormwater conveyance and treatment practices.
(5) A stormwater practice installation schedule.
(6) A maintenance plan developed for the life of each stormwater
management practice, including the required maintenance
activities and maintenance activity schedule.
(7) Cost estimates for the construction, operation, and maintenance of
each stormwater management practice.
(8) Other information as needed by the administering authority to
determine compliance of the proposed stormwater management
measures with the provisions of this article.
(9) All site investigations, plans, designs, computations, and drawings
shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer to be prepared
in accordance with accepted engineering practice and in
accordance with The Wisconsin Stormwater Manual, Part Two:
Technical Design Guidelines for Stormwater BMPs.
B. Exceptions. The administering authority may prescribe alternative
submittal requirements for applicants seeking an exemption to on-site
stormwater management performance standards under § 150-7C of this
article.
A. Maintenance agreement required. The maintenance agreement
required for stormwater management practices under § 150-8B of this
article shall be an agreement between the administering authority and
the permittee to provide for maintenance of stormwater practices
beyond the duration period of this permit. The agreement or recordable
document shall be recorded with the County Register of Deeds so that it
is binding upon all subsequent owners of land served by this
stormwater management practices.
B. Agreement provisions. The maintenance agreement shall contain the
following information and provisions:
(1) Identification of the stormwater facilities and designation of the
drainage area served by the facilities.
(2) A schedule for regular maintenance of each aspect of the
stormwater management system consistent with the stormwater
management plan.
§ 150-9 HOBART CODE § 150-10
1:152
§ 150-11. Financial guarantee.
(3) Identification of the landowner(s), organization or municipality
responsible for long-term maintenance of the stormwater
management practices.
(4) The landowner(s), organization, or municipality shall maintain
stormwater management practices in accordance with the
schedule included in the agreement.
(5) The administering authority is authorized to access the property to
conduct inspections of stormwater practices as necessary to
ascertain that the practices are being maintained and operated in
accordance with the agreement.
(6) The administering authority shall maintain public records of the
results of the site inspections, shall inform the landowner
responsible for maintenance of the inspection results, and shall
specifically indicate any corrective actions required to bring the
stormwater management practice into proper working condition.
(7) That if the administering authority notifies the party designated
under the maintenance agreement of maintenance problems which
require correction, the specified corrective actions shall be taken
within a reasonable time frame as set by the administering
authority.
(8) The administering authority is authorized to perform the corrected
actions identified in the inspection report if the landowner does not
make the required corrections in the specified time period. The
administering authority shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls
and collect the money as a special charge against the property
pursuant to § 66.60(16), Wis. Stats.
A. Establishment of the guarantee. The administering authority may
require the submittal of a financial guarantee, the form and type of
which shall be acceptable to the administering authority. The financial
guarantee shall be in an amount determined by the administering
authority to be the estimated cost of construction and the estimated
cost of maintenance during the period which the designated party in
the maintenance agreement has maintenance responsibility. The
financial guarantee shall give the administering authority the
authorization to use the funds to complete the project if the landowner
defaults or does not properly implement the approved stormwater
management plan.
B. Conditions for release. Conditions for release of the financial guarantee
are as follows:
(1) The administering authority shall release the portion of the
financial guarantee established to assure installation of stormwater
practices, minus any costs incurred by the administering authority
§ 150-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-11
1:153
§ 150-12. Fee schedule.
The fees referred to in other sections of this article shall be established
by the administering authority and may from time to time be modified by
resolution. A schedule of the fees established by the administering authority
shall be available for review in the Municipal Building, located at 2990
South Pine Tree Road, Hobart, Wisconsin 54155.
§ 150-13. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
to complete installation of practices, upon submission of "as-built
plans" by a licensed professional engineer. The administering
authority may make provisions for a partial pro rata release of
the financial guarantee based on the completion of various
development stages.
(2) The administering authority shall release the portion of the
financial security established to assure maintenance of stormwater
practices, minus any costs incurred by the administering authority,
at such time that the responsibility for practice maintenance is
passed on to another entity via an approved maintenance
agreement.
A. Any land development activity initiated after the effective date of this
article by any person, firm, association, or corporation subject to the
article provisions shall be deemed a violation unless conducted in
accordance with said provisions.
B. The administering authority shall notify the responsible owner or
operator by certified mail of any noncomplying land development
activity. The notice shall describe the nature of the violation, remedial
actions needed, a schedule for remedial action, and additional
enforcement action which may be taken.
C. Upon receipt of written notification from the administering authority,
the permit holder shall correct work which does not comply with the
stormwater management plan or other provisions of this permit. The
permit holder shall make corrections as necessary to meet the
specifications and schedule set forth by the administering authority in
the notice.
D. If the violations to this article are likely to result in damage to
properties, public facilities, or waters of the state, the administering
authority may enter the land and take emergency actions necessary to
prevent such damage. The costs incurred by the administering
authority plus interest and legal costs shall be billed to the owner of
title of the property.
E. The administering authority is authorized to post a stop-work order on
all land development activity in violation of this article, or to request the
Village Attorney to obtain a cease-and-desist order.
§ 150-11 HOBART CODE § 150-13
1:154
§ 150-14. Appeals.
F. The administering authority may revoke a permit issued under this
article for noncompliance with provisions of this article.
G. Any permit revocation, stop-work order, or cease-and-desist order shall
remain in effect unless retracted by the administering authority or by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
H. The administering authority is authorized to refer any violation of this
article, or of a stop-work order or cease-and-desist order issued
pursuant to this article, to the Village Attorney, for the commencement
of further legal proceedings.
I. Any person, firm, association, or corporation who does not comply with
the provisions of this article shall be subject to the penalties provided in
§ 1-3. Each day that the violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense.41
J. Every violation of this article is a public nuisance. Compliance with this
article may be enforced by injunctional order at the suit of the Village of
Hobart. It shall not be necessary to prosecute for forfeiture before
resorting to injunctional proceedings.
K. When the administering authority determines that the holder of a
permit issued pursuant to this article has failed to follow practices set
forth in the stormwater management plan, or has failed to comply with
schedules set forth in said stormwater management plan, the
administering authority or a party designated by the administering
authority may enter upon the land and perform the work or other
operations necessary to bring the condition of said lands into
conformance with requirements of the approved plan. The
administering authority shall keep a detailed accounting of the costs
and expenses of performing this work. These costs and expenses shall
be deducted from any financial security posted pursuant to § 150-11 of
this article. Where such a security has not been established, or where
such a security is insufficient to cover these costs, the costs and
expenses shall be entered on the tax roll as a special charge against the
property and collected with any other taxes levied thereon for the year
in which the work is completed.
A. Board of Appeals.
(1) The Board of Appeals, created under § 295-334 of Chapter 295,
Zoning, pursuant to § 62.23(7)(e) or 61.35, Wis. Stats., shall hear
and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any
order decision or determination made by the administering
authority in administering this article. The Board of Appeals shall
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 150-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-14
1:155
also use the rules, procedures, duties, and powers authorized by
statute in hearing and deciding appeals.42
(2) Upon appeal, the Board of Appeals may authorize variances from
the provisions of this article which are not contrary to the public
interest, and where owing to special conditions a literal
enforcement of the article will result in unnecessary hardship.
B. Who may appeal. Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any
aggrieved person or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the
Village of Hobart affected by any decision of the administering
authority.
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 150-14 HOBART CODE § 150-14
1:156
ARTICLE II
Erosion Control
[Adopted as § 4.3 of the 2000 Code]
§ 150-15. Intent.
The intent of this article is to require erosion control practices that will
reduce the amount of sediment and other pollutants leaving land
development or land disturbing activities. This article applies to all land
disturbing activities.
§ 150-16. Approving authority.
Approving authority shall mean the Hobart Village Board, its designee, or
its duly authorized committee, agent or representative.
§ 150-17. Findings and purpose.
§ 150-18. Applicability.
This article applies to land disturbing and land developing activities on
lands within the boundaries and jurisdiction of the Village and, optionally,
the public and private lands subject to extraterritorial review under Ch.
236, Wis. Stats. State funded or conducted construction activities must
meet the requirements contained in the "State Plan for the Control of
Construction Erosion and Stormwater Runoff," which contains similar
requirements as contained in this article.
§ 150-19. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL LAND USE — Use of land for planting, growing,
cultivating and harvesting of crops for human or livestock consumption and
pasturing or yarding of livestock.
COMMERCIAL LAND USE — Use of land for the retail or wholesale sale of
goods or services.
A. Findings. The Village Board, Village of Hobart, finds runoff from
construction sites carries a significant amount of sediment and other
pollutants to the waters of the state and this Village.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to preserve the natural
resources; to protect the quality of the waters of the state and the
Village; and to protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of the
people, to the extent practicable by minimizing the amount of sediment
and other pollutants carried by runoff or discharged from construction
sites to lakes, streams and wetlands.
§ 150-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-19
1:157
CONSTRUCTION SITE CONTROL MEASURE — A control measure used to
meet the requirements of § 150-22.
CONTROL MEASURE — A practice or combination of practices to control
erosion and attendant pollution.
CONTROL PLAN — A written description of the number, locations, sizes,
and other pertinent information of control measures designed to meet the
requirements of this article.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil, sediment or rock
fragments by water, wind, ice, or gravity.
LAND DEVELOPING ACTIVITY — The construction of buildings, roads,
parking lots, paved storage areas and similar facilities.
LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY — Any man-made change of the land surface
including removing vegetative cover, excavating, filling, soil deposits and
grading, but not including agricultural land uses such as planting, growing,
cultivating and harvesting of crops; growing and tending of gardens;
harvesting of trees; and landscaping modifications.
LANDOWNER — Any person holding title to or having an interest in land.
LAND USER — Any person operating, leasing, renting, or having made
other arrangements with the landowner by which the landowner authorizes
use of his or her land.
RUNOFF — The rainfall, snowmelt, or irrigation water flowing over the
ground surface.
SITE — The entire area on which the land disturbing or land development
activity is proposed in the permit application.
§ 150-20. Design criteria, standards and specifications for control
measures.
All control measures required to comply with this article shall meet the
design criteria, standards and specifications for the control measures
contained in the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) Wisconsin
Construction Site Best Management Practice Handbook.
§ 150-21. Maintenance of control measures.
All sedimentation basins and other control measures necessary to meet
the requirements of this article shall be maintained by the applicant or
subsequent landowner during the period of land disturbance and land
development of the site in a satisfactory manner to ensure adequate
performance and to prevent nuisance conditions. Erosion control measures
shall follow maintenance provisions contained in DNR's Wisconsin
Construction Site Best Management Practice Handbook.
§ 150-22. Control of erosion and pollutants during land disturbance
and development.
§ 150-19 HOBART CODE § 150-22
1:158
A. Applicability.
(1) This section applies to the following sites of land development or
land disturbing activities:
(a) Those requiring a subdivision plat approval or the construction
of houses or commercial, industrial or institutional building on
lots of approved subdivision plats;
(b) Those requiring a certified survey approval or the construction
of houses or commercial, industrial or institutional buildings
on lots of approved certified surveys;
(c) Those involving grading, removal of protective ground cover or
vegetation, excavation, land filling or other land disturbing
activities;
(d) Those involving excavation of filling or a combination of
excavation and filling of dirt, sand or other excavation or filling
material;
(e) Those involving street, highway, road, or bridge construction,
enlargement, relocation or reconstruction;
(f) Those involving the laying, repairing, replacing or enlarging of
an underground pipe or facility.
(2) Utility companies responsible for emergency repair work should
enter into a "memorandum of agreement" with the Village of
Hobart clearly stating their responsibilities if their activities are
included under any of the above applicability criteria. Construction
work by private contractors within public rights-of-way or public
utility easements is subject to the requirements of this article.
B. Erosion and other pollutant control requirements. The following
requirements shall be met on all sites described in Subsection A.
(1) Site dewatering. Water pumped from the site shall be treated by
temporary sedimentation basins, grit chambers, sand filters,
upflow chambers, hydrocyclones, swirl concentrators, or other
appropriate controls designed and used to remove particles of 100
microns or greater for the highest dewatering pumping rate. If the
water is demonstrated to have no particles greater than 100
microns during dewatering operations, then no control is needed
before discharge, except as determined by the Village Board. Water
may not be discharged in a manner that causes erosion of the site
or receiving channels. This one-hundred-micron standard is
intended to significantly reduce sedimentation problems in
downstream drainage systems and in the receiving waters that are
caused by large particles.
(2) Waste and material disposal. All waste and unused building
materials (including garbage debris, cleaning wastes, wastewater,
§ 150-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-22
1:159
toxic materials, or hazardous materials) shall be properly disposed
of and not allowed to be carried by runoff.
(3) Tracking. Each site shall have graveled roads, access drives and
parking areas of sufficient width and length to prevent sediment
from being tracked onto public or private roadways. Any sediment
reaching a public or private road shall be removed by street
cleaning (not flushing) before the end of each workday.
(4) Drain inlet protection. All storm drain inlets shall be protected with
a straw bale, filter fabric, or equivalent barrier meeting Village of
Hobart's specifications.
(5) Site erosion control.
(a) The following criteria apply only to land development or land
disturbing activities that result in runoff leaving the site.
[1] Channelized runoff from adjacent areas passing through
the site shall be diverted around disturbed areas, if
practical. Otherwise, the channel shall be protected as
described below. Sheetflow runoff from adjacent areas
greater than 10,000 square feet in area shall also be
diverted around disturbed areas, unless shown to have
resultant runoff velocities of less than 0.5 feet per second
across the disturbed area for the five year twenty-fourhour
design storm. Diverted runoff shall be conveyed in a
manner that will not erode the conveyance and receiving
channels. Natural Resources Conservation Service
guidelines for allowable velocities in different types of
channels should be followed.
[2] All activities on the site shall be conducted in a logical
sequence to minimize the area of bare soil exposed at any
one time.
[3] Runoff from the entire disturbed area on the site shall be
controlled by meeting the following:
[a] For sites with 10 acres or more disturbed at one time,
or if a channel originates in the disturbed area, one or
more sedimentation basins shall be constructed. Each
sedimentation basin shall have a surface area of at
least 1% of the area draining to the basin and at least
three feet of depth and constructed in accordance
with accepted design specifications identified in the
latest edition of the Department of Natural Resources
Wisconsin Construction Site Best Management
Practice Handbook. Sediment shall be removed to
maintain a depth of three feet. The basin shall be
designed to trap sediment greater than 15 microns in
size, based on a five-year, twenty-four-hour design
§ 150-22 HOBART CODE § 150-22
1:160
§ 150-23. Permit application, control plan, and permit issuance.43
No landowner or land user may commence a land disturbance or land
development activity subject to this article without receiving prior approval
of a control plan for the site and permit from the Village of Hobart or
designee. At least one landowner or land user controlling or using the site
and desiring to undertake a land disturbing or land developing activity
subject to this article shall submit an application for a permit and a control
plan and pay an application fee in an amount as set by the Village Board
to the Village of Hobart or designee. By submitting an application, the
applicant is authorizing the Village of Hobart or designee to enter the site
to obtain information required for the review of the control plan.
storm. The basin discharge rate shall also be
sufficiently low as to not cause erosion along the
discharge channel or the receiving water.
[b] For sites with less than 10 acres disturbed at one time,
filter fences, straw bales, or equivalent control
measures shall be placed along all sideslope and
downslope sides of the site. If a channel or area of
concentrated runoff passes through the site, filter
fences shall be placed along the channel edges to
reduce sediment reaching the channel. The earliest
date seeding and sodding is acceptable is April 15.
Seeding dates and rates shall be in accordance with
those identified in the latest edition of WDNR'S
Wisconsin Construction Site Best Management
Practice Handbook.
[4] All soil or dirt storage piles must be contained by erosion
control methods, in either Subsection B(1) or (2) and/or
seeding and sodding. Any soil or dirt storage pile shall not
be located within a downslope drainage length of less than
25 feet to a roadway drainage channel.
(b) In most cases, the preferred methods of controlling sediment
from soil or sand piles in existence for more than seven days
are filter fabric fences or straw bale fences. If the piles are in
existence for extended periods, such as more than six months,
the preferred method of controlling sediment is seeding and/or
sodding.
A. Content of the erosion control plan for land disturbing and land
developing activities covering one or more acres.
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 150-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-23
1:161
(1) Existing site map. A map of existing site conditions on a scale of at
least one inch equals 100 feet showing the site and areas within
500 feet:
(a) Site boundaries and adjacent lands which accurately identify
site location;
(b) Lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches and other
watercourses;
(c) One-hundred-year floodplains, flood fringes and floodways
from existing maps;
(d) Location and identification of the predominant soil types;
(e) Location of vegetative cover;
(f) Location and dimensions of stormwater drainage systems and
natural drainage patterns;
(g) Locations and dimensions of utilities, structures, roads,
highways, and paving;
(h) Site topography at a contour interval not to exceed five feet.
(2) Plan of final site conditions. A plan of final site conditions on the
same scale as the existing site map showing the site changes.
(3) Site construction plan. A site construction plan including:
(a) Locations and dimensions of all proposed land disturbing and
land developing activities;
(b) Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil or dirt
stockpiles;
(c) Locations and dimensions of all construction site management
control measures necessary to meet the requirements of this
article;
(d) Schedule of anticipated starting and completion date of each
land disturbing or land developing activity including the
installation of construction site control measures needed to
meet the requirements of this article; and
(e) Provisions for maintenance of the construction site control
measures during construction.
B. Content of control plan statement for land disturbing and land
developing activities covering less than one acre, but meeting the
applicability requirements stated in § 150-22. An erosion control plan
statement (with simple map) shall be submitted to briefly describe the
site (i.e., percent slope, soil type, existing vegetation, etc.) and erosion
§ 150-23 HOBART CODE § 150-23
1:162
controls (including the site developed schedule) that will be used to
meet the requirements of the article.
C. Review of control plan. Within five days of receipt of the application,
control plan (or control plan statement) and fee, the Village of Hobart or
designee shall review the application and control plan to determine if
the requirements of this article are met. The Village of Hobart or
designee may request comments from other departments or agencies.
If the requirements of this article are met, the Village of Hobart or
designee shall approve the plan, inform the applicant and issue a
permit. If the conditions are not met, the Village of Hobart or designee
shall inform the applicant in writing and may either require needed
information or disapprove the plan. Within five days of receipt of
needed information, the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector or
designee shall again determine if the plan meets the requirements of
this article. If the plan is disapproved, the Village of Hobart or designee
shall inform the applicant in writing the reasons for the disapproval.
D. Permits.
(1) Duration. Permits shall be valid for a period of 180 days, or the
length of the building permit or other construction authorizations,
whichever is longer, from the date of issuance. The Village of
Hobart or designee may extend the period one or more times for up
to an additional 180 days. The Village of Hobart or designee may
require additional control measures as a condition of the extension
if they are necessary to meet the requirements of this article.
(2) Permit conditions. All permits shall require the permittee to:
(a) Notify the Village of Hobart or designee within 48 hours
commencing any land disturbing and land developing activity;
(b) Obtain permission in writing from the Village of Hobart or
designee prior to modifying the control plan;
(c) Install all control measure as identified in the approved control
plan;
(d) Maintain all road drainage systems, stormwater drainage
systems, control measures and other facilities identified in the
control plan;
(e) Repair any siltation or erosion damage to adjoining surfaces
and drainageways resulting from land developing or disturbing
activities;
(f) Inspect the construction control measures after each rain of
0.5 inches or more and at least once each week and make
needed repairs;
(g) Allow the Village of Hobart or designee to enter the site for the
purpose of inspecting compliance with the control plan or for
§ 150-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-23
1:163
§ 150-24. Inspection.
§ 150-25. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
performing any work necessary to bring the site into
compliance with the control plan; and
(h) Keep a copy of the control plan on the site.
(3) Surety bond. As a condition of approval and issuance of the permit,
the Village of Hobart or designee may require the applicant to
deposit a surety bond irrevocable letter of credit to guarantee a
good faith execution of the approved erosion control plan and any
permit conditions.
A. The Village of Hobart or designee shall inspect construction, land
disturbing and land development sites at least once a month.
B. If land disturbing or land development activities are being carried out
without a permit, the Village of Hobart or designee shall enter the land
pursuant to the provisions of § 66.0119, Wis. Stats.
A. The Village of Hobart or designee may post a stop-work order if:
(1) Any land disturbing or land developing activity regulated under
this article is being undertaken without a permit;
(2) The control plan is not being implemented in a good faith manner;
or
(3) The conditions of the permit are not being met.
B. If the permittee does not cease the activity or comply with the control
plan or permit conditions within 10 days, the Village of Hobart or
designee may revoke the permit.
C. If the landowner or land user where no permit has been issued does not
cease the activity within 10 days, the Village of Hobart or designee may
request the Village's attorney to obtain a cease-and-desist order.
D. The Village of Hobart or designee or the Village Board, or the Board of
Appeals may retract the stop-work order or the revocation.
E. Ten days after posting a stop-work order, the Village of Hobart or
designee may issue a notice of intent to the permittee or landowner or
land user of the Village of Hobart or designee's intent to perform work
necessary to comply with this article. The Village of Hobart or designee
may enter the land and commence the work after seven days from
issuing the notice of intent. The costs of the work performed by the
Village of Hobart or designee, plus interest at the rate authorized by the
Village Board, shall be billed to the permittee or the landowner. In the
event a permittee or landowner fails to pay the amount due, the Clerk-
§ 150-23 HOBART CODE § 150-25
1:164
§ 150-26. Appeals.
Treasurer shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect as a
special charge against the property pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
F. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject
to the penalties provided in § 1-3. Beginning with the notification, each
day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.44
G. Compliance with the provisions of this article may also be enforced by
injunction.
A. Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals created pursuant to
§ 62.23(7)(e), Wis. Stats.:45
(1) Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an
error in any order, decision or determination made by the Village of
Hobart or designee in administering this article;
(2) Upon appeal, may authorize variances from the provisions of this
article which are not contrary to the public interest and where
owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions
of the article will result in unnecessary hardships; and
(3) Shall use the rules, procedures, duties and powers authorized by
statute in hearing and deciding appeals and authorizing variances.
B. Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any aggrieved person
or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the Village affected by
a decision of the Village of Hobart.
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 150-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-26
1:165

ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Utility
[Adopted as § 4.5 of the 2000 Code]
§ 150-27. Application.
The rules, regulations and rates set forth in this section shall apply to all
real property within the boundaries of the Village of Hobart.
§ 150-28. Findings.
§ 150-29. Establishment of Stormwater Management Utility.
A. The Village of Hobart finds that the management of stormwater and
other surface water discharges within and beyond its borders is a
matter that affects the public health, safety, and welfare of the Village,
its citizens, businesses, and others in the surrounding area. The
development of land increases impervious surfaces and results in
increased stormwater runoff. Failure to effectively manage this
increased stormwater runoff affects the sanitary sewer utility
operations of the Village Sanitary District by, among other things,
increasing the likelihood of infiltration and inflow into the sanitary
sewer. In addition, surface water runoff may create erosion of lands,
threaten businesses and residences with water damage and create
sedimentation and other environmental damage in surrounding areas
such as, Ashwaubenon Creek, Duck Creek, Dutchman's Creek, Hemlock
Creek, Lancaster Brook, Silver Creek, and Trout Creek. Specific
requirements have been placed on the Village through the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources' (DNR) Regulation 216 requiring the
Village to improve the quality of stormwater discharged to the waters of
the state.
B. The cost of operating and maintaining the Village stormwater
management system, ensuring regulatory compliance, and financing
necessary plans, studies, repairs, replacements, improvements and
extension thereof should, to the extent practicable, be allocated in
relationship to the benefits enjoyed and services received therefrom.
A. In order to protect the health, safety, welfare of the public, Village
assets, and natural resources, the Village Board is exercising its
authority to establish the Village of Hobart's Stormwater Management
Utility and set the rates for stormwater management services.
B. The operation of the Stormwater Management Utility shall be under the
supervision of the Village Board. The Village Administrator will be in
charge of the Stormwater Management Utility.
C. The Village is acting under the authority of Article I, Stormwater
Runoff, of this chapter, Chapters 61 and 66 of the Wisconsin Statutes,
and particularly without limitation the following sections: §§ 66.0621,
§ 150-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-29
1:167
§ 150-30. Powers and duties of utility.
§ 150-31. Definitions.
In this chapter, the following terms have the meanings set forth below:
ADMINISTRATOR — The Village Administrator or his/her designee.
AGRICULTURAL LAND USES — Related to or used for production of food
and fiber, including but not limited to, general farming, livestock and
poultry enterprises, grazing, nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck
farming, forestry, sod production, cranberry productions and wild crop
harvesting and includes lands for on-site buildings and other structures
necessary to carry out such activities.
66.0627, 61.34, 61.354, 66.0701, 66.0703, 66.0809, 66.0811, 66.0813
and 66.0821.46
A. Facilities. The Village, through the Stormwater Management Utility
may acquire, construct, lease, own, operate, maintain, extend, expand,
replace, clean, dredge, repair, conduct, manage and finance such
facilities as are deemed by the Village to be proper and reasonably
necessary for a system of storm and surface water management. These
facilities may include, without limitation by enumeration, surface and
underground drainage facilities, sewers, watercourses, retaining walls
and ponds and such other facilities as will support a stormwater
management system.
B. Rates and charges. The Village, through the Stormwater Management
Utility may establish such rates and charges as are necessary to finance
planning, design, construction, maintenance, administration, and
operation of the facilities in accordance with the procedures set forth in
this article.
C. Budgeting process. The Village through the Stormwater Management
Utility shall prepare an annual budget, which is to include all operation
and maintenance costs, debt service, administrative fees and other
costs related to the operation of the Stormwater Management Utility.
The costs shall be spread over the rate classifications as determined by
the Board. The budget is subject to the public hearing and approval
process, set forth in Wis. Stats. § 65.90.
D. Excess revenues. The Village will retain any excess of revenues over
expenditures in a year in segregated Stormwater Enterprise Fund
which shall be used exclusively for purposes consistent with this article.
E. Financing methods. The Village has the authority provided in § 66.0821,
and may exercise such authority with respect to all financing methods
such as user charges and liens so stated therein.
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 150-29 HOBART CODE § 150-31
1:168
DEVELOPED PROPERTY — The real property that has been altered from
its natural state by the addition of any improvements that may include
a building, structure, impervious surface, and change in grade or
landscaping.
DETENTION STORAGE — The temporary detaining or storage of
stormwater in reservoirs under predetermined and controlled conditions,
with the rate of discharge regulated by installed devices.
DUPLEX UNIT — A residential space containing two dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms that are arranged, designed or
used as living quarters for one family only. Individual bathrooms and
complete kitchen facilities, permanently installed, shall always be included
for each dwelling unit.
EQUIVALENT RUNOFF UNIT or ERU — The term "ERU" means the
statistical average of horizontal impervious area of single-family homes
within the Village of Hobart on the date of the adoption of this article.
The horizontal impervious area includes, but it is not limited to, all areas
covered by structures, roof extensions, patios, porches, driveways, and
sidewalks.
FARMSTEAD HOME SITE — That portion of any agricultural property
which contains one or more dwelling units and vehicle garage, regardless
of whether the dwelling units are on a separate lot or parcel.
IMPERVIOUS AREA or IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Areas that have been
paved, covered or compacted to inhibit the natural infiltration of water into
the soil or cause water to run off the area in greater quantities or at an
increased rate of flow from the present under the natural conditions as
undeveloped property. Such areas may include, but are not limited to, roofs,
roof extensions, patios, porches, driveways, sidewalks, pavement, gravel,
athletic courts, and compacted surfaces, private roads, and parking lots.
Excluded from this definition are undisturbed land, lawn, fields and public
streets.
LOT — A parcel of land having a width and depth sufficient for one principal
building and its accessory building together with open spaces required by
Chapter 295, Zoning, and abutting a public street or access easement.
MULTIFAMILY UNIT — A residential space consisting of three or more
dwelling units within a single building including apartments, residential
condominiums, and townhouses.
NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any developed lot or parcel other than
residential property as defined herein, including, but not limited to,
transient rentals (such as hotels and motels), mobile home parks,
commercial, industrial, institutional, governmental property, parking lots,
and agricultural accessory buildings.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any lot, parcel or farmstead home site with
a vehicle garage developed exclusively for residential purposes including
single-family homes, duplex units, multifamily units, manufactured homes
§ 150-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-31
1:169
and condominiums, but not including transient rentals (such as hotels and
motels) and mobile home parks.
RUNOFF — The surface water, including rain and snowmelt, which is
inhibited by impervious surfaces from naturally infiltrating into soil.
SINGLE-FAMILY HOME — Any residential property consisting of a single
dwelling unit.
STORMWATER SYSTEM — Any natural or man-made stormwater
conveyance facility; means all constructed facilities or natural features used
for collecting, storing, and conducting stormwater to, through, and from
drainage areas to a point of outlet. It may be operated or maintained by
the Village, including but not limited to retention/detention ponds, ditches,
storm sewer, roads and navigable and non-navigable waterways.
UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY — Property that has not been altered by the
addition of any improvements such as a building, structure, change of
grade or substantial landscaping; agricultural use of property; or property
that has been graded for residential or commercial development but does
not have buildings, structures or other improvements. A property shall be
considered developed pursuant to this chapter upon issuance of a certificate
of occupancy, or upon substantial completion of construction or final
inspection if no such certificate is issued or where construction is at least
50% complete and construction is halted for a period of three months.
§ 150-32. Rates and charges.
A. The Village Board shall establish a uniform system of stormwater
service charges that shall apply to each and every lot or parcel within
the Village. It shall be the policy to establish stormwater service
charges in such amount in order to pay for all or a part of operation and
maintenance, administrative fees, debt service, and other costs related
to the operation of the Stormwater Management Utility. The Village
Board may establish and modify stormwater service charges, as
necessary, so as to assure that the charge generate adequate revenues
to pay the costs of the stormwater management program and that costs
are allocated fairly and proportionately to all parcels in the Village.
B. By this article, the Village Board is establishing the basis for the rates
that will be used to calculate and impose a charge upon each developed
lot and parcel within the Village for services and facilities provided by
the Stormwater Management Utility consistent with this article.
Charges imposed under this chapter are in addition to assessments
imposed by resolution of the Village Board.
C. The amount of the charge to be imposed for each customer
classification shall be made by resolution of the Village Board. The
current rates will be set forth in a Stormwater Utility Rate Table and
kept on file in the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer. The rates shall
be reviewed by the Village Board on an annual basis and adjusted as
necessary.
§ 150-31 HOBART CODE § 150-32
1:170
§ 150-33. Credits.
D. Charges shall be imposed to recover all or a portion of the costs for the
Stormwater Management Utility set forth in Subsection A. Such
charges may include the following components:
(1) Base charge (BC). The base charge may be imposed on all
developed property in the Village. The base charge will be designed
to reflect the fact that all developed properties benefit from the
stormwater management activities of the Village and that all
developed properties contribute in some way to the stormwater
discharge that must be managed by the Village. The base charge
will be designed to collect the administrative costs of the storm
sewer utility and the portion of capital costs not covered by other
means.
(2) Equivalent runoff unit (ERU) charge. The ERU charge shall be
imposed for all property in the Village based upon the amount of
impervious area as reasonably determined by the Administrator
under § 150-34.
(3) Special charge (SC). A special charge may be imposed on property
that is in a specific area benefited by a particular stormwater
management facility. The special charge will be developed to
reflect the benefits/services in a particular area that may not be
appropriate to spread to property throughout the Village. The
special charge shall be calculated on an ERU basis or impervious
surface area.
(4) Connection charge (CC). A one-time charge may be imposed when
a property is converted from undeveloped to developed property or
otherwise becomes connected to the Village stormwater
management system. The charge may vary based on the size of the
parcel.
E. The Village Board may make such other classifications in accordance
with § 150-34 as will be likely to provide reasonable and fair
distribution of the costs of the Stormwater Management Utility. In so
doing, the Board may provide credits against certain charges set for the
above facilities installed and maintained by the property owner for the
purpose of lessening the stormwater flow from that given property.
F. The Village of Hobart is hereby appointed as the collection agency for
the Village Stormwater Utility. Bills shall be prepared by the Village, or
its agent, and sent to the owner a minimum of 30 days prior to such bill
being due pursuant to § 150-35 of each premises served. The Village
shall allocate the actual cost of billing and collecting as a base charge.
A. The Village Board may provide credits against the ERU and SC charges
pursuant to Subsections B through I of this section. The Village Board
will not provide credits against the base charge or connection charge,
§ 150-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-33
1:171
§ 150-34. Customer classifications.
unless a scrivener error is made and it is determined that the property
owner paid an erroneous charge.
B. To be entitled to consideration for a credit, the property owner shall file
an application together with a review fee with the Village Administrator
that is supported by documentation from a professional engineer and
demonstrates the conditions of this section have been met. The
application is subject to review and approval of the Administrator. If the
Administrator and property owner cannot agree on credits, then the
Administrator can deny the application unless the property owner
agrees to pay for the necessary engineering services.
C. Credits may be provided under the following circumstances:
(1) A nonresidential property owner may seek a credit on the ERU
charge where they have installed and maintained facilities that
result in an approved stormwater system on site. An ERU credit
may be obtained based on the percent of a twenty-five-year storm
event that is detained on site prior to discharge.
(2) Any property owner may seek a credit on the SC charge if
stormwater from the property does not drain into any stormwater
system that is the subject of the special charge.
D. An 80% credit for parcels used exclusively for agricultural, forest, or
agricultural forest.
E. An 80% credit for agricultural buildings being used as such on
exclusively agricultural classified property.
F. A maximum of 50% credit if the property owner can document to the
Administrator that an on-site approved stormwater system is treating
stormwater.
G. No credit shall be considered for any "natural" features, limited to,
wetlands, streams, and creeks, floodplains, or water impoundment of
any kind in existence prior to the passage of this article.
H. The Administrator may revoke the credit if the basis for the credit has
materially changed. The Administrator shall provide at least 30 days'
advance written notice of any proposed revocation.
I. A denial or revocation of any credit may be appealed under § 150-36.
A. For purposes of imposing the base and ERU charges, all lots and
parcels within the Village shall be classified into the following five
customer classes:
(1) Residential: single-family, including farmstead home sites.
(2) Residential: duplex.
§ 150-33 HOBART CODE § 150-34
1:172
(3) Residential: multifamily including condominiums, townhouses, and
apartments.
(4) Nonresidential.
(5) Undeveloped.
B. The Administrator shall prepare a list of lots and parcels within the
Village of Hobart and assign a customer classification of residential,
nonresidential, or undeveloped to each lot or parcel.
C. The average square footage of impervious area of one ERU is
established to be equivalent to 4,000 square feet.
D. ERUs shall be calculated per classification as follows:
(1) Residential: single-family, including mobile homes: 1 ERU.
(2) Residential: duplex: 0.75 ERU for each dwelling unit.
(3) Residential: multifamily including condominiums, townhouses and
apartment: 0.6 ERU times the number of dwelling units.
(4) The charges imposed for nonresidential properties, as defined
herein, shall be the rate for one ERU, multiplied by the numerical
factor obtained by dividing the total impervious area of
nonresidential property by the square footage of one ERU. The
factor shall be rounded down to the nearest 1/10th, i.e.:
Impervious area in square
feet
4,000 square feet
= 1 ERU rate
e.g.,
10,500 square feet
4,000 square feet
= 2.625 ERUs = 2.6 ERUs
(5) The Administrator/Consultant shall be responsible for determining
the impervious area, based upon the best available information,
including, but not limited to, data supplied by the Public Works
Director, aerial photography, the property owner, tenant, or
developer. The Administrator/Consultant may require additional
information, as necessary, to make the determination. The billing
amount shall be updated by the Administrator/Consultant on any
additions to the impervious area. Upon property owner's written
notification and request, the Administrator/Consultant shall review
impervious area for possible reductions.
(6) All unoccupied developed lots and parcels shall be subject to the
stormwater utility charges. Upon filing of a final plat or certified
survey map, a charge of 0.5 ERU times the rate shall be imposed on
each newly created undeveloped lot. Appropriate ERU rate charges
§ 150-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-34
1:173
§ 150-35. Billing and penalties. [Amended 1-16-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-02]
For nonresidential parcels, the Stormwater Management Utility charges
will be billed 50% in the succeeding tax year, and 100% or the amount
identified through the credit application process on an annual basis
thereafter, following the issuance of a building permit. For all other parcels,
Stormwater Management Utility charges will be billed in advance and on an
annual basis thereafter, following the issuance of a building permit. Nothing
in this section shall be construed to preclude the Stormwater Management
Utility from billing on a more frequent basis should the frequency of billing
for municipal water and sanitary sewer service be increased.
§ 150-36. Method of appeal.
shall be made in accordance with the "new construction" section at
the time of building construction.
(7) All undeveloped lands and parcels, including agricultural, forest,
and agricultural forest classified properties, shall be subject to the
stormwater utility charges. The minimum charges for any
nonresidential parcel shall be equal to the rate of 2/10 of one ERU
per parcel up to 100 acres.
A. The Stormwater Management Utility charge, a determination of ERUs,
or ERU credits may be appealed by filing a written appeal with the
Village Clerk-Treasurer prior to the utility charge due date if not paid or
within 30 days of payment. The appeal shall specify all bases for the
challenge and the amount of the stormwater charge the appellant
asserts is appropriate. Failure to file a timely appeal waives all rights to
challenge such charge.
B. The Village Administrator will determine whether the stormwater
charge is fair and reasonable, or whether an adjustment or refund is
due the appellant. The Administrator may act with or without a hearing,
and will inform the appellant in writing of his or her decision.
C. The appellant has 30 days from the decision of the Administrator to file
a written appeal to the Village Board.
D. The Village Board shall review said written appeal and shall determine
whether the stormwater charge is fair and reasonable, or whether an
adjustment or refund is due the appellant. The Village Clerk-Treasurer
shall provide five business days' prior written notice of the time and
place of the Board's consideration of the appeal to the appellant/owner
at the address listed in the appeal. The appellant shall be notified in
writing, by first class mail, of the Board's decision. If the Board or the
Administrator determines that a refund is due the appellant, the refund
will be applied as a credit on the customer's next stormwater bill or will
be refunded at the discretion of the Administrator.
§ 150-34 HOBART CODE § 150-37
1:174
§ 150-37. Special assessment and charges.
In addition to any other method of charging for Stormwater Management
Utility costs, the Village Board may by resolution collect special
assessments on property in a limited and determinable area for special
benefits conferred upon property pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 66.0703. The
failure to pay such special assessments may result in a lien on the property
enforced pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 66.0703(13).
§ 150-38. Budget excess revenues.
The Stormwater Utility finances shall be accounted for in a separate
Stormwater Management Fund by the Village. The Utility shall prepare an
annual budget, which is to include all operation and maintenance costs,
administrative costs, debt served and other costs related to the operation of
the Stormwater Utility. The budget is subject to the approval by the Village
Board. The costs shall be spread over the rate classifications as determined
by the Board. Any excess of revenues over expenditures in a year will be
retained by the Stormwater Management Fund for subsequent years' needs.
§ 150-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-38
1:175
Chapter 156
EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 121. Zoning — See Ch. 295.
§ 156-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use of explosive materials
and to establish uniform limits on permissible levels of blasting resultants
to reasonably assure that blasting resultants do not cause injury, damage or
a nuisance to persons or property.
§ 156-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in this chapter. Terms not herein
defined shall be understood to have their usual and ordinary dictionary
meaning:
AIRBLAST — An airborne shock wave resulting from the detonation of
explosives.
APPROVED — Approval granted by the Village of Hobart.
BLASTER — Any individual holding a valid blaster's license issued by the
Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services.
BLASTING — Any method of loosening, moving or shattering masses of
solid matter by use of an explosive.
BLASTING BUSINESS — Any individual, corporation, company, association,
firm, partnership, society, or joint stock company engaged in a blasting
operation.
BLASTING OPERATION — Any operation, enterprise or activity involving
the use of blasting.
BLASTING RESULTANTS — The physical manifestations of forces released
by blasting, including, but not limited to, projectile matter, vibration and
concussion, which might cause injury, damage or unreasonable annoyance
to persons or property located outside the permitted explosive uses area.47
COMMUNITY — A built-up inhabited area.
DEPARTMENT — The Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional
Services.
DETONATOR — Any device containing a detonating charge that is used for
initiating detonation in an explosive. The term includes, but is not limited
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 150-38 HOBART CODE § 156-2
1:176
to, electric blasting caps of instantaneous and delay types, blasting caps
for use with safety fuses, detonating cord delay connectors, and nonelectric
instantaneous and delay blasting caps.
ELECTRIC BLASTING CAP — A blasting cap designed for, and capable of,
initiation by means of an electric current.
EXPLOSION — The substantially instantaneous release of both gas and
heat.
EXPLOSIVE — Any chemical compound, mixture or device, the primary or
common purpose of which is to function by explosion unless the compound,
mixture or device is otherwise classified by the Department by rule.
EXPLOSIVE MATERIALS — Explosives, blasting agents and detonator. The
term includes, but is not limited to, dynamite and other high explosives,
slurries, emulsions, water gels, blasting agents, black powder, pellet
powder, initiating explosives, detonators, safety fuses, squibs, detonating
cord, igniter cord and igniters.
FLY ROCK — Rock that is propelled through the air from a blast.
GROUND VIBRATION — A shaking of the ground caused by the elastic wave
emanating from a blast.
HIGHWAY — Any public street, public alley or public road.
INHABITED BUILDING — A building regularly occupied in whole or in
part as a habitation for human beings, or any church, schoolhouse, railroad
station, store or other structure where people are accustomed to assemble,
except any building or structure occupied in connection with the
manufacture, transportation, storage or use of explosive materials.
NUISANCE — An excessive, repeated noise, action or other disturbance
that would cause an unreasonable annoyance.
PARTICLE VELOCITY — Any measure of ground vibration describing the
velocity at which a particle of ground vibrates when excited by a seismic
wave.
PERMITTED EXPLOSIVES USE AREA — The area that surrounds a blasting
site and:
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, association, firm,
partnership, society or joint stock company.
POWDER FACTOR — Any ratio between the amount of powder loaded and
the amount of rock broken.
PRIMER — A capped fuse, electric detonator or any other detonating device
inserted in or attached to a cartridge of detonator sensitive explosive.
A. Is owned by the operator; or
With respect to which, because of property ownership, employment
relationship or agreement with the property owner, the operator can
take reasonably adequate measures to exclude or to assure the safety
of persons and property.
B.
§ 156-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-2
1:177
STEMMING — The inert material, such as drill cutting, used in the collar
portion or elsewhere of a blast hole to confine the gaseous products of
detonation.
§ 156-3. Regulation of explosive materials and blasting.
A. General. No person shall handle or use explosive materials in the
Village of Hobart, unless he:
(1) Possesses a valid State of Wisconsin blaster's license with the
proper classification or is supervised by a holder of a valid State of
Wisconsin blaster's license with the proper classification; and
(2) Possesses all necessary state permits and complies with all
applicable local, state and federal regulations, including, but not
limited to, the requirements of this chapter and Chapter SPS 307,
Explosives and Fireworks, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
B. Permit. No person or blasting business shall handle, use or cause
explosives to be detonated within the Village of Hobart without an
explosives use permit issued by the Village of Hobart as hereafter set
forth to such person, his supervisor or employer:
(1) Application. Applications for an explosives use permit shall be in
writing upon forms provided by the Village Clerk-Treasurer.
Applications shall be accompanied by a permit fee in an amount set
from time to time by resolution of the Village Board. Permits shall
be issued on an annual basis commencing January 1 and ending on
December 31. All explosives use permits applied for after January I
shall be prorated from the date of the issuance of the permit
through the end of the year. Applications may be made by and
permits issued to the blasting business, provided that the person
doing the blasting or responsible for such blasting shall hold a valid
Wisconsin blaster's license with proper classification. The applicant
will identify the licensed blasters operating under the permit and
the blasting locations within the Village of Hobart. In the discretion
of the Board, the permit fee may be waived upon showing of
acceptable hardship by the applicant. All applications for
reissuance and renewal for an explosives use permit shall be filed
by the permittee with the Village Clerk-Treasurer of the Village of
Hobart within 60 days before the expiration date of the previous
permit.
(2) Certificate of insurance. Each application for an explosives use
permit as herein stated, or a renewal thereof, shall be accompanied
by a certificate of insurance for a commercial general liability
policy and said policy of insurance shall have limits of coverage of
not less than $1,000,000 in the aggregate and $500,000 per
occurrence, and the Village shall be named as an additional insured
on applicant's policy of liability insurance.
§ 156-2 HOBART CODE § 156-3
1:178
(3) Explosives use plan. Each application for an explosives use permit
or a renewal thereof shall include a written description of the total
area within which explosives are proposed to be used, blasting
procedures to be employed, including types of explosives, initiating
systems, and an aerial photograph or drawing acceptable to the
Village Board with a scale of no less than one inch equals 400 feet
and which accurately includes all areas and inhabited buildings
within 1,000 feet of all property lines of the owner of the property.
(4) Blasting notification. Before any blasting operation may be
conducted within the Village of Hobart, the blaster shall give notice
thereof by the conspicuous display of a fluorescent flag and legible
sign giving notice of the blasting operation. The flag and sign shall
be displayed at least 24 hours prior to and during all blasting
operations. In addition to the notification requirements required by
§ SPS 307.31(2)(b), Wis. Adm. Code, verbal or written notice of the
blasting operation shall be given to the Village Clerk-Treasurer at
least 24 hours prior to commencement of blasting operations.48
(5) Hours of operation. Blasting shall only be conducted between 8:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday; provided, however,
that in the event an emergency has delayed a blast beyond 4:00
p.m., loaded holes may be blasted within a reasonable time
thereafter. Blasting shall not be conducted at other times or on
Saturdays or Sundays or legal holidays without written permission
from the Village Board, which shall only be granted upon a showing
of extreme need.49
(6) Blasting log. An accurate blasting log shall be prepared and
maintained for each blast fired, and a true and complete copy of
said log shall be supplied to the Village Clerk-Treasurer within
three working days of a request for a copy of said log. The Village
may require that the permittee furnish to the Village an analysis of
any particular blasting log to be prepared by the permittee. In the
event the permittee cannot or will not prepare a reliable analysis,
the Village may obtain such analysis from an independent expert.
The permittee shall be liable for the reasonable cost of such
analysis if it is determined after an opportunity to be heard that this
chapter was violated by the permittee. Each blasting log shall
include, but not be restricted to, the following information:
(a) Name and license number of blaster in charge of blast;
(b) Blast location references to the supplied aerial photograph or
drawing of the explosives use area;
(c) Date and time of blast;
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 156-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-3
1:179
§ 156-4. Temporary permits.
The Village Clerk-Treasurer, upon receipt of a properly completed
temporary permit application form, may issue a temporary permit to allow
for special construction or demolition activities requiring the use of
explosives. Temporary permits shall be issued for a duration of 14
consecutive working days. The temporary permit fee shall be $100 and shall
be submitted with the completed temporary permit application form. Only
one temporary permit can be issued for any given site within the year of
permit issuance. Except as provided herein, all of the requirements of this
chapter apply to temporary permits.
§ 156-5. Regulation of blasting resultants.
(d) Weather conditions at time of blast;
(e) Diagram and cross-section of blast hole layout;
(f) Number of blast holes;
(g) Blast hole depth and diameter;
(h) Spacing and burden of blast holes;
(i) Maximum holes per delay;
(j) Maximum pounds of explosives per delay;
(k) Depth and type of stemming used;
(l) Total pounds of explosives used, including primers and
initiating cord;
(m) Distance to nearest inhabited building not owned by permittee;
(n) Type of initiation system used;
(o) Seismographic and airblast information, which shall include:
[1] Type of instrument and last calibration date;
[2] Exact location of instrument and date, time and distance
from the blast;
[3] Name and company affiliation of person taking reading;
[4] Name of the person and firm analyzing the seismographic
and airblast data when required;
[5] Vibrations and airblast levels recorded; and
[6] Copy of the seismograph printout.
C. No permittee shall be required to obtain more than one permit annually
for its operations within the Village of Hobart.
§ 156-3 HOBART CODE § 156-5
1:180
A. Purpose of sections. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the
establishment of uniform limits on permissible levels of blasting
resultants to reasonably assure that blasting within the Village of
Hobart does not cause injury, damage or a nuisance to persons or
property outside and beyond the permitted explosives use area.
B. Instrumentation. All blast-monitoring instruments used to produce data
to support compliance with this subsection shall meet the following
minimum specifications:
(1) Seismic frequency range: two to 200 Hz (± 3 Hz).
(2) Acoustic frequency range: two to 200 Hz (± 1dB).
(3) Velocity range: two-hundredths inches to 4.0 inches per second.
(4) Sound range: 100 to 140 dB linear.
(5) Transducers: three mutually perpendicular axes.
(6) Recording. Provide time-history of wave form.
(7) Printout. Direct printout showing time, date, peak air pressure,
peak particle velocity and frequency in three directions and a
printed waveform graph of the event depicting measured air blast
and particle velocity in the three directions.
(8) Calibration. At least once every 12 months according to
manufacturer's recommendations.
C. Control of adverse effects.
(1) General requirements. Blasting shall be conducted so as to prevent
injury or a nuisance to persons and damage to public or private
property outside the permitted explosives use area.
(2) Airblast.
(a) Limits. Airblast shall not exceed the following limits:
Lower Frequency Limit of
Measuring System
(Hz)
Maximum Level
(db)
2 or lower — flat response 133 peak
6 or lower — flat response 129 peak
(b) At the location of the dwelling, public building, place of
employment, school, church or community or institutional
building outside and beyond the permitted explosives use area.
D. General ground vibration.
§ 156-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-5
1:181
(1) The maximum ground vibration at the location of any dwelling,
public building, place of employment, school, church, or
community or institutional building outside the permitted explosive
uses area shall be established in accordance with either the
maximum peak-particle-velocity limit (See Table 5-1), the scaleddistance
of Subsection G, or the blasting-level chart of Subsection
H.
(2) All structures in the vicinity of the blasting area not listed in
Subsection D(1), such as water towers, pipelines and other utilities,
tunnels, dams, impoundments and underground mines, shall be
protected from damage by establishment by the operator of a
maximum allowable limit on the ground vibration. The operator
shall establish the limit after consulting with the owner of the
structure.
(3) Maximum peak particle velocity. An operator may use the
maximum ground vibration limits listed in table below.
Table 5-1
Peak Particle Velocity Limits
Maximum in Allowable Peak
Particle Velocity for Ground
Vibration
(inches per second)
Type of Structure
At Frequencies
Below 40 Hz*
At Frequencies
40 Hz and
Greater
Modern homes and
structures with drywall
interiors
0.75 2.0
Older homes and
structures with plaster on
wood lath construction for
interior walls
0.50 2.0
NOTES:
* All spectral peaks within 6 dB (50%) amplitude of the
predominant frequency must be analyzed.
E. Ground vibration shall be measured as the particle velocity. Particle
velocity shall be recorded in three mutually perpendicular directions.
The maximum allowable peak particle velocity shall apply to each of the
three measurements and the vector sum of the three measurements.
F. A seismographic record shall be provided for each blast.
G. Scaled-distance equation.
§ 156-5 HOBART CODE § 156-5
1:182
§ 156-6. Monitoring.
(1) An operator may use the scaled-distance equation, W = (D/Ds)2, to
determine the allowable charge-weight of explosives to be
detonated in any eight-millisecond period, without seismic
monitoring; where W equals the maximum weight per delay of
explosives, in pounds; D equals the distance, in feet, from the
blasting site to the nearest structure listed in Subsection D(1) and
(2); and Ds equals the scaled-distance factor listed in Table 5-2.
(2) The development of a modified scaled-distance factor may be
authorized by the Village on receipt of a written request by the
operator, supported by seismographic records of blasting at the
site. The modified scaled-distance factor shall be determined such
that the particle velocity of the predicted ground vibration will not
exceed the prescribed maximum allowable peak particle velocity of
Subsection D(3) at a 95% confidence level.
Table 5-2
Scaled-Distance Factor Limits
Distance (D) From the
Blasting
(feet)
Scaled-Distance Factor (Ds)
to be Applied Without
Seismic Monitoring
0 to 300 50
301 to 5,000 55
5,001 and beyond 65
H. Blasting level chart.
(1) An operator may use the ground vibration limits found in Figure
7.4450 to determine the maximum allowable ground vibration.
(2) If the Figure 7.44 limits are used, a seismographic record including
both particle-velocity and vibration frequency levels shall be
provided for each blast. The method of analysis shall be subject to
reasonable discretionary review by the Village.
A. Monitoring.
(1) The permittee shall monitor all blasts at the closest location to the
blast of any dwelling, public building, place of employment, school,
church or community or institutional building outside and beyond
the permittee explosives use area; provided, however, that the
permittee may monitor at another location, approximately the same
distance from the blast site, if the permittee is unable to obtain
permission to conduct the monitoring from the owner of the
50.Editor's Note: See Figure 7.44, Blasting Level Chart, of Chapter SPS 307, Explosives and
Fireworks, of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
§ 156-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-6
1:183
§ 156-7. Preblast survey and notification.
preferred location. The Village Board or its designee may, at its
discretion, require the relocation of monitoring equipment to a
more suitable site.
(2) The measuring equipment used shall have an upper end flat
frequency response of at least 200 Hz.
(3) All measuring equipment during monitoring shall be spiked to the
ground or sandbagged.
B. Flyrock. Flyrock produced as a result of explosives use shall be totally
contained within the permitted explosives use area.
C. Seismic monitoring. The Village Board, in its discretion, may conduct
independent seismic blast monitoring or air blast monitoring to spotcheck
data supplied by the permit holder. If the independent monitoring
discloses after hearing that this chapter was violated by the permittee,
then, in that event, the permittee shall pay the reasonable costs
incurred by the Village for the independent monitoring.
A. Preblasting notification. Each explosives use permit application and all
reapplications shall include the names and addresses of all residents or
owners of dwellings or other structures located within 1,000 feet of the
boundaries of the blasting site, as described in the explosives use plan.
B. At the time of permit application, the applicant shall have notified, in
writing, all residents or owners of dwellings or other structures located
within the previously defined area (1,000 feet), who may request a
preblast survey and a water quality test for existing wells. This request
shall be in writing. The applicant shall cause a preblast survey to be
conducted as to such dwelling or structures, and water quality testing
for existing wells; provided, however, that the applicant shall not be
required to conduct a preblast survey or well water quality testing more
than once every six years as to any dwelling, structure, or well.
C. The owner of a dwelling or structure that is within 1,000 feet of the
blasting site, which, subsequent to the conducting of a preblast survey
has been substantially modified or improved by more than 50% of the
property's fair market value, may request a preblast survey. If it is
found that a preblast survey for such improved or modified structure is
appropriate, the applicant/permittee may conduct such surveys within a
reasonable period of time, but in no case exceeding twice a year for all
such requests by all owners.
D. The preblast survey and water quality testing shall be promptly
conducted in a manner and form and by an independent survey
company, a laboratory approved by the State of Wisconsin or
organization selected by the applicant and acceptable to the owner or
resident and the Village Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector. The
survey shall determine the condition of the dwelling or structure and
§ 156-6 HOBART CODE § 156-7
1:184
§ 156-8. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
shall document any preblasting damage or other physical factors that
could reasonably be expected to be affected by the use of explosives.
The testing of wells shall determine the condition of the water as to
be safe for human use. The Board may consider accepting a blasting
survey or well water test that was prepared prior to the effective date
of this chapter if the blasting survey and well water test meets the
requirements outlined herein.
E. The survey shall include a written report signed by the person who
conducted the survey. Copies of the survey report shall be promptly
provided to the Village of Hobart, the owner or resident, and the
applicant/permittee. The owner, resident or applicant/permittee shall
promptly submit in writing to the Village of Hobart any objections to the
survey report, setting forth in detail such objections.
F. The water quality test for existing wells shall include a written report
signed by the person who conducted the test. Copies of the test shall be
promptly provided to the Village of Hobart, the owner or resident, and
the applicant/permittee. The owner, resident or applicant/permittee
shall promptly submit in writing to the Village of Hobart objections to
the test, setting forth in detail such objections.
G. Reasonable and reasonably related expenses incurred as a result of
such independent surveys shall be the responsibility of the applicant/
permittee.
A. Enforcement. The following are criteria that the Village Board may
consider for issuance, reissuance, suspension or revocation of a
blasting permit:
(1) Compliance with the blasting standards established by the Village
of Hobart as noted herein by this chapter.
(2) Development and submittal to the Village Board of the Village of
Hobart of the explosives use plan and compliance with the
explosives use plan.
(3) Development and submittal to the Village Board of the Village of
Hobart the blasting log, when requested, and compliance with the
operation plan with the information called for by the blasting log.
(4) Maintaining the insurance required by this chapter.
(5) Compliance with the operational hours for blasting as noted herein
by this chapter.
(6) Compliance with airblast and ground vibration standards
established by the Village of Hobart as noted herein by this chapter.
(7) Compliance with the pre-blasting notification requirements to
residents and the Village Board as noted herein by this chapter.
§ 156-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-8
1:185
(8) Attempts made by the permittee interest to comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
(9) Consideration of atmospheric, unknown conditions including
geophysical conditions, and other matters beyond the control of the
permittee.
B. Suspension/revocation.
(1) Unless expressly provided herein or by other Village of Hobart
Code provisions, the explosive use permit may be suspended or
revoked for cause for substantial noncompliance with this chapter
after the proper Village of Hobart hearing noted below, unless in an
emergency condition determined by the Village Board of the Village
of Hobart wherein the license, registration or permit can be
suspended temporarily for a set time period. Prior to any action for
suspension or revocation, the Village Board of the Village of Hobart
must, by the Village Clerk-Treasurer of the Village of Hobart,
receive a verified complaint concerning the licensee, registrant or
permittee. The following persons may file a verified complaint with
the Village Board of the Village of Hobart:
(a) The Village President.
(b) The Village Clerk-Treasurer.
(c) The Village Trustees.
(d) The Village Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector.
(e) Any Village of Hobart resident.
(f) A landowner within 1,000 feet of the blasting site.
(2) The Village Board will make a determination if the allegations of
the complaint are of sufficient magnitude, importance, or otherwise
of such a nature as to require a formal evidentiary hearing.
(3) The person subject to charges for violation of any Village of Hobart
ordinance or any violation of a condition of a the explosives use
permit shall be provided a copy of the verified complaint and notice
of hearing before the Village Board of the Village of Hobart. The
hearing shall be required to be not less than 10 days nor more than
30 days after receipt of notice, unless stipulated in writing by the
Village Board of the Village of Hobart and the person subject to
charges.
(4) The person subject to charges for violation of any Village of Hobart
ordinance or any violation of a condition of the explosive use permit
shall be entitled to the following:
(a) Representation by legal counsel.
(b) Right to present and cross-examine witnesses.
§ 156-8 HOBART CODE § 156-8
1:186
Chapter 160
FAIR HOUSING
§ 160-1. Fair housing code.
The Brown County Equal Opportunities in Housing Ordinance (Ch. 132 of
the Brown County Code), as amended, is effective in the Village and all
persons in the Village are subject to the provisions thereof.
Chapter 163
(c) Right to subpoena witnesses by the Village President of the
Village of Hobart issuing subpoenas to compel attendance of
witnesses.
(5) The Village Board of the Village of Hobart may, after the hearing for
any person previously issued an explosive use permit by the Village
Board of the Village of Hobart, act as follows:
(a) Revoke the permit as a final decision.
(b) Suspend the permit for a date certain as a final decision.
(c) Request additional information as an interim decision prior to
taking future action.
(d) Take no action on the permit as a final decision.
(6) The final decision of the Village Board of the Village of Hobart to
revoke or suspend the blasting permit shall be subject to appeal to
the Circuit Court, which appeal must be filed with the Circuit Court
not later than 45 days from the mailing of the Village Board's
decision to the permit holder.
C. Penalty.
(1) In addition to the denial, suspension or revocation of a permit
issued under this chapter, any person who shall violate any
provision of this chapter or who shall fail to obtain a permit as
required hereunder shall, upon conviction of such violation, be
subject to a penalty of a civil forfeiture of not less than $5 nor more
than $500, together with the costs of prosecution. Any default of
such forfeiture determined by a court of competent jurisdiction
shall be subject to any penalties as provided by §§ 66.0109,
66.0115, 66.0113 and 66.0114, Wis. Stats., as may be amended.
(2) Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall
constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this chapter shall
preclude the Village from maintaining any appropriate action to
prevent or remove a violation of any provision of this chapter.
§ 156-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-1
1:187
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 215.
Sewer use — See Ch. 237.
Water — See Ch. 273.
Zoning — See Ch. 295.
§ 160-1 HOBART CODE § 160-1
1:188
ARTICLE I
Professional Services Fees
[Adopted as § 1.15 of the 2000 Code]
§ 163-1. Professional fees charged back.
The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall charge property owners fees for services,
pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes, including §§ 66.0627 and 66.0703, such as
in the following circumstances:
§ 163-2. Property owner allowed time to pay or appeal.
The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall give each property owner billed for
current services as provided for herein notice that they shall have a
specified period of time not less than 30 days to pay. Said notice shall
also state that within 15 days of the date of the notice, the property
owner may request a hearing before the Village Board regarding the charge
against the property. Said notice shall also include an itemized statement
of the professional services fees to be charged. Thereafter, if the property
owner requests a hearing within the proper time period, the matter shall
proceed as described in § 163-3, Appeal to Village Board. If a hearing is not
requested within the required time period if that charge remains unpaid,
the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall automatically charge that delinquent bill
A. A Village of Hobart property owner shall be charged for fees incurred
by the Village of Hobart whenever a property owner contacts the
Village Attorney, Village Engineer, Village Architect or other of the
Village's professional and/or administrative staff (the "professional"),
whether the professional is employed by the Village or independently
contracted, if said contact and subsequent service results in a charge to
the Village of Hobart for that professional's time and services and said
service is not a service supplied to the Village of Hobart as a whole.
B. A Village of Hobart property owner shall be charged for fees incurred
by the Village of Hobart whenever the Village Board, Village
Administrator, Village Clerk-Treasurer, or other Village official contacts
the Village Attorney, Village Engineer, Village Architect, or any of the
Village's professional staff, whether such professional staff is employed
by the Village or independently contracted, regarding an application
received from a property owner, if said contact and subsequent service
results in a charge to the Village of Hobart for that professional's time
and services and said service is not a service supplied to the Village of
Hobart as a whole.
C. A Village of Hobart property owner shall be charged for fees incurred
by the Village of Hobart whenever, at the property owner's request, the
Village incurs time and/or expense associated in considering certified
survey maps, subdivision plats, rezoning petitions, conditional use
permit petitions, site development applications, and other petitions
related to the development of land in the Village of Hobart.
§ 163-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-2
1:189
against the property on the tax roll as provided by law. In the event the
statement rendered to the property owner becomes delinquent too late in
the year to be extended on that year's tax roll, then the delinquent charge
shall be extended to the following year's tax roll.
§ 163-3. Appeal to Village Board.
Upon receipt of a timely request for hearing, the Village Board shall hold
a hearing regarding the property charges at its next scheduled meeting or
as soon as reasonably possible thereafter. Such hearing shall be preceded
by posted public notice and reasonable notice, via first class mail, to the
property owner. In the event a hearing is requested, no charges shall be
placed on the tax roll unless and until such hearing has been held and a
decision has been rendered by the Village Board, and the Village Board
approves the charges against the tax roll in whole or in part. If approved
only in part, only that part of the charges that are approved may be charged
against the tax roll.
§ 163-4. Permits for government organization.
Whenever it is requested that the Village of Hobart grant approval to any
other municipality, agency or other governmental body and that permit
process requires the assistance of contracted professional staff of the
Village as stated herein, the Village of Hobart shall charge the municipality,
agency or governmental body the same as a property owner as stated within
this article.
§ 163-2 HOBART CODE § 163-4
1:190
ARTICLE II
Fee in Lieu of Land Dedication
[Adopted as § 2.0 of the 2000 Code; amended in its entirety
6-7-2016 by Ord. No. 07-2016]
§ 163-5. Public sites and open spaces.
The requirements of this article are established to ensure adequate parks,
open spaces and sites for other public uses are properly located, expanded
and preserved as the Village grows. It has also been established to ensure
the cost of providing the park and recreation sites and facilities necessary
to serve the additional people brought into the community by land
development are equitably apportioned on the basis of the additional needs
created by the development. The requirements shall apply to all lands
proposed for residential development.
§ 163-6. Authority.
This article is authorized under §§ 61.34, 61.35, 62.23, 66.0617, 236.01, and
236.45 of the Wisconsin Statutes. The purpose of this article is to establish
the mechanism for the imposition of impact fees upon new development to
finance the capital costs of acquiring, establishing, upgrading, expanding,
and constructing public facilities which are necessary to accommodate
land development. The provisions of this article shall not be construed to
limit the power of the Village to adopt such ordinance pursuant to any
other source of local authority, nor to utilize any other methods or powers
otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set forth herein, either
in substitution of, or in conjunction with, this article.
§ 163-7. Design.
In the design of a subdivision, land division, planned unit development or
development project, provision shall be made for suitable sites of adequate
area for schools, parks, playgrounds, open spaces, drainageways and other
public purposes. Such sites as shown on the Official Map, Master Plan or
Comprehensive Outdoor Recreation Plan, if applicable, shall be made part
of the design.
§ 163-8. Dedication.
The developer shall donate sufficient land area to the Village for public
use that is suitable and readily developable to provide adequate park,
playground, recreation and open space, subject to a determination of
acceptability by the Village. These public lands shall be made a part of
the plat or certified survey map and shall be donated to the public at
a maximum not-to-exceed rate of up to one acre for each 15 acres, as
determined by the Village. The Village and developer may agree to a land
donation in excess of the established maximum of one per 15 acres. Such
agreement shall be made in writing.
§ 163-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-9
1:191
§ 163-9. Fee in lieu of donation.
§ 163-10. Assessment per-unit fee.
In addition to the fees or dedication required in the preceding sections, a
one-time fee of $300 per dwelling unit will be assessed at the time a building
permit is issued for new construction in a new or existing subdivision for all
single-family, two-family, and multifamily residential developments.
§ 163-11. Additional provisions.
A. Where, in the discretion of the Village Board, there is no land suitable
for public use within the proposed subdivision or the donation of land
would not be compatible with the Village's Comprehensive
Development Plan, or the Village Board determines that a cash
contribution would better serve the public interest, the Village staff
shall recommend to the Village Board that the developer pay a fee in
lieu of making the required land donation. In case of a certified survey
map, the Village staff shall make its recommendation to the Planning
and Zoning Commission.
B. Where a fee-in-lieu-of-land system is used, the developer shall pay to
the Village a fee of $300 per lot created for single- and two-family
subdivisions, or $300 per dwelling unit for multifamily subdivisions. The
same standard shall apply when any combination of single-family, twofamily
and multifamily are proposed in the same subdivision.
C. The Village Board may recommend the developer satisfy the
requirements by combining land donation with fee payments. The fee in
such cases shall be determined by subtracting the fair market value of
the donated land from the total fee which would have been imposed had
no land been donated by the developer. The fair market value shall be
determined by the Village Assessor.
D. All funds so collected by the Village shall be deposited as "Special Fund
for the Acquisition and Development of Public Sites, Recreation Areas,
Open Spaces and Greenways" (Park Special Fund), and such funds so
levied and collected shall be used to pay a portion of capital costs for
such purposes, at such places, and in such manner as shall be
approved, ordered and directed by the Village upon recommendation by
the Village Board. Any and all interest accumulated upon such funds
shall be added to the special fund and be similarly designated.
E. All fees provided for herein are required to be paid on or before the
date of the Village's final plat approval or approval of the certified
survey map.
A. If a person sells off a lot from his home or business, the value for
determining the fee shall be based on the vacant lot that is sold off and
not on the lot with the existing building.
§ 163-9 HOBART CODE § 163-11
1:192
§ 163-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CAPITAL COST — The costs to construct, expand or improve public
facilities, including the cost of land, and including legal, engineering and
design costs to construct, expand or improve public facilities, except that
not more than 10% of capital costs may consist of legal, engineering and
design costs unless such costs related directly to the public improvement
for which the impact fees were imposed actually exceed 10% of the capital
costs.
DEVELOPER — Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
estate or other legal entity dividing land for development. This shall include
all residential development.
DWELLING UNIT — Per the definition of "dwelling unit" in § 295-8, a
dwelling unit for single-family purposes is considered to consist of one or
more rooms which are arranged, designed or used as living quarters for
one family only. Per the definition of "dwelling, multifamily" in § 295-8,
multifamily dwelling units consist of a building, or portion thereof,
containing three or more dwelling units, each occupied by one family with
the intent to use the structure as the principal place of abode.
FAIR MARKET VALUE (MARKET VALUE) — The highest price in terms
of money which a property will bring in a competitive and open market
under all conditions requisite to a fair sale, the buyer and seller each acting
prudently and knowledgeably, and assuming the price is not affected by
undue stimulus.
PUBLIC FACILITIES — Highways as discussed in Chapter 264, Vehicles and
Traffic, and other transportation facilities, traffic control devices, facilities
for collecting and treating sewage, facilities for collecting and treating
storm- and surface waters, facilities for pumping, storing, and distributing
water, parks, playgrounds, and land for athletic fields, solid waste and
B. Impact fees imposed by the Village shall bear a rational relationship to
the need for new, expanded or improved public facilities that are
required to serve land development.
C. When a certified survey map does not result in additional buildable
residential lots, there shall be no fee charged.
D. All approvals of certified survey maps by the Planning and Zoning
Commission are subject to the payment of the fee described above. If
the certified survey map is recorded without paying the fee and the fee
is not paid, then the Village may assess the amount unpaid as a special
assessment and place it on the tax roll.
E. When a subdivision of land has been made and the park fee has been
paid on such land, no further park fee shall be assessed against the
developer on subsequent division of such land.
§ 163-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-12
1:193
recycling facilities, fire protection facilities, law enforcement facilities,
emergency medical facilities and libraries. "Public facilities" does not
include facilities owned by a school district.
§ 163-13. Refund of fees.
All fees imposed and collected under this article that are not used within a
reasonable period of time after they are collected shall be refunded to the
current owner of the property with respect to which the impact fees were
imposed in accordance with applicable state statutes.
§ 163-14. Appeals.
A developer upon whom a fee or dedication is imposed has the right to
contest the amount, collection or use of the impact fee to the Village Board.
Such appeal shall be made within 30 days after the decision or action
complained of, by filing with the Village Clerk-Treasurer a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds thereof. The Village Board shall thereafter reach its
decision within 60 days from the filing of the appeal.
§ 163-12 HOBART CODE § 163-14
1:194
ARTICLE III
Fees Regarding Flammable Liquids
[Adopted as § 5.1 of the 2000 Code]
§ 163-15. Permit fees for installation or removal of underground
and aboveground storage tanks. [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No.
01-2015]
Permit fees for installation or removal of underground and aboveground
storage tanks are as set by contract with the Village of Allouez, which
handles tank inspections for the Village of Hobart.
§ 163-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-15
1:195

ARTICLE IV
Fire Department Service Fees
[Adopted as § 5.6 of the 2000 Code]
§ 163-16. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to ease the Village Fire Department's burden
on the Village's taxpayers by attempting to recover costs associated with
providing services to tax-exempt properties and or entities, corporations,
negligent parties, and insurance providers; provided, however, that the
Village Board retains the authority to waive any fire service fees upon
submission of an appropriate application of an owner showing a hardship.
§ 163-17. Types of fees.
A. The Village of Hobart Clerk-Treasurer shall collect the following fees:
(1) User fees. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall collect a fee based on
costs incurred by the municipality for the following services
performed by the Fire Department:
(a) Where the Fire Department responds to a structure fire where
fire suppressant is necessary and fire investigation determines
that the fire was caused by any action or inaction other than a
natural occurrence;
(b) Where the Fire Department responds to a fire call on a state
trunk highway or any highway that is part of the national
system of interstate highways caused by a negligent party;
(c) Where the Fire Department responds to a vehicle fire for a
nonresident vehicle owner;
(d) Where the Fire Department utilizes Jaws of Life® extraction
equipment; or
(e) Where the Fire Department responds to a tax-exempt parcel
where fire suppressant is used.
(2) Traffic control services. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall collect a
fee for traffic control services which are provided. This fee will be
based on the schedule adopted pursuant to this article.
(3) Hazardous or other spill cleanup. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall
collect a fee in order to recover the costs incurred by the
municipality for the abatement and cleanup of any hazardous or
nonhazardous spill. This fee will be based on the schedule adopted
pursuant to this article.
B. These fees will be based on the schedule adopted pursuant to this
article.
§ 163-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-18
1:197
§ 163-18. Fees.51
The fees provided under this article shall be based, in part, on the costs of
providing these services, whether the services are provided to a resident,
nonresident or business entity and whether the resident or business resides
on or operates from a tax exempt parcel of real estate located within the
Village. The fee shall be in an amount as established from time to time
by the Village Board by resolution. A schedule of the current fees shall be
published by the Village Board and available at the office of the Village
Clerk-Treasurer.
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 163-18 HOBART CODE § 163-18
1:198
ARTICLE V
Connection Fees
[Adopted as § 11.7 of the 2000 Code]
§ 163-19. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Connection Fee Ordinance."
§ 163-20. Purpose.
The purpose of this Connection Fee Ordinance is to generate funding to
cover costs associated with certain improvements within the Village and to
impose a charge for the privilege of connecting a parcel within the Village,
directly or indirectly, to any system or unit and to provide for collection of
said charges. Funds derived under this Connection Fee Ordinance shall be
used for the benefit of the Village.
§ 163-21. Authority.
The Village is empowered to fix fees or charges for the privilege of
connecting, directly or indirectly, to systems or units and to prescribe,
revise, and collect fees, tolls, rates, rentals or other charges for services
and facilities furnished by it. The Village also has the authority to enter into
contracts allocating the installation and/or construction of infrastructure
and other municipal improvements that will be the subject of the connection
fees, including, but not limited to, roadways, sewer, water and utilities.
§ 163-22. Additional revenue.
The revenue provided for hereby shall be in addition to all revenue
otherwise collected by or on behalf of the Village including, but not limited
to, miscellaneous taxes, federal and state grants and loans, contract
revenue, investment income, annexation fees, service charges, and other
charges imposed by other laws and/or Village ordinances.
§ 163-23. Administration.
The Administrator shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions
of this Connection Fee Ordinance. Any powers granted to or duties imposed
on the Administrator may be delegated by the Administrator to persons
acting in the beneficial interest of, or in the employ of the Village.
§ 163-24. Details of connection fee.
A. The connection fees may apply to development plans and the associated
improvements to be constructed within the Village at the Village
Board's discretion. The Village Board shall have the sole discretion to
determine whether a connection fee shall apply to the owners of the
affected property and the amount of the connection fee.
§ 163-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-24
1:199
§ 163-25. Validity.
If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or
term of this Connection Fee Ordinance is held invalid or unconstitutional
for any reason by any court, that decision does not affect the validity or
constitutionality of the remainder of this Connection Fee Ordinance. The
Village Board declares that it would have adopted each provision of this
Connection Fee Ordinance irrespective of the validity of any other provision.
In the event there is any conflict between this article and any applicable
Wisconsin Statute, the Wisconsin Statute shall control in such instance.
In the event a provision of this article conflicts with any other Village
ordinance, the terms within this Connection Fee Ordinance shall supersede,
provided that such terms are less restrictive.
§ 163-26. Effective date.
This Connection Fee Ordinance shall be applicable to any and all future
projects within the Village and any and all projects currently in process
within the Village.
B. The connection fee shall be a one-time mandatory lump-sum charge per
improvement that represents a portion of the cost of development
including, but not limited to, the improvements. The connection fees
shall be paid by the affected property owners in exchange for the
property owners connecting to improvements, with improvements
being defined in the broadest sense. The connection fees shall vary
from project to project and shall be determined at the time the
development plan is approved or, for any and all projects in process at
the time this article is passed, the connection fees shall be determined
within a reasonable time following the passage of this Connection Fee
Ordinance.
C. The specific details of an imposed connection fee shall be set forth by
resolution and provided to the affected property owners within a
reasonable time prior to the connection fee's due date. The affected
property owners will be required to pay the connection fee prior to the
property owner connecting to the improvement.
§ 163-24 HOBART CODE § 163-26
1:200
ARTICLE VI
Recycling and Solid Waste Collection Service Charge
[Adopted 1-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2-2014 (§ 9.1 of the 2000 Code)]
§ 163-27. Title.
The title of this article is "Special Charges for Current Services Ordinance."
§ 163-28. Purpose.52
The purpose of this article is to protect health, safety, and general welfare
by providing a method of financing municipal solid waste (MSW) and
recyclable collection, and to secure revenue streams so as to lessen
volatility of MSW and recycling special charges year-to-year; further, to
meet obligations of cooperative intermunicipal agreements with Brown
County Port and Resource Recovery Department and/or other entities.
§ 163-29. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted as authorized under §§ 66.0627, 66.0405, and 61.34
Wis. Stats.
§ 163-30. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or
interfere with any existing rules, regulations, ordinances or permits
previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, whenever this
article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall apply.
§ 163-31. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be
held to be the minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other power granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. Where
any terms or requirements of this article may be inconsistent or conflicting,
the more restrictive requirements or interpretation shall apply. Where a
provision of this article is required by Wisconsin Statutes, Wisconsin
Administrative Code, and where the ordinance provision is unclear, the
provision shall be interpreted in light of the Wisconsin Statutes and
standards in effect on the date of the adoption of this article, or in effect on
the date of the most recent text amendment to this article.
§ 163-32. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following definition shall have the meaning
indicated:
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 163-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-32
1:201
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — Each living unit in the Village of Hobart designed
for permanent living quarters, including every single-, two-, three- and fourfamily
dwelling unit on fee simple property.
§ 163-33. Applicability.
The requirements of this article apply to all persons owning and/or residing
in a residential unit within the Village of Hobart; however, this article shall
not apply to a newly constructed residential unit until it has been initially
occupied.
§ 163-34. Administration.
The provisions of this article shall be administered by the Village of Hobart.
§ 163-35. Methods for special charges.
Methods for special charges for MSW and recyclable collection and disposal
shall be as follows:
A. Special charges for MSW and recyclable collection and disposal for
each residential unit shall be determined in each annual operating
budget adopted by the Village Board, and shall be billed on the property
owners' next subsequent annual property tax bill following the time
service is made available. Newly constructed residential units and/or
new collection customers will be charged a pro rata share of special
charges based on the number of months remaining in the year service is
made available, and billed the pro rata share on the next subsequent
annual property tax bill.
B. Special charges for MSW and recyclable collection and disposal shall
apply uniformly to all residential units, whether vacant or occupied, or
whether the occupants consistently utilize the collection service made
available or not.
§ 163-32 HOBART CODE § 163-35
1:202
Chapter 170
FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 295.
§ 170-1. Purpose.
The Village Board finds that the Village, possessing both urban and rural
characteristics, contains areas that differ greatly in the degree to which
firearm discharge and other weapon use is appropriate from a standpoint of
public safety, peace and good order. This chapter is hereby established to
protect the public health, safety and welfare by establishing regulations for
the discharge and/or use of certain weapons/firearms.
§ 170-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BODILY HARM — Any bodily injury, to include, without limitation, a
laceration that requires stitches, staples, or a tissue adhesive; any fracture
of a bone; a broken nose; a burn; a temporary loss of consciousness, sight
or hearing; a concussion; or a loss or fracture of a tooth.
FIREARM — Includes all weapons used for the purpose of propelling
bullets, shot or other missiles, whether from cartridge, shell or other
container, by force of gunpowder.
WEAPON — Any device by which a projectile may be launched at a speed
that may cause property damage, bodily harm or worse, including, but not
limited to, a bow, crossbow, firearm or slingshot.
§ 170-3. Restrictions.
A. No person, except a duly authorized police officer or other law
enforcement officer in the line of duty, shall discharge any firearm or
other regulated weapon in the Village of Hobart unless for the purpose
of security, defense, hunting, recreation, or other lawful purpose
consistent with the provisions of this chapter.
B. No child under the age of 18 shall bear any firearm or other weapon in
the Village of Hobart, except under the circumstances set forth in the
Wisconsin regulations and statutes. Any parent or guardian of a child
under the age of 18 who, knowingly or by negligent supervision,
permits a violation of this subsection by their child or ward is also in
violation of this section, except under the circumstances set forth in the
Wisconsin regulations and statutes
§ 163-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-3
1:203
§ 170-4. Firearms districts.
C. Section 167.31, Wis. Stats., and any future amendments thereto, is
hereby adopted and incorporated as if fully set forth herein. If there are
any conflicts between the definitions set forth in this chapter and
§ 167.31(1), Wis. Stats., the definitions provided in § 167.31(1), Wis.
Stats., shall control with regard to interpreting this subsection;
provided, however, that a definition in this chapter that is more
restrictive or more encompassing than the definitions in § 167.31(1),
Wis. Stats., shall not be considered to be conflicting.
A. Weapons/firearms overlay districts are hereby established, and areas of
the Village subject to such districts shall be shown on a Weapons/
Firearms Overlay Map hereby adopted and kept on file with the Village
Clerk-Treasurer and Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector. The
districts established by this chapter are in addition to any other state or
local laws governing hunting and trespassing. All new subdivisions will
be reviewed by the Village Board (or designee), and a district zone will
be applied.
(1) District One (D1): Discharging firearms or any other lawful
weapons shall be allowed.
(2) District Two (D2): Discharge of firearms or any other lawful
weapons is prohibited; however, the following firearms or weapons
may be discharged: bow and arrow, BB gun, pellet gun, .22 caliber
with birdshot, and slingshots.
(3) District Three (D3): No discharge of any firearms or weapon that
launches a projectile of any kind shall be allowed.
(4) District Four (D4): The regulations of District 2 apply; however,
shotguns using shot loads may also be discharged for the purpose
of hunting small game, migratory and upland game birds or
waterfowl.
(5) District Five (D5): Brown County Airport property restricted.
B. Any proposed change to the Weapons/Firearms Overlay Map must be
reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission, which shall make a
recommendation to the Village Board for final action through adopting
a resolution amending the map.
(1) The application to amend the Weapons/Firearms Overlay Map shall
be filed with the Hobart Village Clerk-Treasurer on a form so
prescribed by the Village of Hobart.
(2) Upon receipt in proper form of the application, the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
change to the Weapons/Firearms Overlay Map. Due notice of the
hearing shall be given to parties of interest, as well as owners of
property located within 100 feet of the property in appeal.
§ 170-3 HOBART CODE § 170-4
1:204
§ 170-5. Hunting near residence.
While on the land of another, there shall be no hunting at any time within
300 feet of any building devoted to human occupancy without the express
permission of the owner or occupant of the building. As used in this section,
"building" shall not include any tent, bus, truck, vehicle, camper or other
similar portable unit.
§ 170-6. Discharge of firearm near school building, playground or
place of worship.
There shall be no discharge of any firearm at any time by anyone other than
a duly authorized law enforcement officer in the performance of official duty
within a radius of 1,000 feet from a school building, playground, park or
place of worship.
§ 170-7. Posting of signs.
The Village of Hobart shall post warning signs indicating no discharge
of any firearm at any time around the perimeter of the school building,
playground, park or place of worship at a radius of 1,000 feet if requested
by the owner of the property.
§ 170-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is subject to the
penalties as outlined in § 1-3 of the Village of Hobart Code, and shall be
subject to forfeiture in an amount of no less than $200 and not to exceed
$1,000 for each offense.
(3) The Planning and Zoning Commission's decision on recommending
any changes to the Weapons/Firearms Overlay Map shall be based
on, but not limited to, the following criteria:
(a) The population density of the area surrounding the parcel.
(b) The type of weapon or weapons being used, as well as the
hours of operation for the discharge of such weapon or
weapons.
(c) The recommendation of the Hobart Police Chief or his or her
designee.
(d) Information and comments received at the public hearing for
said application.
§ 170-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-8
1:205
Chapter 177
DETACHED HEATING DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 207. Zoning — See Ch. 295.
§ 177-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DETACHED HEATING DEVICE — Any equipment, device or apparatus, or
any part thereof, which is not installed within the primary or principal
structure, whether installed indoors or outdoors, for the primary purpose
of combustion of fuel to produce heat or energy used as a component of a
heating system providing heat for any interior space or water source.
SEASONED NATURAL WOOD — Wood cut from trees which has been split,
stacked, and allowed to dry for a minimum of six months.
STACKS or CHIMNEYS — Any vertical structure enclosing a flue or flues
that carry off smoke or exhaust from an outdoor solid-fuel-fired heating
device; especially that part of such structures extending above a roof.
WOOD BOILER — Any self-contained heating plant, equipment, device or
apparatus designed for the combustion of solid fuel employing the transfer
of heat through hydronic methods. Wood boilers are also called wood-fired
furnaces, wood-fired stoves, and outdoor furnaces.
§ 177-2. Regulations for detached heating devices.
A. Wood boilers are prohibited in all zoning districts, except in A-1 and A-2
Zoning Districts.
B. All detached heating devices shall be installed, operated and
maintained in strict conformance with the manufacturer's instructions
and the regulations promulgated hereunder. In the event of a conflict,
the regulations promulgated hereunder shall apply unless the
manufacturer's instructions are more strict than the regulations
promulgated hereunder, in which case the manufacturer's instructions
shall apply.
C. All detached heating devices installed within the Village limits are
required to meet the following regulatory standards:
(1) Emission standards currently required by the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA). Emission standards currently required by
the EPA are hereby adopted by reference together with any
amendments or modifications made to them in the future.
§ 170-8 HOBART CODE § 177-2
1:206
(2) Testing and listing: All devices shall be listed by a testing agency
acceptable to the Village of Hobart.
D. Substantive requirements. All detached heating devices and wood
boilers shall be installed, operated and maintained pursuant to the
following conditions:
(1) Fuel. Only fuels specifically permitted, identified, or recommended
by the manufacturer shall be used, except that the following fuels
are strictly prohibited:
(a) Industrial waste, rubber, plastic, toxic chemicals, hazardous
waste, yard waste, painted or chemically treated wood,
processed wood products (except for wood pellets
manufactured for use in heating devices), household garbage,
cardboard, waste paper, or animal waste.
(b) Kerosene.
(c) Corn, corn cobs (except in A-1 and A-2 Zoning Districts).
(d) Any other items not specifically allowed by the heating device
manufacturer or this section.
(2) Wood boiler location and chimney requirements shall be as follows:
(a) Twenty-five feet from nearest side or rear property line.
(b) One hundred feet from any road.
(c) Twenty-five feet from any structure.
(d) Fifteen feet minimum chimney height.
(e) Chimneys shall be a minimum of two feet above the highest
eave line of any building within 100 feet.
(f) Chimneys shall be supported to withstand winds up to 90 miles
per hour.
E. Existing detached heating devices. All existing legally permitted and
installed units shall immediately comply with all manufacturer's
specifications and be subject to Subsection D(1), Fuel, within 30 days
from the effective date of this chapter. All existing nonconforming
devices, upon the complaint of a Village resident, shall be removed,
replaced, or modified to meet the requirements of this chapter within
45 days of notification of noncompliance from the Village Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector, Police Department, or other Village
officer or agent.
F. Permits.
(1) No person shall allow, maintain or use a detached heating device in
the Village of Hobart without first having obtained a permit from
§ 177-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-2
1:207
§ 177-3. Variance.
Where the Village finds that extraordinary hardship will occur from the
enforcement of this chapter, upon application to the Village Board, said
Village Board may vary the regulations contained herein to afford
substantial justice, provided that such variation will not have the effect of
nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter.
Chapter 185
HEALTH AND SANITATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 102.
Sewer use — See Ch. 237.
Water — See Ch. 273.
Agricultural shoreland management — See
Ch. 288.
Shoreland zoning — See Ch. 293.
the Village Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector on the forms
prescribed by such official. Permit fee per schedule.
(2) Violations. A permit may be suspended in the event the owner fails
to comply with this chapter.
(3) Penalty. Any person who constructs, erects, or fails to remove,
replace, or modify any detached heating device that does not meet
the requirements of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty
provided in § 1-3A.
§ 177-2 HOBART CODE § 177-3
1:208
ARTICLE I
Animal Waste Management
[Adopted 7-21-2009 by Ord. No. 04-2009 as § 10.3 of the 2000 Code]
§ 185-1. Authority.
This article is adopted under authority granted under §§ 59.70(1), 92.15
and 92.16 of the Wisconsin Statutes. The title of this article is "Village
of Hobart Animal Waste Management Ordinance" and it regulates design,
construction, abandonment and maintenance of animal waste storage
facilities, animal feedlots, and nutrient management.
§ 185-2. Findings and declaration of policy.
§ 185-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the location, construction,
installation, alteration, design and use of animal waste storage facilities
and animal feedlots so as to protect the health and safety of residents and
transients; prevent the spread of disease and promote the prosperity and
general welfare of the citizens of the Village of Hobart. It is also intended to
provide for the administration and enforcement of this article and to provide
penalties for its violation. It is also intended to protect the groundwater and
surface water resources of the Village of Hobart.
A. The Village of Hobart Board finds this article is designed to protect and
promote our agricultural industry and also to promote and enhance the
aesthetic conditions and general welfare of the people within the
Village of Hobart.
B. The County of Brown permits operation of properly conducted
agricultural operations within the county. If the property you are
purchasing or own is located near agricultural lands of operation or
included within an area zoned for agricultural purposes, you may be
subject to outcomes arising from such operations. Such outcomes may
include, but are not limited to, noises, odors, lights, fumes, dust, smoke,
insects, arising from the use of chemicals, operation of machinery
(including aircraft) during a twenty-four-hour period, the storage and
disposal of manure, and the application by spraying or otherwise of
chemical fertilizers, soil amendments, herbicides and pesticides. One or
more of the outcomes described may occur as a result of any
agricultural operation, which is in conformance with existing laws and
regulations and accepted customers and standards. If you live near an
agricultural area, you should be prepared to accept such outcomes as a
normal and necessary aspect of living in a county with a strong rural
character and an active agricultural sector. The Village of Hobart has
enlisted the Brown County Land Conservation Department to assist in
the resolution of any animal waste management disputes which might
arise between residents of the county regarding agricultural
operations.
§ 185-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-4
1:209
§ 185-4. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be
held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor
of the Village of Hobart, and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of
any other power granted by the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 185-5. Applicability.
This article applies only to the areas in the Village of Hobart. Abandonment
requirements apply to all animal waste storage facilities regardless of the
date of construction. Nutrient Management Plan (590) provisions shall
apply to all animal waste storage facilities issued a permit under this article
regardless of the date of construction. Animal feedlot requirements shall
apply only to sites that exceed the prohibitions in § 185-14 of this article
or the standards in Section 10.04(1)(b), Brown County Code; or receive
a notice of discharge under Ch. 283 Wis. Statutes; or existing sites that
exceed 500 animal units; or new animal feedlots that exceed 40 animal
units.
§ 185-6. Definitions.
Definitions herein are to conform to the provisions set forth in the Wisconsin
Administrative Code and Village of Hobart Code.
ABANDONMENT — A livestock waste storage facility is no longer being
used for its intended purpose, and is no longer receiving animal wastes,
has not received any animal wastes for a period of two years and, based on
available evidence, will not receive animal wastes from an active livestock
operation within the next six months.
ANIMAL FEEDLOT — Land or building or combination of land and buildings
intended for the confined feeding, breeding, raising, or holding of animals,
specifically designed as a confinement area in which manure may
accumulate, or where the concentration of animals is such that a vegetative
cover cannot be maintained within the enclosure. For purposes of these
parts, open land used for the feeding and rearing of poultry (poultry ranges)
shall be considered to be animal feedlots. Pastures shall not be considered
animal feedlots under these parts. New animal feedlots are those that are
established after the effective date of this article.
ANIMAL UNIT — A unit of measure used to determine the total number of
single animal types or combination of animal types, as specified in Ch. NR
243, Wis. Adm. Code, which are fed, confined, maintained, or stabled in an
animal feeding operation.
ANIMAL WASTE — Livestock excreta and other materials such as bedding,
rain or other water, soil, hair, feathers and other debris normally included
in animal waste handling operations.
ANIMAL WASTE STORAGE FACILITY — Concrete, steel or otherwise
fabricated structure and earthen animal waste storage facility used for
temporary storage of animal waste or other organic waste.
§ 185-4 HOBART CODE § 185-6
1:210
APPLICANT — Any person who applies for a permit under this article.
EARTHEN ANIMAL WASTE STORAGE FACILITY — A facility constructed of
earth dikes, pits or ponds used for temporary storage of animal waste.
KARST FEATURE — An area or surficial geologic feature subject to bedrock
dissolution so that it is likely to provide a conduit to groundwater, and may
include caves, enlarged fractures, mine features, exposed bedrock surfaces,
sinkholes, springs, seeps or swallets.
LAND CONSERVATION COMMITTEE — An operating committee of the
Brown County Board of Supervisors.
LAND CONSERVATION DEPARTMENT — The enforcing authority of this
article.
MANURE — Livestock excreta. "Manure" includes livestock bedding, water,
soil, hair, feathers, and other debris that becomes intermingled with
livestock excreta in normal manure handling operations.
NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT PLAN (590) — A plan that balances the nutrient
needs of a crop with the nutrients available from legume crops, manure,
fertilizer or other sources. Management includes the rate, method, and
timing of the application of all sources of nutrients to minimize the amount
of nutrients entering surface and groundwater. The requirements for a
nutrient management plan are as established in § ATCP 50.04(3).
PASTURE — Land with a permanent, uniform cover of grasses or legumes
used as forage for livestock. Pastures do not include areas where
supplemental forage feeding is provided on a regular basis.
PERMIT — The signed, written statement issued by the Brown County
Land Conservation Department under this article authorizing the applicant
to construct, install, reconstruct, enlarge or substantially alter an animal
waste storage facility or animal feedlot.
PERMITTEE — Any person to whom a permit is issued under this article.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, limited liability company, trust,
partnership, joint venture, agency, unincorporated association, municipal
corporation, county, or state agency within Wisconsin, the federal
government, or any other legally recognized entity, or any combination
thereof.
SITE THAT IS SUSCEPTIBLE TO GROUNDWATER CONTAMINATION —
Under § 281.16(1)(g), Wis. Stats., means any one of the following:
A. An area within 250 feet of a private well.
B. An area within 1,000 feet of a municipal well.
C. An area within 300 feet upslope or 100 feet downslope of karst features.
A channel with a cross-sectional area equal to or greater than three
square feet that flows to a karst feature.
D.
§ 185-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-6
1:211
TECHNICAL GUIDE — The United States Department of Agriculture
(USDA) Natural Resources Conservation Service Field Office Technical
Guide that is currently in effect, and as amended from time to time.
UNCONFINED MANURE PILE — A quantity of manure, at least 175 cubic
feet in volume, that covers the ground surface to a depth of at least
two inches and is not confined within a manure storage facility, livestock
housing facility or barnyard runoff control facility.
WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT AREAS — The area within 1,000 feet
from the ordinary high water mark of navigable waters that consist of a
lake, pond or flowage, except that, for a navigable water that is a glacial
pothole lake, the term means the area within 1,000 feet from the high water
mark of the lake; the area within 300 feet from the ordinary high water
mark of navigable waters that consist of a river or stream; and a site that is
susceptible to groundwater contamination, or that has the potential to be a
direct conduit for contamination to reach groundwater.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Those portions of Lake Michigan and Lake
Superior within the boundaries of Wisconsin, and all lakes, bays, rivers,
streams, springs, ponds, wells, impounding reservoirs, marshes,
watercourses, drainage systems and other surface water and groundwater,
natural or artificial, public or private within the state or its jurisdiction as
defined in § 293.01(20) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
WINTER SPREADING PLAN — Any plan developed and approved by the
Brown County Land Conservation Department and provided to farmers
which identifies high-risk fields that should be completely avoided or
restricted from receiving winter applications of manure.
§ 185-7. Administration.
An area where the soil depth to groundwater or bedrock is less than
two feet.
E.
An area where the soil does not exhibit one of the following soil
characteristics:
At least a two-foot soil layer with 40% fines or greater above
groundwater or bedrock.
(1)
At least a three-foot soil layer with 20% fines or greater above
groundwater or bedrock.
(2)
At least a five-foot soil layer with 10% fines or greater above
groundwater or bedrock.
(3)
F.
A. Delegation of authority. the Village of Hobart hereby designates the
Brown County Land Conservation Department to administer and
enforce this article.
B. Administrative duties. In the administration and enforcement of this
article, the County Land Conservation Department shall:
§ 185-6 HOBART CODE § 185-7
1:212
§ 185-8. Application for and issuance of permits.
(1) Keep an accurate record of all permit applications, animal waste
facility plans, animal feedlot plans, animal waste storage facility
abandonment plans, permits issued, inspections made, and other
official actions.
(2) Review permit applications and issue permits in accordance with
§ 185-13 of this article.
(3) Inspect animal waste facility and animal feedlot construction and
animal waste facility abandonment to insure the facility is being
constructed according to plan specifications.
(4) Investigate complaints relating to compliance with this article.
(5) Monitor the adequacy of manure storage systems, including
compliance with nutrient management plans.
(6) Perform other duties as specified in this article.
C. Inspection authority. The Brown County Land Conservation Department
is authorized to enter upon any lands affected by this article to inspect
the land prior to or after permit issuance to determine compliance with
this article. If permission cannot be received from the applicant or
permittee, entry by the Brown County Land Conservation Department
shall be according to § 66.0119, Wisconsin Statutes.
A. Permit required.
(1) No animal waste storage facility or parts thereof may be located,
installed, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted,
substantially altered or its use changed, including abandonment,
without an animal waste management permit as provided in this
article, and without compliance with the provisions of this article,
and without compliance with Natural Resources Conservation
Service Technical Guide as adopted as part of this article.
(2) Animal feedlots that exceed the prohibitions in § 185-14 of this
article, or exceed the standards in Section 10.04(1)(b) of the Brown
County Code, or receive a notice of discharge under Ch. 283, Wis.
Statutes, or exceed 500 animal units shall obtain an animal waste
management permit as provided in this article.
(3) The requirements of this article shall be in addition to any other
ordinance regulating animal waste management, such as Chapter
22, Brown County Code; Chapter 293, Shoreland Zoning, of the
Village of Hobart Code; Chapter 288, Agricultural Shoreland
Management, of the Village's Code. In the case of conflict, the most
stringent provisions shall apply.
(4) No person may apply animal waste between December 1 and
March 31 without first obtaining a winter spreading permit as
§ 185-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-8
1:213
provided in this article. The winter spreading permit shall be issued
after the completion of the winter spreading plan as described in
this article.
(5) No unconfined manure pile shall be utilized without a temporary
unconfined manure stacking permit as provide in this article, and
without compliance with the provisions of this article, and without
compliance with Natural Resources Conservation Service
Technical Guide as adopted as part of this article.
B. Emergency repairs. Emergency repairs such as repairing a broken pipe
or equipment, leaking dikes or the removal of stoppages may be
performed without an animal waste storage facility permit. Such work
will be reported to the Land Conservation Department as soon as
possible for a determination as to whether an animal waste storage
facility permit will be required for an additional alteration or repair to
the facility. The County Land Conservation Department shall consult
with the Land Conservation Committee prior to making this
determination.
C. Fee. Fees will be based upon hourly costs of conservation components
required as part of permit.
D. Animal waste storage facility plan requirements. Each application for a
permit under this section shall include an animal waste storage facility
plan. The plan shall specify:
(1) The number and kinds of animals for which storage is provided.
(2) A sketch of the facility and its location in relation to buildings
within 250 feet and homes within 500 feet of the proposed facility.
The sketch shall be drawn to scale, with a scale no smaller than one
inch equals 100 feet.
(3) The structural details, including dimensions, cross sections, and
concrete thickness.
(4) The location of any wells within 300 feet of the facility.
(5) The soil test pit locations and soil descriptions to a depth of at least
three feet below the planned bottom of the facility.
(6) The elevation of groundwater or bedrock if encountered in the soil
profile and the date of any such determinations.
(7) Provisions for adequate drainage and control of runoff to prevent
pollution of surface water and groundwater such as exposed
bedrock or sinkholes. If a navigable body of water lies within 500
feet of the facility, the location and distance to the body of water
shall be shown.
(8) The scale of the drawing and the North arrow.
§ 185-8 HOBART CODE § 185-8
1:214
(9) A time schedule for construction of the facility.
(10) A description of the method in transferring animal waste into the
facility.
(11) A recoverable bench mark(s) including elevation(s) expressed in
feet and hundredths.
(12) A preliminary Nutrient Management Plan, verifying the ability of
the permittee to comply with Standard 590. A Nutrient
Management Plan checklist will be completed by the county for this
purpose.
E. Animal feedlot plan requirements. Each application for a permit under
this section shall include an animal feedlot facility plan. The plan shall
specify:
(1) A plan map showing location of the facility, including buildings,
homes, and wells within 300 feet of the proposed site. The sketch
shall be drawn to scale, with a scale no smaller than one inch
equals 100 feet.
(2) The location of any wells within 300 feet of the facility.
(3) The location of all soil test pits, including a detailed log of each pit,
to a depth of at least three feet below the planned bottom elevation
of the facility. The location of each test pit, prior to digging, and the
log descriptions of each pit, as it is excavated, shall be determined
and recorded by the Brown County Land Conservation Department
staff.
(4) Depth of high groundwater, estimated or observed, in the soil
profile and date determined.
(5) Depth to bedrock, estimated or observed.
(6) Ground contours (two-foot maximum intervals), with spot
elevations, indicating land slope at and around the site for a
minimum distance of 100 feet.
(7) Provisions for adequate drainage and control of runoff to prevent
pollution of surface and groundwater such as exposed bedrock or
sinkholes. The location of any navigable body of water within 500
feet of the proposed site must be shown. Rivers and streams in the
Village of Hobart shall be presumed to be navigable if they are
designated as continuous waterways or intermittent waterways on
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) quadrangle maps.
(8) Description of the type(s) of materials the facility is to consist of;
size, dimensions, and cross sections of the facility, and any other
specific details including, but not limited to, concrete thickness in
floor and walls, steel schedules, and fencing.
§ 185-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-8
1:215
(9) A time schedule for construction of the facility.
(10) Scale of the plan drawing(s) and North arrow.
(11) Description of bench mark(s) including elevation(s) expressed in
feet and hundredths.
(12) Landowners must plan and document the availability of acceptable
acreage of cropland per animal unit for all future expansions of
their livestock operations. Use either Phosphorus Index (PI) or Soil
Test Phosphorus Management Strategy found in the most current
Conservation Practice Standard NRCS 590 Nutrient Management.
A Nutrient Management Checklist will be completed by the county
for this purpose.
F. Animal waste storage facility abandonment plan requirements. Each
application for a permit under this section shall include an
abandonment plan. The plan shall specify:
(1) The abandonment plan may include provisions for future operation
of the animal waste storage facility. The facility shall meet the
standards and specifications in § 185-14 of this article and shall
have a permit issued under this article. Facilities not meeting this
requirement shall be properly abandoned under this section.
(2) A preliminary Nutrient Management Plan, verifying the ability of
the permittee to comply with Standard 590. A Nutrient
Management Plan checklist will be completed by the county for this
purpose.
(3) Provisions to remove and properly dispose of all accumulated
wastes in the manure facility.
(4) Provisions to remove any concrete or synthetic liner, or properly
use pieces of the concrete or synthetic liner, or properly use pieces
of the concrete or synthetic liner as clean fill at the site.
(5) Provisions to remove and properly dispose of any soil saturated
with waste from the manure storage facility.
(6) Provisions to remove any soils to the depth of significant manure
saturation or two feet, whichever is less, from the bottom and sides
of a facility without a constructed liner.
(7) Provision to remove or permanently plug the waste transfer system
serving the manure storage facility.
(8) Covering all disturbed area with topsoil, seeding the areas with a
grass mixture, and mulching the seeded area. This subsection does
not apply if an alternative use of the site is authorized under an
abandonment plan approved by the county or Village as part of the
permit.53
§ 185-8 HOBART CODE § 185-8
1:216
G. Winter spreading plan requirements.
(1) Each application for a permit under this section shall include a
Winter Spreading Plan. The plan shall specify:
(a) The lowest risk fields for the application of winter spread
manure based on slope, length of slope, soils, and depth to
bedrock.
(b) Specify rates of application and applicable setbacks from the
nearest surface waters and/or direct conduit to groundwater
as determined by Brown County Land Conservation
Department.
(c) The plan must include a description of the emergency response
procedures that will be engaged immediately in the event of
direct runoff related to the spreading of animal waste.
(d) Only maps prepared by Brown County Land Conservation
Department, using GIS technology, may be used to identify
appropriate fields for animal waste applications.
(e) For the purpose of this practice, winter spreading plans shall
take effect no later than December 1 prior to the winter for
which the plan is developed and continue through the
following March 31 unless animal waste can be effectively
incorporated.
(f) The landowner shall maintain an accurate record of the date,
location, and rate of application for every application of
manure on the land that is subject to the winter spreading
permit. The record shall be made available to the Brown
County Land Conservation Department upon request and shall
be retained by the Department and owner for one year
following the date of application.54
(2) Transitional provision.
(a) Applicators/landowners of animal waste required to have a
permit under Section 26.10(d)55 in the Towns of Green Bay,
Scott and Morrison shall notify the Brown County Land
Conservation Department by December 1, 2006 of their intent
to comply. BCLCD shall work with the applicator/landowner to
develop winter spreading plans in priority order based on the
potential for off-site impacts. An applicator/landowner is
considered to be in compliance for the 2006-2007 winter
season, provided they have contacted the department prior to
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
55.Editor's Note: Refers to the Brown County Code of Ordinances.
§ 185-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-8
1:217
December 1, 2006 and cooperates with the department in
the development of the winter spreading plan. Applicators/
landowners required to have a permit under Section 26.10 in
the Towns of Glenmore, Holland, Humboldt and Wrightstown
shall be required to obtain a winter spreading permit prior to
December 1, 2007.
(b) Applicators/landowners in all other areas of the county will be
required to obtain a winter spreading permit prior to
December 1, 2008.
H. Temporary unconfined manure stacking requirements. Each application
for a permit under this section shall include a site plan. The plan shall
specify:
(1) Waste consistencies. Waste materials having less than 16% solids
shall not be stacked in the field.
(2) Size and stacking period.
(3) Hydrologic soil groups.
(4) Subsurface separation distance.
(5) Surface separation distances.
I. Review of application. The County Land Conservation Department shall
receive and review all permit applications.
(1) The County Land Conservation Department shall determine if the
proposed facility meets the required standards set forth in § 185-14
of this article. Within 60 days after receiving the completed
application and fee, the County Land Conservation Department
shall inform the applicant in writing whether the permit application
is approved or disapproved. If additional information is required,
the County Land Conservation Department has 30 days from the
receipt of the additional information in which to approve or
disapprove the permit application in writing. Within 60 days of the
receipt of the permit application or within 30 days of the receipt of
additional information, as appropriate, the application shall be
deemed approved and the applicant may proceed as if a permit had
been issued.
(2) Prior to approval or disapproval of the permit application, the
County Land Conservation Department shall submit a copy of the
proposed plan(s) to the Village office of Hobart where the site is
located for their review and/or approval if appropriate.
J. Permit conditions. All permits issued under this article shall be issued
subject to the following conditions and requirements:
§ 185-8 HOBART CODE § 185-8
1:218
§ 185-9. Standards and specifications.
(1) Design, construction and management shall be carried out in
accordance with the animal waste facility plan and applicable
standards specified in § 185-14 of this article.
(2) The permittee shall give five working days' notice to the County
Land Conservation Department before starting any construction
activity authorized by the permit.
(3) Approval in writing must be obtained from the County Land
Conservation Department prior to any modifications to the
approved animal waste facility plan.
(4) The permittee and, if applicable, the contractor shall certify in
writing by signing the certification sheet that the facility was
installed as planned and designed. A copy of the signed
certification sheet shall be mailed to the County Land Conservation
Department within 30 days of completion of installation.
(5) Activities authorized by permit must be completed within two years
from the date of issuance after which such permit shall be void.
(6) Nutrient management plans shall be submitted to the Brown
County Land Conservation Department annually by June 1.
K. Permit revocation. The County Land Conservation Department may
revoke any permit issued under this article if the holder of the permit
has misrepresented any material fact in the permit application or
animal waste facility plan, or if the holder of the permit violates any of
the conditions of the permit.
A. Animal feedlots. The standards and specifications for design,
construction, operation and maintenance of animal feedlots are those
identified in Standards 350 and 312, USDA-NRCS Technical Guide.
Feedlots requiring a permit under this article shall not deliver more
than 20 pounds of phosphorus annually as determined by the County
Land Conservation Department.
B. Animal feedlot separation requirements. All new animal feedlots shall
be sited a minimum of 100 feet from adjacent properties, 300 feet from
any lake or perennial stream (as defined by USGS quadrangle maps),
and at least two vertical feet from groundwater.
C. Animal waste storage facilities. The standards and specifications for
design, construction, operation, and maintenance of animal waste
storage facilities are those identified in Standards 313 and 634, USDANRCS
Technical Guide. The Standards and Specifications for
abandonment/closure of animal waste storage facilities are those
identified in Standard 360, USDA-NRCS Technical Guide.
§ 185-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-9
1:219
(1) This standard does not apply to: facilities in which greater than
10% of the design storage volume or greater than 25,000 gallons is
occupied by any combination of domestic waste, industrial
wastewater generated off site, or sludge. These types of facilities
are defined and regulated under various codes administered by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (WDNR).
D. Animal waste storage facilities separation requirements. All new animal
waste storage facilities shall be sited a minimum of 250 feet from
adjacent properties, 300 feet from any lake or perennial stream (as
defined by USGS quadrangle maps), and at least three vertical feet
from groundwater. Reception pits as part of the animal feedlot or
buildings with under-floor storage shall be sited a minimum of 100 feet
from adjacent properties.
E. Nutrient management. Animal wastes for which permits are issued
under this chapter of the Code and all wastes from existing livestock
waste storage facilities shall be managed and utilized in accordance
with Standard 590, USDA-NRCS Technical Guide. A current (590)
Nutrient Management Plan must be submitted annually to the Brown
County Land Conservation Department by June 1, until the animal
waste storage facility is no longer in use and it has been properly
abandoned. The following Wisconsin Administrative Code sections and
NRCS conservation practice standards shall apply:56
ATCP 50.04(3)(a)
(a) A landowner shall have and follow an annual nutrient management
plan when applying nutrients to any field after the date specified
in par. (h). A nutrient management plan shall comply with this
subsection. (Register November 2006 No. 611).
ATCP 50.04(3)(b)
(b) The plan shall include every field on which the landowner
mechanically applies nutrients. (Register November 2006 No.
611)
ATCP 50.04(3)(c)
(c) A nutrient management planner qualified under s. ATCP 50.48
shall prepare or approve the plan. (Register November 2006 No.
611)
ATCP 50.04(3)(g)
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 185-9 HOBART CODE § 185-9
1:220
(g) The plan shall be consistent with any nutrient management plan
required under Ch. NR 113, 204 or 214 if the landowner applies
septage, municipal sludge, industrial waste or industrial
byproducts to the land. A landowner is not required to have a
nutrient management plan under this subsection if the landowner
applies only septage, municipal sludge, industrial waste or
industrial by-products according to Ch. NR 113, 204 or 214.
(Register November 2006 No. 611)
Nutrient Management
(acre)
Code 590
Natural Resources Conservation Service
Conservation Practice Standard V
Criteria
(NRCS WI, 9/05)
(j) Organic byproducts of other than manure (i.e., industrial wastes,
municipal sludge, and septage) applied to fields shall be analyzed
for nutrient content and applied in accordance with applicable
regulations including restrictions on heavy metal content and land
application rates.
(k) Manure, organic byproducts, and fertilizers shall not run off the
field site during or immediately after application. If ponding,
runoff or drainage to subsurface tiles occurs, implement the
following activities, as appropriate:
(1) Stop application.
(2) Take corrective action to prevent off-site movement.
(3) Modify the application (rate, method, depth of injection,
timing) to eliminate runoff or drainage to subsurface tiles.
F. Temporary unconfined manure stacking requirements. Each application
for a permit under this section shall include plan specifications
identified in Standard 313, USDA-NRCS Technical Guide.
G. Manure management prohibitions. The following prohibitions are
incorporated into this article:
(1) All livestock producers shall comply with this section.
(2) A livestock operation shall have no overflow of manure storage
facilities.
(3) A livestock operation shall have no unconfined manure pile in a
water quality management area.
§ 185-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-9
1:221
§ 185-10. Violations and penalties.
§ 185-11. Appeals.
(4) A livestock operation shall have no direct runoff from a feedlot or
stored manure into the waters of the state.
(5) A livestock operation may not allow unlimited access by livestock to
waters of the state in a location where high concentrations of
animals prevent the maintenance of adequate sod or self-sustaining
vegetative cover. This prohibition does not apply to properly
designed, installed and maintained livestock or farm equipment
crossings.
A. Penalties. Any person who violates, neglects, or refuses to comply with
or resists the enforcement of any provision of this article shall be
subject to a forfeiture of not less than the fines identified in the Brown
County Ordinance Chapter 26 plus costs of prosecution of each
violation. An unlawful violation includes failure to comply with any
standard of this article or with any condition or qualification attached to
the permit. Each day that a violation exists shall be a separate offense.
Failure to obtain proper permit is considered a violation. Brown County
Land Conservation Department shall refer all enforcements to the
Brown County Corporation Counsel for commencement of enforcement
action.
B. Enforcement actions, temporary restraining orders and/or other
necessary remedial action. As a substitute for or an addition to
forfeiture actions, Brown County may seek enforcement of any part of
this article by court actions seeking injunctions or restraining orders.
A. Authority. Under authority of Chapter 68, Wisconsin Statutes, the
Brown County Land Conservation Committee, created under
§ 59.70(19,) Wisconsin Statutes, and by the Brown County Board of
Supervisors on May 19, 1982, acting as an appeal authority under
§ 68.09(2), Wisconsin Statutes, is authorized to hear and decide all
appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, requirement,
decision, or determination by the County Land Conservation
Department in administering this article.
B. Procedure. The rules, procedures, duties and powers of the Land
Conservation Committee and Chapter 68, Wisconsin Statutes, shall
apply to this article.
C. Who may appeal. Any person having a substantial interest which is
adversely affected by this order, requirement, decision may take
appeals or determinations made by the County Land Conservation
Department.
§ 185-9 HOBART CODE § 185-11
1:222
Chapter 189
INTOXICATING LIQUOR AND FERMENTED MALT
BEVERAGES
§ 185-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-11
1:223

ARTICLE I
Licensing and Regulation
[Adopted as § 5.5 of the 2000 Code]
§ 189-1. Title; adoption of statute.
§ 189-2. Purpose.
Whereas, the Wisconsin Statutes, and in particular § 61.34 and Chapter 125
thereof, grant the Village Board the power to regulate the sale of fermented
malt beverages and intoxicating liquors; and, whereas, the Village of Hobart
is predominantly a residential community with a small business district and
provides limited fire and police protection; now then, the Village Board
deems it to be in the best interests of the Village and for the health, safety,
welfare, convenience and morality of the public to regulate the sale of
fermented malt beverages and intoxicating liquors in the Village of Hobart.
§ 189-3. Definitions.
See Chapter 125, § 125.02, of the Wisconsin Statutes for additional
definitions. The following terms used in this article shall have the meanings
indicated in this section:
COMMON AREA — Any area within any building or other structure in which
the area for the sale, offer for sale, or display for sale of any fermented
malt beverages and/or intoxicating liquor is not separated from the area
for the sale, offer for sale, or display for sale of any nonrelated goods,
product, thing or service by a solid floor-to-ceiling wall which contains no
door, window or other opening which is capable of allowing any person or
thing to pass from either area to the other, unless the same is a secondary
doorway which serves solely as a safety exit.
FERMENTED MALT BEVERAGES — Any liquor or liquid capable of being
used for beverage purposes made by the alcoholic fermentation of an
infusion in potable water of barley, malt and hops, with or without unmalted
grains or decorticated and degerminated grains or sugar, containing 1/2 of
1% or more of alcohol by volume.
INTOXICATING LIQUOR — Any ardent, spirituous, distilled, or vinous
liquors, liquids, or compounds, whether medicated, proprietary, patented,
or not, by whatever name called, containing 1/2 of 1% or more of alcohol by
A. Title: "Regulation and Licensing of Fermented Malt Beverages and
Intoxicating Liquor."
B. Adoption. The provisions of Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin Statutes, as
now existing and as the same may hereafter be amended, are hereby
adopted and made part of this article of the Village of Hobart Code (the
"Code") by reference. In the event a conflict exists between Chapter
125 of the Wisconsin Statutes and this article of the Code, Chapter 125
shall control.
§ 189-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-3
1:225
volume, which are fit for use for beverage purposes, but shall not include
fermented malt beverages which contain less than 5% of alcohol by weight.
PEACE OFFICER — Includes sheriffs, undersheriffs, deputy sheriffs, police
officers, constables, and any duly authorized employee of the Wisconsin
Department of Revenue.
PREMISES — The area that is the subject of an application and license for
sale of fermented malt beverages and/or intoxicating liquor.
RESERVE RETAIL "CLASS B" LICENSE — A "Class B" license which the
Village has been authorized to issue under § 125.51(4)(br), Wisconsin
Statutes (as now existing and as the same may hereafter be amended), but
which it has not granted or issued.
SELL, SOLD or SALE — Sale, transfer, gift, barter, trade or exchange, or
any shift, device, scheme or transaction whatever whereby fermented malt
beverages and/or intoxicating liquors may be obtained, but does not include
the solicitation of orders for, or the sale for future delivery of, fermented
malt beverages or intoxicating liquors.
VILLAGE — The Village of Hobart.
§ 189-4. License required.
No person shall vend, sell, deal or traffic in, or have in his or her possession
with intent to vend, sell, deal or traffic in, or for the purpose of avoiding any
ordinance of the Village or law of this state give away any fermented malt
beverages or intoxicating liquors without having a license as provided by
this article nor without complying with all of the provisions of this article
and all regulations and laws of this state applicable thereto.
§ 189-5. Types of licenses.
A. Fermented malt beverages. Licenses to sell, deal or traffic in fermented
malt beverages shall be designated either retail Class "A" or Retail
Class "B":
(1) A retail Class "A" license shall permit its holder to sell, deal or
traffic in fermented malt beverages only for consumption away
from the premises where sold and in the original package,
container or bottle.
(2) A retail Class "B" license shall permit its holder to sell, deal or
traffic in fermented malt beverages either to be consumed on the
premises where sold or away from such premises.
(3) A temporary retail Class "B" license shall permit its holder to sell
fermented malt beverages only for consumption at a picnic or other
similar gathering of limited duration.57
57.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 5.505A.4 and 5, regarding wholesaler's license and special
wholesaler's license, respectively, which immediately followed this subsection, were
repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 189-3 HOBART CODE § 189-5
1:226
§ 189-6. License fees.
The issuance of all licenses, whether an original or renewal, are subject to
the Village Board's discretion and approval. The license fee shall depend
upon the type of license requested. All fees are set by Village resolutions
and shall be posted on the Village's official web site or shall be available
from the Village Clerk-Treasurer. License fees are subject to change
pursuant to the Village Board's discretion.
§ 189-7. Number of licenses.
§ 189-8. Application for license.
B. Intoxicating liquors. Licenses to sell, deal or traffic in intoxicating
liquors shall be designated either retail "Class A," or retail "Class B."
(1) A retail "Class A" license shall permit its holder to sell, deal or
traffic in intoxicating liquors only in original packages or
containers, in quantities of not more than three wine gallons at any
one time and to be consumed off the premises so licensed, except
that wine may be sold in the original package or otherwise in any
quantity.
(2) A retail "Class B" license shall permit its holder to sell, deal or
traffic in intoxicating liquors to be consumed by the glass only on
the premises so licensed, and in the original package or container,
in quantities of not more than one quart at any one time, and to be
consumed off the premises so licensed, except that wine may be
sold in the original package or otherwise in any quantity to be
consumed off the premises.
(3) A temporary retail "Class B" license shall permit its holder to sell
wine only for consumption at a picnic or other similar gathering of
limited duration.
A. The number of licenses granted by the Village Board for any license
year shall not exceed the quotas set forth in Chapter 125 of the
Wisconsin Statutes.
B. For the purposes of this section, any combination license granted by the
Village Board to a licensee shall be counted as one license for each class
of license included in the combination license.
A. The application for an original license or a renewal license to sell, deal
or traffic in fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquors shall be
made in writing on a form prescribed and furnished by the Wisconsin
Department of Revenue and sworn to by the applicant. The application
shall state the kind of license applied for, designate the premises where
such fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquors are to be sold
and designate such other information as filed with the Village Clerk-
§ 189-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-8
1:227
§ 189-9. Requirements for license; Village discretion.
Treasurer and be accompanied by the cost of publication of notice of
such application.
B. In the event the applicant is not the title owner of the real property
upon which the premises sit (the "title owner"), the application for the
original license or renewal license to sell, deal or traffic in fermented
malt beverages or intoxicating liquors shall also be sworn to by the title
owner. Specifically, the title owner shall confirm that the premises
conforms to the sanitary, safety and health requirements of the state
building code, the state plumbing code and the rules and regulations of
the State Department of Health Services applicable to restaurants as
contemplated in § 125.68(5) of the Wisconsin Statutes, and also
conforms to all ordinances and regulations of the Village. The Village
Clerk-Treasurer shall keep all applications for licenses and they may be
inspected by any citizen.
A. An alcohol beverage license is a privilege, not an entitlement. The
Village shall review each application on an individual basis and, after
considering the Village's best interest, the Village Board shall make
discretionary decisions regarding the granting or the denial of any
requested liquor license, whether for fermented malt beverage or
intoxicating liquor.58
B. No alcohol beverage license shall be granted to any person or persons
under the age of 18 years for the sale of any fermented malt beverages
or intoxicating liquors, or to any person who is not of good moral
character and a full citizen of the United States, and of the State of
Wisconsin, and who has not resided in the State of Wisconsin
continuously for at least one year immediately prior to the date of filing
the application.59
C. No license shall be issued or granted to any person who fails to pay
personal property tax or real estate tax or who owes any unpaid
delinquent personal property tax, real estate tax, room tax, special
charge for current services, special assessment, municipal court
forfeiture, parking ticket, utility bill, ambulance bill, hazardous material
spill response charge, or inspection fee to the Village.
D. No license shall be issued or granted for any premises if the title owner
who fails to pay personal property tax or real estate tax or who owes
any unpaid delinquent personal property tax, real estate tax, room tax,
special charge for current services, special assessment, municipal court
forfeiture, parking ticket, utility bill, utility fee, ambulance bill,
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 189-8 HOBART CODE § 189-9
1:228
§ 189-10. Annual license meeting.60
The Village Board shall meet not later than May 15 of each year and be
in session from day to day thereafter, so long as may be necessary, for the
purpose of acting upon such applications for licenses as may be presented
to them on or before April 15, and all applications for licenses so filed
shall be granted, issued or denied not later than June 15 for the ensuing
license year, provided that nothing shall prevent the Village Board from
granting any licenses which are applied for at any other time. As soon as the
application has been approved, a duplicate copy thereof shall be forwarded
to the Wisconsin Department of Revenue. No application for a license which
is in existence at the time of such annual license meeting shall be rejected
without a statement on the Clerk-Treasurer's minutes as to the reasons for
such rejection. By July 15 annually, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall mail to
the Department of Revenue a list containing the name, address and trade
name of each person holding a license issued by the Village, other than a
manager's or operator's license or a license issued under § 125.26 (6), Wis.
Stats., the type of license held and, if the person holding the license is a
corporation or limited liability company, the name of the agent appointed.
hazardous material spill response charge, or inspection fee to the
Village.
E. No license shall be issued or granted to any person who has habitually
been a petty law offender, or has been convicted of an offense against
the laws of this state, or any other state punishable by imprisonment in
the state prison, unless the person so committed has been duly
pardoned. Where the applicant is an entity, the provisions of this section
shall apply to the entity's owners, members, officers and directors.
F. The Village Board may also consider, but shall not be limited to, the
applicant's and title owner's financial responsibility, the proposed
location, the effect of the license on the surrounding community, the
condition of the premises, the applicant's and title owner's fitness for
the trust to be reposed.
G. Every applicant for an original or renewal license to sell, deal or traffic
in fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquors, and every title
owner, in the event the applicant is not the title owner of the real
property upon which the premises sit, shall expressly consent to the
jurisdiction of the Village and/or Brown County Circuit Court for the
State of Wisconsin, as the case may be, for any and all disputes arising
out of or related to the original and/or renewal license for fermented
malt beverages and/or intoxicating liquors.
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 189-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-11
1:229
§ 189-11. Issuance and duration of licenses.
Upon the approval of the application by the Village Board, the Village Clerk-
Treasurer shall attest the license and, upon the filing by the applicant of
a receipt showing the payment of the required license fee to the Village
Clerk-Treasurer, issue the license to the applicant. Each license shall be
numbered in the order in which issued and shall specifically state the name
of the licensee, the premises for which issued under, the date of issuance,
and the fee paid. All such licenses shall remain in force until and expire on
June 30 at midnight next after the granting thereof, unless sooner revoked
or suspended.
§ 189-12. Posting of licenses.
Every license for the sale of fermented malt beverages and intoxicating
liquors shall be enclosed in a suitable wood or metal frame, having a clear
glass face and a substantial wood or metal back, so that the whole of such
license may be seen therein, and shall be posted and at all times displayed
in a conspicuous place in the room where such business is carried on, so
that all persons visiting such place may readily see the same.
§ 189-13. Transfer of licenses.
§ 189-14. Revocation or suspension of licenses.
A. Transfer of license. Every license issued pursuant to this chapter may,
for a fee as outlined in this code, and upon application by the licensee
and for good cause shown, be transferred by the Village Board from one
location (the original premises) to another location within the Village,
but no licenses shall be entitled to more than one transfer in any one
license year. Whenever a license is transferred, the Village Clerk-
Treasurer shall forthwith notify the Wisconsin Department of Revenue
of such transfer (the "transfer").
B. All provisions of this article apply to a transfer; therefore, in the event
of a transfer and the applicant is not the title owner of the premises to
which such license shall be transferred, the requirements of § 189-8B
continue to apply.
C. A alcohol beverage license is not transferable from the licensee to any
other person or entity, except pursuant to Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin
Statutes and upon application and approval of the Village Board.61
A. The Village Board shall have the power to revoke or suspend any license
issued under this chapter on the grounds designated in § 125.12 of the
Wisconsin Statutes, or for any other valid reason.
B. The proceedings shall be commenced by a summons, signed by the
Village Clerk-Treasurer, directed to any peace officer commanding the
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 189-11 HOBART CODE § 189-14
1:230
§ 189-15. Restrictions on issuance of licenses.
In addition to all other provisions set forth in this article and Chapter 125
of the Wisconsin Statutes, the following restrictions on issuance of licenses
shall apply:
licensee to appear before the Village Board on a day certain and at a
place named in such summons, not less than 20 days from the date it is
served on the licensee, to show cause why his or her license or licenses
should not be revoked or suspended. The summons may be served on
the licensee personally or upon the person in charge of the premises. A
complaint signed by the Village President, stating the grounds for the
proposed revocation or suspension, shall be served at the same time as
the summons.
C. If the licensee does not appear at the hearing, the complaint shall be
taken as true. If the licensee appears at the hearing and denies the
complaint, each party may produce witnesses and be heard by counsel.
If upon such hearing the Board shall find that any of the alleged
grounds stated in the complaint are more likely true than not true, the
license may be suspended for not less than 10 days nor more than 90
days, or be revoked. If the Board shall find the complaint to be more
likely untrue than true, the proceedings shall be dismissed without cost
to the accused. When a license is suspended or revoked, it shall be so
entered of record by the Village Clerk-Treasurer, and the Village Clerk-
Treasurer shall forthwith notify the Wisconsin Department of Revenue
of such suspension or revocation. No other license shall be granted to
such person within 12 months of the date of a license revocation nor
shall any part of the money paid for any license so suspended or
revoked be refunded.
D. Any license granted but not issued or issued and not used due to the
premises not being open for business for a period in excess of six
months during a licensing year is presumed invalid. Upon allegation,
the Village Board may order a hearing to determine the validity of such
license by ordering the licensee to show cause why such license should
not be revoked.
A. No license under this chapter shall be issued to any person acting as
agent for or in the employ of another.
B. No retail Class "B" intoxicating liquor license shall be issued to any
person who does not have a retail Class "B" fermented malt beverage
license.
C. No license for the sale of fermented malt beverages or intoxicating
liquor shall be issued for premises less than 300 feet from any
established public school, parochial school, hospital or church. Such
distance shall be measured by the shortest route along the highway
from the closest point of the boundary of such school, church or
hospital to the closest entrance to such premises.
§ 189-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-15
1:231
§ 189-16. Operator's license.
D. A license for the sale of fermented malt beverages and/or intoxicating
liquor shall be issued only for premises located in a commercial zone
that permits the sale of fermented malt beverage and/or intoxicating
liquor.
E. No license shall be issued to any person until such person has obtained
a valid federal special tax stamp appropriate to his or her business and
has provided proof to the Village that he or she holds a Wisconsin
seller's permit.
F. No license shall be granted to any entity when more than 50% of the
ownership of such entity, whether represented by stock or other
beneficial control, is held by any person or persons not themselves
individually eligible for a license under this article and/or Chapter 125
of the Wisconsin Statutes.
G. No license for the sale of fermented malt beverages or intoxicating
liquors shall be issued to any applicant for any premises until all
delinquent municipal taxes, assessment or other fees have been paid by
the applicant and/or title owner to the Village Clerk-Treasurer. This
applies to all municipal licenses, not just alcohol beverage licenses.62
A. The Village Board may issue a license known as an "operator's license,"
which shall be granted pursuant to the Village's discretion and upon
application in writing filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer. An
operator's license may be issued only to natural persons who:
(1) Do not have an arrest or conviction record, subject to §§ 111.321,
111.322 and 111.335, Wisconsin Statutes, which are incorporated
by reference herein, said statutes in part describing prohibited
bases of discrimination of age, race, creed, color, handicap, marital
status, sex, national origin, ancestry, arrest record or conviction
record;
(2) Have been a resident of this state continuously for at least 90 days
prior to the date of application;
(3) Have attained the age of 18 years by the time of issuance;
(4) Have not been a habitual law offender or convicted of a felony,
unless the person has been duly pardoned; and
(5) Have completed a responsible beverage server training course.
Persons are exempt from the training course requirement if they
renew an existing operator's license.
B. For all premises operating under a Class "A" and Class "B" license for
fermented malt beverages and "Class A" and "Class B" for intoxicating
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 189-15 HOBART CODE § 189-16
1:232
liquor, a licensee, or some other person who has an operator's license
and is responsible for the acts of all persons serving any fermented
malt beverages or intoxicating liquor to customers, shall be present at
all times while such premises are open for business. For purposes of
this subsection, any member of the licensee's immediate family who
has attained the legal drinking age shall be considered the holder
of an operator's license. No person, including underage members of
the licensee's immediate family, other than the licensee, may serve
fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquors in any premises
operated under a Class "A," Class "B," "Class A," or "Class B" unless
he or she has an operator's license, or is at least 18 years of age and
is under the immediate supervision of the licensee or a person holding
an operator's license and who is on the premises at the time of the
service.63
C. The fee for an operator's license is outlined in § 189-6 of this chapter.
D. The Clerk-Treasurer, or the Deputy Clerk in the Clerk-Treasurer's
absence, may issue a temporary or provisional operator's license which
shall be granted upon application in writing filed with the Village Clerk-
Treasurer. A temporary or provisional operator's license may be issued
only to natural persons who have applied for an operator's license
under this section of the Code and who meet the requirements of
Subsection A(1) through (5) of this section.
E. A temporary or provisional operator's license may not be issued to any
person who has been denied a license under this article of the Code by
the Village Board.
F. The fee for a temporary or provisional operator's license is outlined in
§ 189-6 of this Code.
G. A temporary operator's license may only be issued pursuant to Chapter
125 of the Wisconsin Code, which includes issuance only to operators
employed by or donating their services to nonprofit corporations. A
temporary operator's license shall be valid for any period from one day
to 14 days.
H. A provisional operator's licenses may only be issued pursuant to
Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin Statutes. A provisional operator's license
will expire 60 days after its issuance, or when an operator's license
under this section is issued to the holder, whichever is sooner.
I. A temporary or provisional operator's license may be revoked by the
Clerk-Treasurer if the application of the license holder contains any
false statements. The Clerk-Treasurer may issue the temporary or
provisional license before receipt of the applicant's record check but
shall immediately revoke the temporary or provisional license if the
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 189-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-16
1:233
§ 189-17. Violations and penalties.
§ 189-18. Other licenses.
This article of the Code shall not be construed as prohibiting, limiting,
or restricting the Village Board from granting any other type or class of
fermented malt beverage or intoxicating liquor license which it is, or may
be, authorized to grant by the laws of the State of Wisconsin.
§ 189-19. Hour restrictions.65
Hour restrictions shall be as provided in §§ 125.32(3) and 125.68(4), Wis.
Stats.
record check indicates the applicant has failed to meet any of the
requirements under this section of the article.
J. Any violation of the terms of the article, or any of the laws of the State
of Wisconsin applicable to the sale of Fermented Malt Beverages and
Intoxicating Liquors, by any person holding any type of operator's
license shall be cause for revocation of said license.
A. Any person who, either personally or by his agents or employees, shall
violate any of the provisions of the Village Code or Chapter 125 of the
Wisconsin Statutes shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the
penalties provided in § 1-3.64
B. Upon conviction of a violation of the provisions of this article or any of
the laws of the State of Wisconsin applicable to the sale of fermented
malt beverages or intoxicating liquors, the license authorizing such
sales shall be subject to revocation by the court which tries the violation
or as provided by § 189-14. In the event of a conviction for a second
offense during any one license year for a violation of this article or
Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin Statutes, any license which may have
been issued by the Village shall, without notice, be forthwith forfeited
by the licensee.
C. Upon conviction of a violation pursuant to this section, any penalty shall
be assessed against the premises' real estate as special taxes.
D. In regards to the enforcement of this article, including any penalties as
herein set forth, the applicant and title owner consent to the special
assessments set forth in Subsection C and the exclusive jurisdiction of
the Village or the Brown County Circuit Court for State of Wisconsin.
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 189-16 HOBART CODE § 189-20
1:234
§ 189-20. Display and sale.66
No person, firm or entity which holds, or is acting for or on behalf of the
holder of, a retail Class "A," Class "B," "Class A," or "Class B" license shall:
A. Sell, offer for sale, or display for sale, any fermented malt beverages
and/or intoxicating liquor in a common area from which such person,
firm, entity or corporation shall sell, offer for sale, or display for sale,
any goods, products, things or services which are not immediately and
directly related to the serving or consumption of any fermented malt
beverage or intoxicating liquor.
B. Allow or permit a person who is not of sufficient age to lawfully
purchase a fermented malt beverage and/or intoxicating liquor, to enter
and/or remain in an area where a fermented malt beverage and/or
intoxicating liquor is sold, offered for sale or displayed for sale, unless
such person is accompanied by an adult parent or legal guardian.
C. Allow or permit a person to purchase a fermented malt beverage or an
intoxicating liquor if that person is not of sufficient age to lawfully make
such purchase.
D. Allow or permit a person who has purchased any goods, product or
thing in an area where fermented malt beverages and/or intoxicating
liquors are sold, offered for sale or displayed for sale, to exit such area
without first paying for the same and having all such goods, products
and things (except for fermented malt beverages) in a bag, carton or
other container furnished by the seller and which is separate from any
container furnished by the manufacturer or distributor.
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 189-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-20
1:235

ARTICLE II
Underage and Intoxicated Persons
[Adopted as § 125.0 of the 2000 Code]
§ 189-21. Possession; proof of age; presence on licensed premises.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, all provisions of
Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin Statutes, as the same may hereafter be
amended from time to time, including but not limited to those provisions
describing and defining regulations with respect to underage and
intoxicated persons, their presence on licensed premises, possession and
proof of age, are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this
article as if fully set forth therein. Any act required to be performed or
which is prohibited by Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin Statutes is required
or prohibited by this article. The penalty for violation of any provision of
this article shall be imposed as provided in Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin
Statutes, with the exception that imprisonment shall not be ordered.
§ 189-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-21
1:237
Chapter 194
MINING, NONMETALLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Erosion control and stormwater
management — See Ch. 150.
Explosives and blasting — See Ch. 156.
Zoning — See Ch. 295.
§ 189-21 HOBART CODE § 189-21
1:238
Part 1
[ARdeogputeladt iAosn §O1f2 N.0o nOmf Tethael l2ic0 0M0i nCiondge]
ARTICLE I
Nonmetallic Mining
§ 194-1. Purpose of chapter.
Nonmetallic mining is recognized as an important industry which
contributes to the Village's economic and social well-being, but which risks
damage to the long-term physical environment and the tax base of the
Village. It is the purpose of this Part 1 to establish regulations for
nonmetallic mining and site reclamation that will protect the environment
and the tax base both during and after the conduct of mining operations.
§ 194-2. Definitions.
As used in this Part 1, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
ABANDONMENT OF OPERATIONS — The cessation of nonmetallic mining
operations for more than 360 consecutive days where the cessation is not
specifically set forth in an operator's application, operation or reclamation
plan or permit, or by other written request deemed sufficient by the Village.
Abandonment of operations does not include the cessation of activities due
to labor strikes or natural disasters.
ENLARGEMENT — Any horizontal or vertical increase beyond dimensions
of the original application for the project site and shall be subject to the
diminishing assets rule.
ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION — The contaminating or rendering unclean
or impure the air, land or waters of the state or making the same injurious
to public health, harmful for commercial or recreational use, or deleterious
to fish, bird, animal or plant life.
MODIFICATION — Any vertical or horizontal increase or decrease within
the dimensions of the original application for the project site.
NONMETALLIC MINING or NONMETALLIC MINING OPERATION —
Operations or activities for the extraction from the earth for sale or use
by the operator of mineral aggregates such as stone, sand, gravel and
nonmetallic minerals such as asbestos, beryl, clay, feldspar, peat, talc and
topsoil-related operations or activities such as excavation, grading or
dredging if the purpose of those operations or activities is the extraction
of mineral aggregates and nonmetallic minerals and related processes such
as crushing, screening, scalping, dewatering and blending. "Nonmetallic
mining" or "nonmetallic mining operation" does not include or allow the
following activities or uses by way of illustration, which include but are
not limited to: manufacture of concrete building blocks or other similar
products, asphalt or hot blacktop mixing and production of ready-mix
concrete.
§ 194-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-2
1:239
NONMETALLIC MINING REFUSE — Waste soil, rock, mineral, liquid,
vegetation and other waste material resulting from a nonmetallic mining
operation. This term does not include merchantable by-products resulting
directly from or displaced by the nonmetallic mining operation.
NONMETALLIC MINING SITE or PROJECT SITE or SITE — The location
where a nonmetallic mining operation is proposed to be conducted or is
conducted, including all surface areas from which minerals are removed,
related storage and processing areas, areas where nonmetallic mining
refuse is deposited, and areas disturbed by the nonmetallic mining
operation by activities such as the construction or improvement of roads or
haulageways.
OPERATOR — Any person who is engaged in a nonmetallic mining operation
or nonmetallic mining site reclamation or who applies for or holds a
nonmetallic mining permit issued under a nonmetallic mining reclamation
ordinance, whether individually, jointly or through subsidiaries, agents,
employees, contractors or subcontractors.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — The owner and operator of a proposed or existing
nonmetallic mining site and all owners of property located within 1,000 feet
of the boundaries of a proposed or existing nonmetallic mining site.
PERMIT — Any permit which may be required under this section of an
operator as a condition precedent to commencing or continuing nonmetallic
mining at a project site.
RECLAMATION — The rehabilitation of a nonmetallic mining site,
including, but not necessarily including, and not limited to, removal of
nonmetallic mining refuse, grading of the site, replacement of topsoil,
stabilization of soil conditions, establishment of vegetative cover, control
of surface water and groundwater, prevention of environmental pollution,
construction of fences and, if practical, restoration of plant, fish and wildlife
habitat.
REPLACEMENT OF TOPSOIL — The replacement of the topsoil which was
removed and disturbed by a nonmetallic mining operation or the provision
and placement of soil which is at least as adequate, in the opinion of the
Village, as the topsoil which was removed or disturbed for the purposes or
providing adequate vegetative cover and stabilization of soil conditions.
RIPRAP — A quantity of durable stones or concrete pieces of varying size
and shape, placed as a protective layer over soil in such a manner that the
smaller pieces fill the spaces between the larger pieces. Concrete pieces are
less desirable than stones for this use, and those with exposed reinforcing
rods shall not be used.
TOPSOIL — That material (normally the A and upper part of the B horizon)
which, based upon the official national cooperative soil survey, is acceptable
for respreading on the surface of regraded areas to provide a medium which
sustains a dense plant growth capable of preventing wind and water erosion
of the topsoil and other materials beneath.
VILLAGE — The Village of Hobart.67
§ 194-2 HOBART CODE § 194-3
1:240
§ 194-3. Applicability.
This Part 1 is applicable to all nonmetallic mining sites within the Village
of Hobart. This Part 1 applies to any portion of a nonmetallic mining site,
including unreclaimed portions of a site, which was mined prior to the
effective date of this Part 1.
§ 194-4. Exempt activities.
This Part 1 does not apply to the following activities:
§ 194-5. Applications for permits.
A. Excavations or grading by a person solely for domestic use at his or her
residence.
B. Excavations or grading conducted for highway construction purposes
within the highway right-of-way.
C. Grading conducted for farming, preparing a construction site or
restoring land following a flood or natural disaster.
D. Excavations for building construction purposes.
E. Any mining operation, the reclamation of which is required in a permit
obtained under Chapter 293, Wis. Stats.
F. Any activities conducted at a soil or hazardous waste disposal site
required to prepare, operate or close a solid waste disposal facility
under §§ 289.10 to 289.33 or a hazardous waste disposal facility under
§§ 291.001 to 291.97, Wis. Stats.; provided, however, that section
applies to activities related to solid or hazardous waste disposal which
are conducted at a nonmetallic mining site separate from the solid or
hazardous waste disposal facility, such as activities to obtain
nonmetallic minerals to be used for lining, capping, covering or
constructing berms, dikes or roads.
G. Any nonmetallic mining site or portion of a site which is subject to
permit and reclamation requirements of the Department of Natural
Resources under §§ 30.19, 30.195 and 30.20, Wis. Stats.
A. General requirement. An operator shall obtain a nonmetallic mining
permit prior to engaging in nonmetallic mining or the enlargement of a
site. Such permit applications are subject to public hearing before the
Village Board. Permits shall be denied if the Village Board finds that the
project does not conform with the minimum standards set forth in this
Part 1 or if the applicant has failed or continues to fail to comply with
this section.
67.Editor's Note: The original definition of "Village Quarry Advisory Committee," which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 194-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-5
1:241
B. Application. The application for a permit shall be submitted to the
Village Clerk-Treasurer on forms provided by the Village. The
application for a mining permit shall be signed by the applicant and
shall be accompanied by information which shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
(1) General information. The name and address of the operator.
(2) Lease(s). A signed copy of the lease(s) which authorizes the
operator to enter upon the lessor's land for the purpose of mining
as defined in this section. The expiration date of the lease shall
clearly be indicated thereon.
(3) Legal description. A legal description and survey map of the tracts
of land to be involved and affected by the proposed operation and
the approximate total number of acres involved.
(4) General map. Five copies of a general map which shall be drawn at
a scale of no less than one inch equals 400 feet and shall include
the following:
(a) Property boundaries of the operator's owned and/or leased
land consistent with the legal description for the premises.
(b) Location and names of all known streams, roads, railroads,
utility lines on or immediately adjacent to the site.
(c) Location of all structures owned by parties in interest within
1,000 feet.
(d) Names and addresses of parties in interest.
(e) Boundaries for the site.
(f) Location and description of mining site boundary stakes and
permanent reference point.
(g) Zoning of the site.
(h) Existing and proposed drainage within and without the site of
operations to a distance of 500 feet reflecting the handling of
all waters, natural, pumped, surface and identify wetlands
thereon.
(i) Locate and identify setbacks.
(5) Operation plan. The operation plan shall include information about
the site, a legal description of the proposed nonmetallic mining
operation, methods and procedures to be used in mining the site,
including the following:
(a) Type of mining, processing and transportation equipment to be
used.
§ 194-5 HOBART CODE § 194-5
1:242
§ 194-6. Permit approval and appeal process.
(b) Type of materials to be extracted.
(c) A description of the proposed horizontal and vertical limits of
the proposed operation plan.
(d) Primary travel routes to be used to transport material to
processing plants or markets.
(e) Measures to be taken to control noise, dust and vibrations from
the operations and/or a written explanation of why such
measures are not needed.
(f) If explosives are to be used in the operation, a copy of the
blaster's explosive use plan should be on file with the Village.
(g) A statement that the applicant has complied with all Wisconsin
Statutes, Administrative Code provisions and Village/county
ordinances regulating erosion control, wetlands, navigable
streams, air quality, zoning, water drainage and discharge
from the site of operation and that all required plans and
permits have been submitted and/or obtained by the applicant.
(6) Reclamation plan. The permit shall be subject to the provisions and
requirements of §§ 295.11 to 295.20, Nonmetallic Mining
Reclamation, Wis. Stats.
(7) Certificate of insurance. Each application for a permit herein or a
renewal thereof shall be accompanied by a certificate of insurance
for a commercial general liability policy, and said policy of
insurance shall have limits of coverage of not less than $1,000,000
in the aggregate, and $500,000 per occurrence and the Village
shall be named as an additional insured on applicant's policy of
liability insurance.
(8) Other information. The Village Board may require the submittal of
such other information as may be necessary to determine the
nature of the nonmetallic mining operation and proposed
reclamation and the effect on the surrounding area. The Village
Board may waive portions of the specified information if it is
satisfied that, because of the nature or method of the operation,
such information is not relevant or is unnecessary to a full and
proper evaluation of the application. In determining what
information shall be waived, the Village Board shall take into
account, among other things, the nature of the applicant's
operation and whether the operation is a legally preexisting
operation. It shall be the obligation of the applicant to request any
such waiver. Such request shall set forth the justification for such
waiver.
§ 194-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-6
1:243
A. Standards for evaluation and approval. The Village Board, in
conjunction with Village's consultants, shall review the site plan,
existing and proposed structures, architectural plans, neighboring land
and water uses, parking areas, driveway locations, highway access,
traffic generation and circulation, drainage, the proposed operation,
the effects of the proposed use, structure, operation and improvement
upon flood damage protection, water quality, shoreland cover, natural
beauty and wildlife habitat, quality of life of the neighborhood and
Village and any other pertinent requirements deemed necessary by the
Village Board so as to eliminate, alleviate or control any unreasonable
hazard, danger, harm, risk or nuisance that exists or could develop as a
result of the operation and reclamation for which the application is
made. In making such determinations, the Village Board shall consider
whether or not the applicant is applying as to a legal preexisting
operation and use and the rights which may have accrued to such
applicant as a result thereof.
B. Public hearing.
(1) Within 30 days after receipt of a complete permit application and a
recommendation from the Village Planning and Zoning
Commission, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall schedule a public
hearing on the application before the Village Board; the application
shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission and the
Village's consultants for its recommendation prior to Village Board
action.
(2) Notice of the aforementioned public hearing shall be published as a
Class 2 notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the
Village of Hobart. In addition, notice of said public hearing shall be
mailed to the last-known address of all owners of property within
500 feet of the subject property. Failure to receive notice shall not
invalidate any action taken by the Village Board.68
(3) At the hearing on an application for a nonmetallic mining permit,
the Village Board shall hear and receive any evidence or sworn
testimony presented by the applicant or an authorized agent. At the
conclusion of the applicant's presentation, the Village Board shall
hear first any public comments from those in support of the
application then from those in opposition to the application and
finally the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the Village's consultants. The applicant shall be
given an opportunity to respond to any adverse comments,
evidence or recommendations.
(4) Approval or denial. Within 30 days after the hearing, the Village
Board shall either grant, deny or grant with modification the
application based upon specific findings and conclusions. The
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 194-6 HOBART CODE § 194-6
1:244
§ 194-7. Minimum reclamation standards.
The permit shall be subject to the provisions and requirements of
Subchapter I of Chapter 295, Wis. Stats. and Part 2, Nonmetallic Mining
Reclamation, of this chapter.
§ 194-8. Standards applied to all permits.
Village Board may grant an application conditioned upon meeting
certain operational and reclamation provisions and standards,
which shall not be less stringent than the minimum standards
hereinafter set forth. In deciding upon an application for a legally
preexisting operation, the Village Board shall take into account the
preexisting nature and circumstances of the operation.
(5) Appeal. Appeals from the decision of the Village Board in granting
or denying a license shall be to the Circuit Court.
(6) All stone quarries as nonmetallic mining operations legally existing
at the effective date of this Part 1 shall not be subject to the public
hearing requirements except for enlargement.
A. Right of access. The filing of an application shall grant the Village and
its officers, consultants and agents the right of access onto the site and
contiguous lands owned or leased by the applicant for the purpose of
inspecting the site and adjacent lands for pre-permit issuance
inspections, for compliance with the permit if issued and for any other
purpose relative to this section. Except in emergencies, access shall be
granted during normal business hours with reasonable notice to the
operator. Inspectors shall report to the person in charge of the site and
comply with established safety rules and regulations.
B. After the issuance of a permit all nonmetallic mining operations as a
condition of their permit shall comply with all Wisconsin State Statutes,
Administrative Code provisions, and Village/county ordinances
regulating erosion control, wetlands, navigable streams, air quality,
zoning, water drainage and discharge from the site of operation and
that all required plans and permits have been submitted and/or
obtained by the applicant.
C. Boundary staking. All excavation and phase boundaries, if any, shall be
staked or otherwise marked per the survey by the operator and
inspected by the Village prior to commencing operations on a site.
Stakes shall be made of steel consisting of at a minimum a two-inch
pipe. Stakes shall be placed on all corners of the site and additional
stakes shall be placed every 300 feet between corner stakes. Stakes
shall be set so they are at least five feet above ground level and painted
so they are visible.
§ 194-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-8
1:245
D. Plans on site. A copy of the plans and specifications returned by the
Village at the time of permit issuance shall be kept on the project site
throughout the entire excavation and reclamation period.
E. Permit period. Permits shall be granted for a one-year period of time
and shall expire on December 31. Permits shall be on a calendar-year
basis.
F. Limits of operation. Projects shall be limited to approved dimensions.
G. Conflicts with other regulations. It is the responsibility of the operator
to obtain any local, state or federal permits or approvals.
H. Compliance with reclamation. The operator shall comply with
progressive reclamation plans, if any, and final reclamation plans for
the site.
I. Notification of commencement and cessation. The operator shall notify
the Village in writing at least 15 days prior to initial nonmetallic mining
operations and at least 30 work days prior to final completion of project
reclamation. All phases within a site shall also comply with the
notification requirements above. When a phase is complete, the
operator shall notify the Village Board for approval of the reclamation
before entering the next phase.
J. Records of operations. All records of the permittee regarding the
conduct of the nonmetallic mining operation which are reasonably
needed for the proper monitoring and evaluation of the operation or the
enforcement of this Part 1 shall be subject to inspection by the Village
officials at all reasonable times; provided, however, that Village
personnel, to the extent provided by law, shall take reasonable steps to
prevent disclosure of records which the operator advises in writing
contain privileged trade secret information.
K. Complaints of violations. In the event of a complaint of a violation of this
section, the plan of operation or the plan of reclamation, the permittee
shall be notified thereof in writing by the Village and shall respond to
the Village in writing within 10 working days of notification by the
Village. In the event the permittee shall fail to respond or shall deny any
violation without reasonable grounds, the permittee shall be liable for
the reasonable costs of investigation of such complaint, including the
cost of any experts if after hearing it has been determined that there
has been a violation of this Part 1.
L. Other conditions. The Village may apply such other conditions or
requirements as are necessary to ensure the proper operation and the
progressive and final reclamation in a manner consistent with this
section and to limit any adverse environmental impacts. Standards
contained in Wisconsin Administrative Code Transportation 207 or in
State of Wisconsin Department of Transportation standards
specifications for road and bridge construction may be applied to any
appropriate aspect of this Part 1.
§ 194-8 HOBART CODE § 194-8
1:246
(1) Hours of operation.
(a) These time parameters only restrict the operation of crushing
equipment and drilling operations for blasting purposes.
Requests for permanent hours of operation beyond those listed
below will be subject to approval of the Village Board through
the permit process. Extension of these hours in emergency
situations may be approved by the Village President or his
designee.
6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, April 1 to
September 30 (crushing equipment)
6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, October 1 to
March 31 (crushing equipment)
6:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m., Saturday, all year (crushing
equipment)
7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, all year
(drilling equipment)
(b) The following hours of operation apply to trucking and loader
operations. Requests for permanent hours of operation beyond
those listed below will be subject to approval of the Village
Board through the permit process. Extension of these hours in
emergency situations may be approved by the Village
President or his designee.
5:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, all year
5:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m., Saturday, all year
No operations on Sunday or holidays
(c) Nonemergency temporary modifications to the hours of
operation, not to exceed 14 days, may be approved subject to
the following process: [Amended 4-19-2011]
[1] The permit applicant shall submit to the Village a written
request identifying the scope, nature, duration and reason
for the requested temporary modification.
[2] The written request shall be reviewed by the Village
President (or designee) and Village Administrator (or
designee) with the permit applicant (or designee) as soon
as practicable.69
[3] The Village shall send notification to all property owners
and residents within 2,000 feet of the quarry perimeter of
the request for temporary modification to allow area
property owners and residents an opportunity to voice
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 194-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-8
1:247
§ 194-9. Renewal of permit.
concerns or support. Notification, at minimum, to be by
regular U.S. Mail within three business days of the
meeting in Step 2.
[4] The Village President (or designee) and Village
Administrator (or designee) shall review all comments
received with the permit applicant no sooner than five
business days after the notification in Step 3.
Modifications to the requested temporary modifications
may be made in this meeting.
[5] The Village President (or designee) shall approve or deny
the request for temporary modifications within five
business days of the meeting in Step 4.
(2) Setbacks. The nonmetallic mining operation shall be set back a
minimum of 100 feet from the right-of-way line of all highways,
streets or roads and all exterior property lines and a minimum of
500 feet to the nearest residence. Uses accessory to the
nonmetallic mining operation such as parking and loading areas
and stockpiles of materials except for landscaped berms shall be
set back a minimum of 100 feet from the right-of-way line of all
highways, streets or roads and from all property lines. Existing
setbacks for those stone quarries in existence as of the effective
date of this Part 1 shall not be subject to this provision and shall be
located and identified on the general map for the site. The setback
requirements will be applicable for any site enlargement.
(3) Dust control. Opacity limit for all fugitive emissions at the property
line of the site shall comply with DNR regulations; provided,
however, that fugitive dust following blasting operations shall not
exceed twenty-percent opacity at any public road or highway.
(4) Blasting notification. Before any blasting operation may be
conducted in the Village of Hobart, the company or operator shall
give notice thereof by the conspicuous display of a fluorescent flag
and legible sign giving notice of the blasting operations. The flag
and sign shall be displayed at least 24 hours prior to and during all
blasting operations. This notice requirement is in addition to any
other notices required by law or regulation.
A. Applications for permit renewal must be submitted in writing to the
Village Clerk-Treasurer at least 60 days prior to the expiration date of
the existing permit. Such applications shall comply with the provisions
of this Part 1 but need not include any items previously submitted with
a prior application for a permit for such site. Renewal applications may
merely indicate no change in such items. Any previously submitted
items which have been changed from the prior applications shall be
resubmitted showing any such changes.
§ 194-8 HOBART CODE § 194-9
1:248
§ 194-10. Existing nonmetallic mining operations.
All nonmetallic mining operations existing at the effective date of this Part
1 (March 11, 1996) shall, within 30 days of said effective date of this
Part 1, be provided with a copy of this Part 1 via certified mail. Within
90 days of their receipt of this Part 1, operators of existing nonmetallic
mining operations shall submit the necessary plans to bring said operation
into conformity with this Part 1. Such period may be extended for an
additional 90 days upon review and approval by the Village Board of said
written request for extension. Pending the receipt and review of a timely
submitted application by the Village Board, the operation shall be permitted
to continue the existing nonmetallic mining operation at the site for which
an application was submitted. If a permit is denied, the applicant shall cease
nonmetallic mining operations at such site; however, the applicant shall be
given a reasonable period of time for the processing and removal of existing
materials and/or stockpiles.
§ 194-11. Project site modification or enlargement.
B. No permit renewal shall be granted unless the project is in reasonable
compliance with the terms of the existing permit.
C. Permit renewals may be conditioned upon correction of any
unanticipated environmental impacts occurring during the original or
renewal permits.
D. No public hearing shall be required to be held with respect to a renewal
application unless the application provides for an enlargement of the
previously approved site or otherwise provides for an alteration or
change in the method of operations or reclamation previously approved
which might adversely effect the use or enjoyment of nearby properties.
Site enlargement shall be subject to all the provisions and procedures
set forth in § 194-6 of this Part 1.
A. Site modification. An operator may apply for a modification or
cancellation of a project permit or for a change in the reclamation plan
for a project site. The application for the modification, cancellation or
change shall be submitted in writing by the operator and shall identify
the site to be removed or affected by a change in the operation and
reclamation plans.
B. Transfer of permit. When one operator succeeds to the interest of
another in an uncompleted site, the Village Board shall release the first
operator of the responsibilities imposed by the permit, but only if:
(1) Both operators are in compliance with the requirements and
standards of this Part 1.
(2) The new operator assumes the responsibility of the former operator
to complete the reclamation of the entire project site by a written,
witnessed document and provides financial assurance therefor.
§ 194-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-11
1:249
§ 194-12. Fees.
The application for an initial permit or renewal permit requiring a public
hearing under this Part 1 shall be accompanied by a fee as set from time
to time by resolution of the Village Board. An application for a renewal
permit under this Part 1 for which no public hearing is required shall be
accompanied by a fee in the amount set from time to time by resolution of
the Village Board.
§ 194-13. Inspection.
The Village Board or its designee may enter the premises of a nonmetallic
mining site in the performance of its or their official duties, or pursuant to
a special inspection warrant issued under § 66.0119, Wis. Stats., in order
to inspect the premises to act on any application hereunder, to ascertain
compliance with the nonmetallic mining reclamation ordinance and permit,
or to investigate any alleged violation. It shall be a condition of a permit
issued hereunder that, upon request, such person shall be granted access to
the premises during hours of operation for purposes of any such inspection,
provided that applicable safety laws, rules and regulations are adhered to.
§ 194-14. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
C. Site enlargement. Any proposed enlargement shall be processed as a
new application pursuant to this Part 1. All provisions of this section
shall apply to the proposal.
A. Enforcement. The following are criteria that the Village Board may
consider for issuance, reissuance, suspension or revocation of a
nonmetallic mining permit:
(1) Compliance with the reclamation standards established by the
State of Wisconsin.
(2) Submittal to the Village Board of the Village of Hobart a
nonmetallic mining operation plan and compliance with the
operation plan.
(3) Submittal to the Village Board of the Village of Hobart of a
nonmetallic mining reclamation plan and compliance with the
operation plan as required by state law.
(4) Maintaining the certificate of insurance required by the Village
Board of the Village of Hobart.
(5) Compliance with the operational hours for operation of the
nonmetallic mining operation.
(6) Installation, provision and maintenance of adequate and necessary
physical structures, equipment and operational controls as
determined by the Village Board to prevent public nuisances and to
protect the public health and safety to persons residing near the
§ 194-11 HOBART CODE § 194-14
1:250
nonmetallic mining operation or person entering the nonmetallic
mining operation, including public nuisances associated with noise,
dust, odors, fires, explosions, water pollution, air pollution and
erosion.
(7) Attempts made by the permittee or party in interest to comply with
the provisions of this Part 1.
(8) Consideration of extenuating circumstances and matters beyond
the control of the permittee or party in interest.
B. Suspension/revocation.
(1) Unless expressly provided herein or by other Village of Hobart
ordinance provisions, the nonmetallic mining permit may be
suspended or revoked for cause for substantial noncompliance with
this Part 1 after the proper Village of Hobart hearing noted below
unless in an emergency condition determined by the Village Board
of the Village of Hobart wherein the license, registration or permit
can be suspended temporarily for a set time period. Prior to any
action for suspension or revocation, the Village Board of the Village
of Hobart must, by the Village Clerk-Treasurer of the Village of
Hobart, receive a verified complaint concerning the permittee. The
following persons may file a verified complaint with the Village
Board of the Village of Hobart:
(a) The Village President.
(b) The Village Clerk-Treasurer.
(c) The Village Trustees.
(d) The Village Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector.
(e) Any Village of Hobart resident.
(f) A landowner within 1,000 feet of the blasting site.
(2) The Village Board will make a determination if the allegations of
the complaint are of sufficient magnitude, importance, or otherwise
of such a nature as to require a formal evidentiary hearing.
(3) The person subject to charges for violation of any Village of Hobart
ordinance or any violation of a condition of the nonmetallic mining
permit shall be provided a copy of the verified complaint and notice
of hearing before the Village Board of the Village of Hobart. The
hearing shall be required to be not less than 10 days nor more than
30 days after receipt of notice, unless stipulated in writing by the
Village Board of the Village of Hobart and the person subject to
charges.
§ 194-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-14
1:251
(4) The person subject to charges for violation of any Village of Hobart
ordinance or any violation of a condition of the nonmetallic mining
permit shall be entitled to the following:
(a) Representation by legal counsel.
(b) Right to present and cross-examine witnesses.
(c) Right to subpoena witnesses by the Village President of the
Village of Hobart issuing subpoenas to compel attendance of
witnesses.
(5) The Village Board of the Village of Hobart may, after the hearing for
any person previously issued a nonmetallic mining permit by the
Village Board of the Village of Hobart, act as follows:
(a) Revoke the permit as a final decision.
(b) Suspend the permit for a date certain as a final decision.
(c) Request additional information as an interim decision prior to
taking future action.
(d) Take no action on the permit as a final decision.
(6) The final decision of the Village Board of the Village of Hobart to
revoke or suspend the nonmetallic mining permit shall be subject
to appeal to the Circuit Court, which appeal must be filed with the
Circuit Court not later than 45 days from the mailing of the Village
Board's decision to the permit holder.
C. Penalty.
(1) In addition to the denial, suspension or revocation of a permit
issued under this Part 1, any person who shall violate any provision
of this Part 1 or who shall fail to obtain a permit as required
hereunder shall, upon conviction of such violation, be subject to the
penalties provided in § 1-3. Any default of such forfeiture
determined by a Court of competent jurisdiction shall be subject to
any penalties as provided by §§ 66.115, 66.117, 66.119 and 66.12,
Wis. Stats., as may be amended. [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No.
01-2015]
(2) Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall
constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Part 1 shall preclude
the Village from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or
remove a violation of any provision of this Part 1.
§ 194-14 HOBART CODE § 194-14
1:252
Part 2
[AdoNptoendm1e-t6a-l2li0c1 M5 iBnyinOgr dR.e Ncloa.m 0a7t-i2o0n1470]
ARTICLE II
General
§ 194-15. Title.
The title of this Part 2 shall be "Nonmetallic Mining Reclamation Ordinance
for the Village of Hobart."
§ 194-16. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 2 is to establish a local program to ensure the
effective reclamation of nonmetallic mining sites on which nonmetallic
mining takes place in the Village of Hobart after the effective date of this
Part 2, in compliance with Chapter NR 135, Wisconsin Administrative Code,
and Subchapter I of Chapter 295, Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 194-17. Statutory authority.
This Part 2 is adopted under authority of § 295.14(1), Wis. Stats., § NR
135.32, Wisconsin Administrative Code, and § 61.34(1), Wis. Stats.
§ 194-18. Restrictions adopted under other authority.
The purpose of this Part 2 is to adopt and implement the uniform statewide
standards for nonmetallic mining required by § 295.12(1)(a), Wis. Stats.,
and contained in Chapter NR 135, Wisconsin Administrative Code. It is
not intended that this Part 2 repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere
with any existing rules, regulations, ordinances or permits not concerning
nonmetallic mining reclamation previously adopted pursuant to other
Wisconsin law.
§ 194-19. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Part 2 shall be
held to be the applicable requirements for nonmetallic mining reclamation
and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted
by the Wisconsin Statutes outside the reclamation requirements for
nonmetallic mining sites required by Subchapter I of Chapter 295,
Wisconsin Statutes, and Chapter NR 135, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
Where any terms or requirements of this Part 2 may be inconsistent or
conflicting, the more restrictive requirements or interpretation shall apply.
Where a provision of this Part 2 is required by Wisconsin Statutes, or by a
standard in Chapter NR 135, Wisconsin Administrative Code, and where the
provision is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted to be consistent with
70.Editor’s Note: This Ordinance Superseded Former Part 2, Nonmetallic Mining
Reclamation, Adopted As § 12.1 Of The 2000 Code, As Amended.
§ 194-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-19
1:253
the Wisconsin Statutes and the provisions of Chapter NR 135, Wisconsin
Administrative Code.71
§ 194-20. Severability.
Should any portion of this Part 2 be declared unconstitutional or invalid by
a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this Part 2 shall not be
affected.
§ 194-21. Applicability.
§ 194-22. Administration.
The provisions of this Part 2 shall be administered by Village of Hobart.
§ 194-23. Effective date.
The provisions of this Part 2 shall take effect on January 6, 2015.
§ 194-24. Definitions.
All definitions for the purposes of this Part 2 are those contained in § NR
135.03, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
A. Overall applicability. The requirements of this Part 2 apply to all
operators of nonmetallic mining sites within the Village of Hobart and
as provided in § NR 135.02(1) and (2), Wisconsin Administrative Code,
except where exempted in Subsection B of this section.
B. Exemptions. This Part 2 does not apply to the exempt activities listed in
§ NR 135.02(3), Wisconsin Administrative Code.
71.Editor's Note: Following this section, Ord. No. 07-2014 provided an explanatory note to
authors of ordinances regarding §§ 194-18 and 194-19. The text of this note may be viewed
in the copy of Ord. No. 07-2014 that is on file in the Village offices.
§ 194-19 HOBART CODE § 194-24
1:254
ARTICLE III
Standards
§ 194-25. Reclamation standards.
All nonmetallic mining sites subject to this Part 2 shall be reclaimed in
conformance with the standards contained in Subchapter II of Chapter NR
135, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
§ 194-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-25
1:255

ARTICLE IV
Permitting
§ 194-26. Nonmetallic mining reclamation permit application
required.
No person may engage in nonmetallic mining or in nonmetallic mining
reclamation without possessing a nonmetallic mining reclamation permit
issued pursuant to the applicable reclamation ordinance unless the activity
is specifically exempted in § 194-21 or § NR 135.3(16)(b), Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
§ 194-27. Reclamation plan.
§ 194-28. Financial assurance.
A. Required submittal. The operator of all nonmetallic mining sites shall
apply for a reclamation permit from the Village of Hobart. All
reclamation permit applications under this section shall be
accompanied by the information required by § NR 135.18(1), Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
B. Reclamation permit application contents. The operator of any
nonmetallic mine site shall submit an application that meets the
requirements of § NR 135.18(2), Wisconsin Administrative Code, and
the submittals required under Subsection A of this section to the Village
of Hobart.
A. Reclamation plan requirements. All operators of nonmetallic mining
sites subject to this Part 2 shall prepare and submit a reclamation plan
that meets the requirements of § NR 135.19, Wisconsin Administrative
Code.
B. Existing plans and approvals. To avoid duplication of effort, the
reclamation plan required by § 194-27A may, by reference, incorporate
existing plans or materials that meet the requirements of this Part 2.
C. Approval of reclamation plan. The Village of Hobart shall approve,
conditionally approve or deny the reclamation plan submitted under
this section in writing as part of permit issuance pursuant to § 194-30B.
Conditional approvals of reclamation plans shall be made according to
§ 194-30E, and denials of reclamation plans made according to
§ 194-31. The operator shall keep a copy of the reclamation plan
required by this section, once approved by the Village of Hobart under
this Part 2, at the mine site or, if not practicable, at the operator's
nearest office or place of business.
A. Financial assurance requirements. All operators of nonmetallic mining
sites in the Village of Hobart shall prepare and submit a proof of
financial assurance of successful reclamation that meets the
requirements of § NR 135.40, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
§ 194-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-28
1:257
§ 194-29. Public notice and right of hearing.
§ 194-30. Issuance of nonmetallic mining reclamation permit.
B. Private nonmetallic mines. The operator of any nonmetallic mining site
that applies for a reclamation permit in conformance with § 194-26
shall submit the proof of financial assurance required by § 194-28A as
specified in the reclamation permit issued to it under this Part 2.
C. Public nonmetallic mining. The financial assurance requirements of this
section do not apply to nonmetallic mining conducted by the State of
Wisconsin, a state agency, board, commission or department, or a
municipality.
A. Reclamation plan hearing. The Village of Hobart shall provide public
notice and the opportunity for a public informational hearing as set
forth in § NR 135.20(1) and (2), Wisconsin Administrative Code, for any
nonmetallic mining site for which a complete reclamation permit
application that satisfies § 194-26 is received.
B. Local transportation-related mines. No public notice or informational
hearing is required for a nonmetallic mining reclamation permit issued
to a local transportation-related mine pursuant to § 194-30C.
A. Permit required. No person may engage in nonmetallic mining or
nonmetallic mining reclamation in the Village of Hobart without
obtaining a reclamation permit issued under this section, except
nonmetallic mining sites exempt from this Part 2 as provided in
§ 194-21B.
B. Permit issuance. Applications for reclamation permits for nonmetallic
mining sites that satisfy § 194-26 shall be issued a reclamation permit
or otherwise acted on as provided in § NR 135.21(2), Wisconsin
Administrative Code. The permit shall require compliance with a
reclamation plan submitted by the applicant that conforms with
§ 194-27A, and provision by the applicant of financial assurance that
conforms with § 194-28, payable to the Village of Hobart, prior to
beginning mining.
C. Automatic permit for local transportation-related mines. The Village of
Hobart shall issue an automatic permit under this subsection for any
borrow site operated to provide material for a locally administered
transportation project that meets the criteria in § NR 135.23(1)(a),
Wisconsin Administrative Code. This automatic permit shall be issued
according to the provisions of § NR 135.23(1)(b) through (j), Wisconsin
Administrative Code. [NOTE: A reclamation permit is not required
under this subsection for nonmetallic mine sites that are operated to
provide materials for construction, maintenance and repair of
transportation facilities that are subject to the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation concerning restoration of the nonmetallic mining site,
as provided by § 295.16(1)(c), Wis. Stats. Plan review fees may not be
§ 194-28 HOBART CODE § 194-30
1:258
§ 194-31. Permit denial.
An application for a nonmetallic mining reclamation permit shall be denied
if any of the factors specified in § NR 135.22, Wisconsin Administrative
Code, exist.
§ 194-32. Alternative requirements.
assessed for local transportation-related mines permitted under this
subsection, and the county or municipality may not assess them an
annual fee under § 194-41 that is greater than allowed by § NR
135.23(1)(g), Wisconsin Administrative Code.]
D. Expedited review. Any operator of a nonmetallic mining site may obtain
an expedited review of a reclamation permit application by paying the
expedited review fee specified in § 194-39B. The expedited review shall
be carried out according to the provisions of § NR 135.23(2), Wisconsin
Administrative Code. Such expedited review shall not waive, shorten or
otherwise affect the public notice and right of hearing pursuant to
§ 194-29.
E. Permit conditions. Permits issued under this section may include
conditions as provided in § NR 135.21(2), Wisconsin Administrative
Code. One required condition shall be that new mines shall obtain
financial assurance prior to beginning mining pursuant to § NR 135.40,
Wisconsin Administrative Code.
A. Scope of alternative requirements approvable. An operator of a
nonmetallic mining site may request an alternative requirement to any
reclamation standard established in § 194-25. Such a request may be
made only on the basis of the criteria set forth in § NR 135.26(1),
Wisconsin Administrative Code.
B. Procedures. The operator of a nonmetallic mining site requesting an
alternate requirement in § 194-32A shall demonstrate all the criteria in
§ NR 135.26(1), Wisconsin Administrative Code. This shall be submitted
in writing to the Village of Hobart Planning and Zoning Commission/
Board of Trustees, Village of Hobart, 2990 S. Pine Tree Rd., Hobart, WI
54155. Alternative reclamation requests shall be subject to the same
review, public hearing and approval processes identified in §§ 194-27C
and 194-29A, as provided in § NR 135.26(2), Wisconsin Administrative
Code.
C. Transmittal of decision on request for alternate requirements. The
decision on a request for alternative reclamation requirements shall be
in writing to the applicant and shall include documentation of why the
alternative requirement was or was not approved.
D. Notice to Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. The Village of
Hobart shall provide notice to the Wisconsin Department of Natural
§ 194-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-32
1:259
§ 194-33. Permit duration.
A nonmetallic mining reclamation permit issued under this Part 2 shall last
through operation and reclamation of the nonmetallic mining site, unless
suspended or revoked pursuant to § 194-46B, or as limited under § NR
135.27, Wisconsin Administrative Code, where the mine operator is not the
landowner.
§ 194-34. Permit transfer.
A nonmetallic mining reclamation permit issued under this Part 2 shall be
transferred to a new owner or operator upon satisfaction of the conditions
in § NR 135.28, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
§ 194-35. (Reserved)
§ 194-36. Review.
Any permitting decision or action made by the Village of Hobart under
this Part 2 may be reviewed as set forth in § NR 135.30, Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
Resources as provided in § NR 135.26(3)(a), Wisconsin Administrative
Code.
§ 194-32 HOBART CODE § 194-36
1:260
ARTICLE V
Administration
§ 194-37. Permit modification.
§ 194-38. Permit suspension or revocation.
§ 194-39. Annual operator reporting.
A. By Village of Hobart. A nonmetallic mining reclamation permit issued
under this Part 2 may be modified by the Village of Hobart if it finds
that, due to changing conditions, the nonmetallic mining site is no
longer in compliance with this Part 2. Such modification shall be by an
order conforming with the procedures in § 194-46 and as provided in
§ NR 135.24(1), Wisconsin Administrative Code.
B. At operator's option. If the operator of any nonmetallic mine that holds
a reclamation permit issued under this Part 2 desires to modify such
permit or reclamation plan approved under this Part 2, it may request
such modification by submitting a written application for such
modification to the Village of Hobart. The application for a permit or
plan modification shall be acted on using the standards and procedures
of this Part 2.
C. Required by operator. The operator of any nonmetallic mine that holds a
reclamation permit issued under this Part 2 shall request a modification
of such permit if required under the circumstances set out in § NR
135.27, Wisconsin Administrative Code. Such application for permit
modification shall be acted on using the standards and procedures of
this Part 2.
D. Review. All actions on permit modifications requested or initiated under
this section are subject to review under § 194-36.
A. Grounds. The Village of Hobart may suspend or revoke a nonmetallic
mining reclamation permit issued pursuant to this Part 2 if it finds any
of the grounds listed in § NR 135.25(1), Wisconsin Administrative Code.
B. Procedures. If the Village of Hobart finds grounds for suspending or
revoking a nonmetallic mining reclamation permit set forth in
§ 194-38A, it may issue a special order suspending or revoking such
permit as set forth in § 194-46B.
C. Consequences. The consequences of a reclamation permit suspension
or revocation order under § 194-38B shall be as set forth in § NR
135.25(2) and (3), Wisconsin Administrative Code.
A. Contents and deadline. Annual reports shall be submitted by the
operators of nonmetallic mining sites that satisfy the requirements of
§ NR 135.36, Wisconsin Administrative Code. These reports shall be for
reclamation during a calendar year and submitted in writing within 60
days of the end of each calendar year. Annual reports shall be submitted
§ 194-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-39
1:261
§ 194-40. Plan review fees.
§ 194-41. Annual fees.
until reclamation at each nonmetallic mining site is certified as
complete under § 194-43C.
B. Inspection in lieu of report. The Village of Hobart may, at its discretion,
obtain the information required in § 194-39A by written documentation
of an inspection it completes during a calendar year, as set forth in § NR
135.36(4), Wisconsin Administrative Code.
C. Retention of annual reports. Annual reports submitted under this
section or inspection records that replace them shall be retained by the
Village of Hobart for at least 10 years after the calendar year to which
they apply. These records, or accurate copies of them, shall be made
available to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources upon
written request or during its inspection or audit activities carried out
pursuant to Chapter NR 135, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
A. Amount and applicability. A person who intends to operate a
nonmetallic mining site for which a permit application has been
submitted under § 194-26 shall submit a nonrefundable plan review fee
as established by the Village of Hobart Board by resolution. No plan
review fee may be assessed under this section for any local
transportation-related mine issued an automatic permit under
§ 194-30C. A separate plan review fee shall be paid under this section
for any modification to an existing reclamation plan submitted pursuant
to § 194-37. [NOTE: The prohibition on plan review fees for existing and
local transportation-related mines is required under § NR 135.23(1)(g),
Wisconsin Administrative Code.]
B. Expedited plan review Fee. A person who intends to operate a
nonmetallic mining site for which a permit application has been
submitted under § 194-26 may obtain expedited reclamation plan
review by paying a fee as established by the Village of Hobart Board by
resolution. Such fee shall be in addition to that required in § 194-40A.
C. Relation to annual fee. Any reclamation plan review fee or expedited
reclamation plan review fee collected under this section shall be added
to and collected as part of the first annual fee collected under § 194-41.
[NOTE: Plan review fees collected under this section are required
under § 295.12(3)(e)1.a, Wis. Stats., to equal as closely as possible the
cost of examination and approval of such plans. Section 295.15, Wis.
Stats., requires the regulatory authority to use its fees only for the
administration of its reclamation ordinance. Section NR 135.39(4)(b)1,
Wisconsin Administrative Code, requires that fees collected by the
regulatory authority be used only for reasonable expenses associated
with administration of its reclamation program.
§ 194-39 HOBART CODE § 194-41
1:262
§ 194-42. Regulatory reporting and documentation.
§ 194-43. Completed reclamation: reporting, certification and
effect.
A. Areas subject to fees, procedures, deadline and amount. Operators of
all nonmetallic mining sites subject to reclamation permits issued under
this Part 2 shall pay annual fees to the Village of Hobart. These fees
shall be calculated based on amount of unreclaimed acres of each site,
as defined in § NR 135.39(1)(a), Wisconsin Administrative Code, and
according to its provisions. Such fees apply to a calendar year or any
part of a year in which nonmetallic mining takes place, until final
reclamation is certified as complete under § 194-43. Fees shall be paid
no later than January 31 for the previous year.
B. Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources' share of fee. Fees paid
under this section shall include a share for the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources equal to the amount specified in § NR 135.39(3),
Wisconsin Administrative Code. For sites on which no nonmetallic
mining has taken place during a calendar year, the fee to be paid under
this section for the following year shall be $15. The Village of Hobart
shall forward fees collected under this subsection to the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources by March 31.
C. Village of Hobart's share of fee.
(1) Fees paid under this section shall also include an annual fee due to
the Village of Hobart which shall be as established by the Village of
Hobart Board by resolution.
(2) The annual fee collected by the Village of Hobart under this
subsection for local transportation-related mines issued permits
under § 194-30C may not exceed the amounts set forth in Table 2 of
§ NR 135.39, Wisconsin Administrative Code, and shall include
both a share for the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
and the Village of Hobart. [NOTE: This is required by § NR
135.23(1)(g), Wisconsin Administrative Code.]
A. Reporting. The Village of Hobart shall send an annual report to the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources including the information
required by § NR 135.37, Wisconsin Administrative Code, by March 31
for the previous calendar year.
B. Documentation. The Village of Hobart shall, to the best of its ability,
maintain the information set forth in § NR 135.47(3), Wisconsin
Administrative Code, and make it available to the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources for that agency's audit of the Village
of Hobart's reclamation program pursuant to § NR 135.47, Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
§ 194-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-43
1:263
§ 194-44. Permit termination.
When all final reclamation required by a reclamation plan conforming to
§ 194-27 and required by this Part 2 is certified as complete pursuant
to § 194-43C, the Village of Hobart shall issue a written statement to
the operator of the nonmetallic mining site, thereby terminating the
reclamation permit.
A. Reporting. The operator of a nonmetallic mining site may certify
completion of reclamation for a portion or all of the nonmetallic mining
site pursuant to a reclamation plan prepared and approved pursuant to
this Part 2 and Chapter NR 135, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
B. Reporting of interim reclamation. The operator of a nonmetallic mining
site may report completion of interim reclamation as specified in the
reclamation plan for the site prepared and approved pursuant to this
Part 2 and Chapter NR 135, Wisconsin Administrative Code. Reporting
of interim reclamation shall be done according to the procedures in
§ 194-43A.
C. Certification of completed reclamation. The Village of Hobart shall
inspect a nonmetallic mining site for which reporting of reclamation or
interim reclamation has been submitted pursuant to this subsection
within 60 days of receipt and make a determination in writing in
accordance with § NR 135.40(7)(c), Wisconsin Administrative Code. If it
is determined that interim or final reclamation is complete, including
revegetation as specified in a plan that conforms with § 194-27, the
Village of Hobart shall issue the mine operator a written certificate of
completion.
D. Effect of completed reclamation. If reclamation is certified by the
Village of Hobart as complete under § 194-43C for part or all of a
nonmetallic mining site, then:
(1) No fee shall be assessed under § 194-41 for the area so certified.
(2) The financial assurance required by § 194-28 shall be released.
(3) For sites which are reported as interim reclaimed under § 194-43B,
and so certified under § 194-43C, financial assurance for
reclaiming the certified area shall be appropriately reduced or
waived.
E. Effect of inaction following report of completed reclamation. If no
written response as required by § 194-43C for an area of the mine site
reported as reclaimed or interim reclaimed is given within 60 days of
receiving such request, any annual fee paid to the Village of Hobart for
it under § 194-41 shall be refunded.
§ 194-43 HOBART CODE § 194-44
1:264
ARTICLE VI
Enforcement
§ 194-45. Right of entry and inspection.
For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of
Subchapter I of Chapter 295, Wisconsin Statutes, Chapter NR 135,
Wisconsin Administrative Code, or this Part 2, any authorized officer, agent,
employee or representative of the Village of Hobart may inspect any
nonmetallic mining site subject to this Part 2 as provided in § 295.17(1),
Wis. Stats., and § NR 135.42, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
[NOTE: Under § NR 135.42(1), Wisconsin Administrative Code, persons
entering nonmetallic mine sites under this right of inspection shall obtain
training and provide their own safety equipment as needed to comply with
applicable federal, state and local laws or regulations.]
§ 194-46. Orders and citations.
A. Enforcement orders. The Village of Hobart may issue orders as set forth
in § 295.19(1)(a), Wis. Stats., to enforce Subchapter I of Chapter 295,
Wisconsin Statutes, Chapter NR 135, Wisconsin Administrative Code,
this Part 2, a permit issued pursuant to this Part 2 or a reclamation plan
required by § 194-27 and a permit issued under this Part 2. A violation
of this Part 2, an order or permit issued pursuant to this Part 2 or a
reclamation plan required by § 194-27 and a permit issued under this
Part 2 shall be considered a violation of Subchapter I of Chapter 295,
Wisconsin Statutes, and Chapter NR 135, Wisconsin Administrative
Code.
B. Special orders. The Village of Hobart may issue a special order as set
forth in § 295.19(1)(b) and (c), Wis. Stats., suspending or revoking a
nonmetallic mining reclamation permit pursuant to § 194-38, or
directing an operator to immediately cease an activity regulated under
Subchapter I of Chapter 295, Wisconsin Statutes, Chapter NR 135,
Wisconsin Administrative Code, or this Part 2 until the necessary plan
approval is obtained.
C. Review of orders. An order issued under § 194-46A or B may be
reviewed as provided in § NR 135.43(2), Wisconsin Administrative
Code.
D. Citations. The Village of Hobart may issue a citation under § 66.119,
Wis. Stats., and Village of Hobart Code of Ordinances § 14-1 to collect
forfeitures or require any action needed to enforce Subchapter I of
Chapter 295, Wisconsin Statutes, Chapter NR 135, Wisconsin
Administrative Code, this Part 2, a permit issued pursuant to this Part 2
or a reclamation plan required by § 194-27 and a permit issued under
this Part 2. The issuance of a citation under this subsection shall not
preclude proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the
same or any other matter. Proceeding under any other ordinance or law
§ 194-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-46
1:265
§ 194-47. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of Subchapter I of Chapter 295, Wisconsin Statutes, Chapter
NR 135, Wisconsin Administrative Code, this Part 2, a permit issued
pursuant to this Part 2 or a reclamation plan required by § 194-27 and a
permit issued under this Part 2 may result in forfeitures as provided in
§ 295.19(3), Wis. Stats., and Village of Hobart Code of Ordinances § 14-1.
relating to the same or any other matter shall not preclude the issuance
of a citation under this subsection.
E. Enforcement. The Village of Hobart may submit any order issued under
this § 194-46 to the District Attorney, the Corporation Counsel, the
Municipal Attorney or the Attorney General for enforcement as
provided in § 295.19(1)(d), Wis. Stats.
§ 194-46 HOBART CODE § 194-47
1:266
Chapter 197
MINORS
§ 194-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-47
1:267

ARTICLE I
Curfew
[Adopted as § 3.1 of the 2000 Code]
§ 197-1. Children in street at night.
§ 197-2. Parental violation.
No parent, guardian or other person having legal custody of a child under
the age of 17 years shall permit or suffer such child to loiter, idle or remain
upon any street, alley or other public place in the Village between 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the next day, unless such child is accompanied by his
parent, guardian or other adult person having legal custody of such child.
§ 197-3. Responsibility of operators of places of amusement.
No person operating a place of amusement or entertainment within the
Village, or any agent, servant or employee of any such person, shall permit a
child under the age of 17 years to enter or loiter in such place of amusement
or entertainment between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the next day unless
such child is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult
person having legal custody of such child.
§ 197-4. Responsibility of hotels, motels, and rooming houses.
No person operating a hotel, motel, or lodging or rooming house within the
Village, or any agent, servant or employee of such person, shall permit any
A. No child under the age of 17 years shall loiter, idle or remain upon any
street, alley or other public place in the Village between 10:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. the next day unless such child is accompanied by his parent,
guardian or other adult person having legal custody of such child.
B. Exceptions.
(1) This section shall not apply to a child:
(a) Performing an errand as directed by parent, guardian or
person having lawful custody.
(b) Who is on his own premises or the areas immediately adjacent
thereto.
(c) Whose employment makes it necessary to be upon the streets,
alleys, public places or any motor vehicle after such hour.
(d) Returning home from a supervised school, church or civic
function.
(2) These exceptions shall not, however, permit a child to
unnecessarily loiter about the streets, alleys or public places or be
in a parked motor vehicle on the public street.
§ 197-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 197-4
1:269
child under the age of 17 years to visit, idle, wander or stroll in any portion
of such hotel, motel or lodging or rooming house between 10:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. the next day, unless such child is accompanied by his parent,
guardian or other adult person having legal custody for such child.
§ 197-5. Loitering in school and playground areas.
No person not in official attendance or on official school business shall
enter into, congregate, loiter, wander, stroll, stand or play in any school
building or in or about any playground area adjacent thereto within the
Village between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on official school days.
§ 197-6. Detaining a child.
A child believed to be violating the provisions of this section shall be
taken to the Police Chief or the County Sheriff's Department for proper
identification. Every law enforcement officer while on duty may detain any
child violating §§ 197-1, 197-3, 197-4 and 197-5 until such time as the
parent, guardian, or other adult person having legal custody of the child
shall be immediately notified and the person so notified shall, as soon as
reasonably possible thereafter, report to the Police Chief's or the Sheriff's
office to take the child into custody and shall sign a release for him.
§ 197-7. Warning.
The first time a child is detained by law enforcement officers as provided
in § 197-6, a parent, guardian or person having legal custody shall be
advised as to the provisions of this section; and any violation of this section
occurring thereafter by this child or any other child under such person's
care or custody shall result in a penalty being imposed as herein provided.
§ 197-8. Violations and penalties.72
A. Any parent, guardian or person having legal custody of a child
described in §§ 197-1, 197-3, 197-4 and 197-5 who has been warned in
the manner provided in § 197-7 and who thereafter violates any of the
provisions of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than
$50 nor more than $500 for each offense. No violation of this article
shall be or shall be construed to be a misdemeanor, nor shall
imprisonment be imposed as a punishment for violation of this article
except for failure of the defendant to pay the forfeiture imposed by the
court.
B. Any child who violates this section after being detained and released
under § 197-6 shall be dealt with under Chs. 48 and 938, Wis. Stats.
72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 197-4 HOBART CODE § 197-8
1:270
ARTICLE II
Truancy
[Adopted as § 3.827 of the 2000 Code]
§ 197-9. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
HABITUAL TRUANT — A pupil who is absent from school without an
acceptable excuse under §§ 118.15 and 118.16(4), Wis. Stats., for part or all
of five or more days in which school is held during a semester.
TRUANCY — Any absence of part or all of one or more days from school
during which the school attendance officer, principal or teacher, has not
been notified of a legal excuse of such absence by the parent or the legal
guardian of the absent pupil.
TRUANT — A pupil who is absent from school without an acceptable excuse
under §§ 118.15 and 118.16(4), Wis. Stats., as from time to time may be
amended, for all or part of any day on which school is held during a
semester.
§ 197-10. Violations and penalties.
A. Any pupil under the age of 18 years of age found by the court to be a
truant shall be subject to one or more of the following:
(1) An order for the pupil to attend school.
(2) Subject to § 938.37, Wis. Stats., a forfeiture of not more than $50
plus costs for first violation, or a forfeiture of not more than $100
plus costs for any second or subsequent violation committed within
12 months of a previous violation, up to a cumulative maximum of
not more than $500 for all violations committed during a school
semester.
(3) All or part of the forfeiture plus costs may be assessed against the
pupil, the pupil's parent(s) or guardian(s), or both.
B. Any pupil under the age of 18 years of age found by the court to be a
habitual truant shall be subject to one or more of the following:
(1) Suspension of the person's operating privilege for not less than 30
days nor more than one year. The court may take possession of any
suspended license. If the court takes possession of a license, it shall
destroy the license. The court shall forward to the Department of
Transportation a notice stating the reason for and the duration of
the suspension.73
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 197-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 197-10
1:271
§ 197-11. Contributing to truancy.
(2) An order for the pupil to participate in counseling, a supervised
work program, or other community service as described in
§ 938.34(5g), Wis. Stats. The costs of any such counseling,
supervised work program, or other community service work may be
assessed against the pupil, the parent(s) or guardian(s) of the pupil,
or both.
(3) An order for the pupil to remain at home except during the hours in
which the pupil is attending religious worship or a school program,
including travel time required to get to and from the place of
worship or school program (the order may permit the pupil to leave
his/her home if the pupil is accompanied by a parent or guardian).
(4) An order for the pupil to attend an educational program as
described in § 938.34(7d), Wis. Stats.
(5) An order for the pupil to attend school.
(6) Subject to § 938.37, Wis. Stats., a forfeiture of not more than $500
plus costs for each occurrence. All or part of the forfeiture plus
costs may be assessed against the pupil, the pupil's parent(s) or
guardian(s) of the pupil, or both.
(7) Any other reasonable conditions consistent with this subsection,
including a curfew, restrictions as to going to or remaining on
specified premises and restrictions on associating with other
children or adults.
(8) An order placing the pupil under formal or informal supervision as
described in § 938.34(2), Wis. Stats., for up to one year.
(9) An order for the pupil's parent, guardian, or legal custodian to
participate in counseling at the parent's, guardian's, or legal
custodian's own expense, or to attend the school with the pupil, or
both.
A. Except as provided in Subsection C(2), below, any person 17 years of
age or older who, by act or omission, knowingly encourages or
contributes to the truancy of a pupil shall be subject to the forfeiture of
not less than $50 nor more than $500 plus costs, and upon default of
the payment of the forfeiture or the costs of the prosecution, shall be
imprisoned in the county jail until said forfeiture and costs are paid, but
not to exceed 90 days.74
B. An act or omission contributes to a truancy of a pupil, whether or not
the pupil is adjudged to be in need of protection or services, if the
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 197-10 HOBART CODE § 197-11
1:272
natural and probable consequences of that act or omission would be to
cause the pupil to be truant.
§ 197-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 197-11
1:273

ARTICLE III
Possession or Purchase of Cigarettes and Tobacco Products by
Minors
[Adopted as § 3.830 of the 2000 Code]
§ 197-12. Purchase and possession.
§ 197-13. Violations and penalties.
Persons under 18 shall be penalized $25, plus costs, or a total of $55.
§ 197-14. Tobacco vending machines.76
No retailer may place a vending machine within 500 feet of a school. No
retailer may keep a vending machine in any public place that is open to
persons under the age of 18. A vending machine operator shall attach a
notice in a conspicuous place on the front of his or her vending machines
stating that the purchase of any cigarette or tobacco product by a person
under the age of 18 is unlawful under § 254.92, Wis. Stats., and that the
purchaser is subject to a forfeiture of not to exceed $50. The provisions of
§ 254.92, Wis. Stats., are applicable in the Village.
A. No person under 18 years of age may possess any cigarette or tobacco
products.
B. A person under 18 years of age may purchase or possess such products
for the sole purpose of resale in the course of employment during his
working hours if employed by a retailer licensed under § 134.65(1), Wis.
Stats.75
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 197-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 197-14
1:275

ARTICLE IV
Harboring Minor
[Adopted as § 3.833 of the 2000 Code]
§ 197-15. Harboring minor without parental consent.
Any owner, tenant or person in control of a residence or other facility shall
not allow or permit a child under the age of 18 to loiter, idle or remain
in such residence or upon such property without the consent of the child's
parent, guardian or spouse.
§ 197-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 197-15
1:277
Chapter 201
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 264.
§ 197-15 HOBART CODE § 197-15
1:278
ARTICLE I
Compression Brakes
[Adopted as § 3.10 of the 2000 Code]
§ 201-1. Compression brakes prohibited.
No persons shall use motor vehicle brakes within the Village of Hobart,
which are in any way activated or operated by the compression of the
engine of any such motor vehicle or any unit or part thereof. It shall be an
affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that said compression
brakes were applied in an emergency and were necessary for the protection
of persons and/or property.
§ 201-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall have committed a
traffic violation and a forfeiture per fee schedule plus court costs shall be
imposed.
§ 201-3. Signs.
The Village of Hobart Director of Public Works is authorized and directed to
post appropriate signs consistent with the provisions of this article.
§ 201-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-3
1:279
Chapter 207
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open burning — See Ch. 127.
Noise — See Ch. 201.
Zoning — See Ch. 295.
§ 201-3 HOBART CODE § 201-3
1:280
ARTICLE I
General Nuisances
[Adopted as §§ 3.401 through 3.405, 3.809, 3.812, 3.813 of the 2000
Code; amended 7-6-2010]
§ 207-1. Public nuisances prohibited.
No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist
any public nuisance within the Village of Hobart.
§ 207-2. Nuisances defined.
A. Public nuisances. A public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation,
condition or use of property which shall continue for such length of time
as to:
(1) Substantially annoy, injure, or endanger the comfort, health, repose
or safety of the public.
(2) In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of
property.
(3) Greatly offend the public morals or decency.
(4) Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct, or tend to
obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley,
highway, navigable body of water or other public way.
B. Public nuisances affecting health. The following acts, omissions, places,
conditions, and things are hereby specifically declared to be public
health nuisances, but shall not be construed to exclude other health
nuisances coming within the definition of Subsection A of this section.
(1) All decayed, harmfully adulterated, or unwholesome food or drink
sold or offered for sale to the public.
(2) Carcasses of animals, birds, or fowl not buried or otherwise
disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death.
(3) Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash,
rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, scrap metal or
any material in which flies, mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects,
rats or other vermin breed.
(4) All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies, or other insects can
multiply.
(5) Garbage cans which are not flytight.
(6) All noxious weeds and other rank growth of vegetation.
(7) All animals running at large.
§ 207-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-2
1:281
(8) The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly
ash or industrial dust within the Village in such quantities as to
endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or to
threaten or cause substantial injury to property.
(9) The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or
body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes, refuse,
garbage, or other substances.
(10) Any use of property, substances, or things within the Village
emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous,
noxious, or disagreeable odors, or stenches extremely repulsive to
the physical senses of ordinary persons, which annoy, discomfort,
injure or inconvenience the health of any appreciable number of
persons within the Village.
(11) All abandoned wells not securely covered or secured from public
use.
(12) Any obstruction in or across any watercourse, drainage ditch or
swale.
(13) The deposit of garbage, refuse, or any offensive substance on any
public or private property except as may be permitted by
ordinance.
C. Public nuisances offending morals and decency. The following acts,
omissions, places, conditions, and things are hereby specifically
declared to be public nuisances offending public morals and decency
but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances
offending public morals and decency coming within the definition of
Subsection A of this section.
(1) All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill fame, gambling
houses and buildings or structures kept or restored for the purpose
of prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse or gambling.
(2) All gambling devices, gambling tables and slot machines.
(3) All places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages
are sold, brewed, bottled, manufactured or rectified without a
permit or license as provided by the Village.
(4) Any place or premises where Village ordinances or state laws
relating to public health, safety, peace, morals or welfare are
openly, continuously, repeatedly, and intentionally violated.
(5) Any place or premises resorted to for the purpose of drinking
intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages in violation of the
laws of the State of Wisconsin or the ordinances of the Village.
D. Public nuisances affecting peace and safety. The following acts,
omissions, places, conditions, and things are hereby declared to be
§ 207-2 HOBART CODE § 207-2
1:282
public nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such enumeration shall
not be construed to exclude other nuisances affecting public peace or
safety coming within the provisions of Subsection A of this section.
(1) All ice not removed from the public sidewalks and all snow not
removed from public sidewalks within 24 hours after it has ceased
to fall thereon.
(2) All signs and billboards, awnings and other similar structures over
or near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places frequented by
the public so situated or constructed as to endanger the public
safety.
(3) All buildings erected, repaired or altered within the fire limits of
the Village in violation of the provisions of the ordinances of the
Village relating to materials and manner or construction of
buildings and structures within said district.
(4) All unauthorized signs, signals, markings, or devices which purport
to be or may be mistaken as official traffic control devices placed or
maintained upon or in view of the public highway or railway
crossing.
(5) All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent
persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys, or highways from
obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection
or pedestrian crosswalk.
(6) All limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk, less than
eight feet above the surface thereof or less than 14 feet over the
surface of a public street.77
(7) All use or display of fireworks except as provided by the laws of the
State of Wisconsin and ordinances of the Village.
(8) All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of repair so as
to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary, or otherwise unfit for human
use.
(9) All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are strung
less than 18 feet above the surface of the street or ground.
(10) All loud, discordant and unnecessary noises or vibrations of any
kind tending to unreasonably disturb the peace and quiet of
persons in the vicinity thereof unless the making and the
continuing of the same cannot be prevented and is necessary for
the protection and preservation of the health, safety, life or limb of
some person.
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 207-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-2
1:283
(a) No person occupying or having charge of any building or
premises shall cause, suffer or allow any loud, excessive or
unusual noise in the operation or use of any radio, or other
mechanical or electrical sound-making or -reproducing device
or machine which loud, excessive or unusual noise shall
disturb the comfort, quiet, or repose of persons therein or in
the vicinity.
(b) No person shall use or operate in any public street or place or
in front of or outside of any building, place or premises or in or
through any window, doorway or opening of any building
adjacent to any public street or place any device, apparatus, or
instrument for the amplification of the human voice or sound or
noise or other sound making or sound reproducing device. No
person shall make for the purpose of advertising any
immoderate or excessive use of the voice of any bell, gong,
horn, instrument, article or device.
(c) No person operating or having charge of or occupying any
building or premises shall keep or allow to be kept any animal
or bird which shall habitually by any noise disturb the peace
and quiet of any person in the vicinity thereof.
(d) No person shall park or leave standing for more than 15
minutes in any street in the Village a vehicle containing
livestock, live fowl, or other living animals.
(e) Nothing in this section shall apply to the use of loud speaking
or amplifying systems as follows:
[1] By a school when used in connection with an educational,
athletic, entertaining or recreational purpose.
[2] By a church when used in connection with an educational,
religious or recreational activity.
[3] Within a public park of the Village subject to the rules and
regulations of the Village Board.
[4] The using of loud speaking or amplifying systems after
registering with the Police Department as follows:
[a] An amplifying system may be used on the public
streets of the Village between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m., provided such use does not interfere or
annoy any religious, educational or recreational
gathering and is not audible to the human ear for the
distance of more than 300 feet. The use shall at all
times be under the jurisdiction of the Police
Department who are hereby given the authority to
restrain the use if, in their opinion, the same is a
public nuisance or a public annoyance.
§ 207-2 HOBART CODE § 207-2
1:284
[b] An amplifying system may be used in front of or
outside a building between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m., provided that the same is not audible to the
human ear at a distance of 100 feet. If the use
becomes a public nuisance to disturb the peace and
quiet of any persons, the use shall be discontinued.
(11) The keeping or harboring of any animal or fowl which by frequent
or habitual howling, yelping, barking, crowing or making of other
noises shall greatly annoy or disturb a neighborhood or any
considerable number of persons within the Village.
(12) The obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and all
excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by the
ordinances of the Village or which, although made in accordance
with such ordinances, are kept or maintained for an unreasonable
length of time after the purpose thereof has been accomplished.
(13) All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or unused
basements freely accessible from any public street, alley or
sidewalk.
(14) All abandoned refrigerators or iceboxes from which the doors and
other covers have not been removed or which cannot be opened by
pushing from the inside by a small child.
(15) Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on a public
street, alley or sidewalk or of a public street, alley or sidewalk
which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic
and free use of the streets or sidewalks.
(16) Repeated or continuous violations of the ordinances of the Village
or laws of the State of Wisconsin relating to the storage of
flammable liquids.
(17) Any structure, material or condition which constitutes a fire hazard
or will impair extinguishing of any fire.
(18) Any and all excavations, including basements, which have been
abandoned or for which a building permit has become null and
void, or which permit has been revoked by the Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector.
(19) Any nuisance so defined by the Wisconsin Statutes.
E. Smoke.
(1) Dense smoke. The emission of dense smoke from the smokestack of
any engine or from the smokestack or chimney of any building
within the Village is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and is
prohibited.
§ 207-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-2
1:285
(2) Stationary engine. The owner, lessee, or occupant of any building,
or the fireman, engineer, or any other person having charge or
control of any furnace or stationary engine who shall cause, permit,
or allow dense smoke to issue or to be emitted from the smokestack
or chimney connected with any such furnace or stationary engine
within the Village shall be guilty of creating a public nuisance and
of violating the provisions of this section.
(3) All soot prohibited. The emission of soot, cinders, or coal dust from
any chimney, stack, furnace, or from any building within the Village
is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and is prohibited.
F. Storage of junk.
(1) No person shall store on any property in the Village, any junk,
debris or condition, including, but not limited to: unlicensed and/or
inoperable vehicles, vehicle parts, machinery, machinery
implements, or machinery parts, refrigerators, furnaces, washing
machines, stoves, water heaters, wood, bricks, concrete blocks,
other building materials, upholstered furniture, mattresses,
bedsprings or other furniture not intended for exterior use by the
manufacturer and used or stored on open porches or in yards,
household garbage or refuse not properly contained or stored, or
other unsightly debris or unsightly conditions which may tend to
depreciate property values in the area or create a nuisance, hazard
or eyesore except in an enclosed building which houses such
property from public view, or upon permit issued by the Village, or
as may be allowed as an approved use by Chapter 295, Zoning. See
§ 207-3, Storage of junk regulated.
(2) Lots in residentially developed areas shall be kept free, by the
owner, occupant, or person authorized to use same, of dirt piles,
rubble, grass piles, leaf piles, and any other material or conditions
which might hinder maintenance of the property, except as
provided by the following:
(a) Dirt piles and materials used for landscaping the lot shall be
leveled, used within 30 days of the date of delivery of the dirt.
(b) Dirt piles in commercially and industrially zoned areas shall be
removed within one year of the date of deposit on the property,
completion of site development or expiration of a Village
building permit.
(c) Dirt piles and materials used for landscaping used in
conjunction with properly zoned landscaping businesses or
contractor's yards are permitted.78
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 207-2 HOBART CODE § 207-2
1:286
(d) Compost piles shall be allowed if they meet all of the following
requirements:79
[1] Located in the rear yard as defined by Chapter 295,
Zoning.
[2] Located at least 10 feet from property lines, except for
properties zoned A1 or A2 where the compost pile is not
abutting a residentially zoned property.
[3] Confined in a bin meeting generally acceptable
composting principles.
[4] Managed and maintained odor-free.
[5] Does not contain meat or other animal products.
[6] Kept free of vermin.
[7] Does not pose or create any nuisance condition.
(3) A violation of this section is declared a public nuisance.
G. Unkempt buildings. The exterior of every structure or accessory
structure, residential and nonresidential, including fences, shall be
maintained by the owner, occupant or person authorized to use same, in
good repair and all exterior surfaces thereof shall be kept painted or
covered with exterior siding materials intended for that use by the
manufacturer for purposes of preservation and appearance. The same
shall be maintained by the owner, occupant or persons authorized to
use same, free of broken or missing siding, shingles or exterior
woodwork crumbling stone or brick, excessive chipped, peeling or lack
of paint, missing, broken or deteriorating steps, porches, handrails and
guardrails or any other conditions reflective of deterioration and/or
inadequate maintenance or as may tend to depreciate property values
in the area or create a nuisance or hazard.
H. Weed cutting and lawn care.
(1) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
DEVELOPED LOT — A lot with a finished residential use,
commercial use, institutional use or industrial use building or
building under construction.
NOXIOUS WEEDS — As defined in Wisconsin Statutes § 66.0407,
which is hereby adopted and made a part of this article, and
shall also include common ragweed (Ambrosia artemisiifolia), giant
ragweed (Ambrosia trifida) and burdock (Actrium spp.).
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 207-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-2
1:287
UNDEVELOPED LOTS — Any lot not meeting the developed lot
definition located within a platted subdivision or Certified Survey
Map.
(2) Owner's responsibility.
(a) The owner of every parcel of land within the Village shall
destroy or cause to be destroyed all noxious weeds on every
parcel of land which he/she owns, occupies or controls.
(b) The owner of every parcel of land within the Village shall cut or
cause to be cut all grass, weeds and similar vegetative growth
in excess of eight inches in length/height for developed lots
and 12 inches in length/height for undeveloped lots, including
the public right-of-way adjoining said land, except as follows:
[1] Lands zoned A-1 or A-2 where the property contains a
permitted principal use other than or in addition to a
dwelling. For the purposes of this exception, the yard
around any dwelling on such land is required to comply
with the landscape maintenance provisions of Subsection
H(3).
[2] Lands, used principally for farming, agricultural,
cultivation, harvesting operations including, but not
limited to, crops or livestock. For the purposes of this
exception, the yard around any dwelling on such lands is
required to comply with the landscape maintenance
provisions of Subsection H(3).
[3] Appropriately maintained natural landscaping as provided
in Subsection H(3)(b).
[4] Wooded areas or tree lines where the distance between
trees effectively prevents mowing.
[5] Hilly areas with severe slopes that would prevent safe
mowing.
[6] Lands located in a designated floodplain and/or wetland
area.
[7] Properties owned by governmental entities or where
federal, state or local regulations provide otherwise.
[8] Property or land areas with unusually unique terrain or
circumstances as determined by Village personnel.
(3) Landscape maintenance.
(a) Purpose.
[1] The use of woodlands, prairies, wildflowers, natural
grasses and other native plants in a managed landscape
§ 207-2 HOBART CODE § 207-2
1:288
design can be economical, low-maintenance and effective
in soil and water conservation. However, it is not the intent
of this section to allow vegetated areas to be completely
unmanaged or overgrown.
[2] Areas that present either a direct health hazard or provide
a demonstrated breeding ground for fauna known to
create a safety or health hazard will not be permitted.
Certain noxious weeds defined in this section are
recognized indicators of neglect. The Village recognizes
the desirability of permitting natural vegetation within the
Village limits while maintaining public health and safety at
the same time.
(b) Managed and natural landscaping.
[1] Native and naturalized plants including, but not
necessarily limited to, ferns, wildflowers, grasses, shrubs
and trees may be grown in a managed landscape design or
in naturally maintained conditions such as prairies,
wooded areas, wetlands provided said plants were not
obtained, or are not growing, in violation of any local, state
or federal laws.
[2] Nuisance weeds and noxious weeds as identified in this
article are prohibited in all cases and shall be subject to
abatement.
[3] Managed and natural landscape areas shall not be allowed
to interfere with traffic vision.
(c) Yard neglect.
[1] The front, side and rear yards of a residence, commercial,
institutional or industrial use, shall be maintained with a
lawn, shrubbery, plantings or other surface treatment
consistent with this section for an area equal to the
property's zoning district minimum setback requirements,
except as provided in Subsection H(2)(b).
[2] Rank or unmanaged growth of vegetation identified in
state or local codes is not permitted and is declared to be a
public nuisance.
(4) Noxious weeds and uncut growth; public nuisance; abatement by
the Village. All noxious weeds and uncut vegetative growth as
outlined in this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance
and may be abated by the Village at its option if the owner fails to
comply with this article. In addition to any other penalty provided
in this article, the costs thereof, together with an administrative
charge applied to the bill, imposed each time the growth is abated
shall be charged against the property as a special tax.
§ 207-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-3
1:289
§ 207-3. Storage of junk regulated.
A. Restricted. No person shall store junked or discarded property,
including automobiles, automobile parts, trucks, tractors, refrigerators,
furnaces, washing machines, stoves, machinery or machinery parts,
wood, bricks, cement blocks or other unsightly debris which
substantially depreciates property values in the neighborhood, except
in an enclosure which screens such property from public view or upon
permit issued by the Village Board.
B. Order for compliance. The Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector
may require by written order any premises in violation of this section to
be put in compliance within the time specified in such order and, if the
order is not complied with, may have the premises put in compliance
and the cost thereof assessed as a special tax against the property.
C. Motor vehicle and trailer salvage storage.
(1) Planning and Zoning Commission to establish rules. The Planning
and Zoning Commission shall enact such rules and regulations
including, but not limited to, provisions for fencing, distance from
highways, etc., for the regulation of the dismantling, accumulation
or storage of junked or inoperable motor vehicles and trailers or
parts thereof outside of any building as deemed necessary for the
public health, safety and welfare. Rules and regulations so enacted
shall, after ratification by the Village Board and publication in the
official newspaper, become a part of this section by reference as
though fully incorporated herein.
(2) Permit required. No person shall accumulate or store any junked or
inoperable motor vehicles or trailers or parts thereof outside of any
building on any real estate within the Village unless a permit is
obtained from the Village Clerk-Treasurer for such use. The Village
Clerk-Treasurer shall not issue a permit unless the application is
approved by the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector and a fee
of $100 is paid to the Village Clerk-Treasurer. All permits shall
expire on the 31st day of December of each year and shall be
renewed. A renewal application may be denied for violation of this
section, and if approval is denied, the Zoning Administrator/
Building Inspector shall state the reasons for disapproval on the
application. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall notify the applicant
of disapproval and the applicant shall be given an opportunity to be
heard before the Village Board.
(3) Conformance with rules and regulations of Planning and Zoning
Commission. The Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector shall not
approve an application for a permit to accumulate or store junked
or inoperable motor vehicles and trailers or parts thereof unless
the premises conforms to the rules and regulations of the Planning
and Zoning Commission as follows:
§ 207-3 HOBART CODE § 207-3
1:290
(a) All material not stored within a building shall be enclosed by a
solid fence.
[1] The fence shall be of chain link fabric of No. 9 gauge wire
or heavier, galvanized or aluminum-coated steel; such
fence to have an open mesh no larger than three inches
and be equal to "U.S. Cyclone" or "Sentry Fence" standards
and with slats inserted in the fence which are impervious
to sight.
[2] The fence shall be kept in good state of repair and painted
in uniform color.
[3] The fence shall not be less than six feet in height and of
uniform height and material. If materials stored exceed six
feet, such material shall be screened by natural objects or
plantings.
[4] The fence shall not be less than 25 feet from the street,
curb or road edge.
(b) No material shall rest upon the fence.
(c) There shall be no signs, bulletins and posters posted on the
fence.
(d) All properties with such materials in existence on the date of
enactment of these rules and regulations shall conform to
these requirements within 90 days.
(4) Enforcement. The rules and regulations governing the storage of
junked or inoperable motor vehicles and trailers or parts thereto
shall be enforced by the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector.
(5) Defined. "Motor vehicle" and "trailer" as used herein shall mean
any automobile, truck trailer, semitrailer, tractor, motor bus or any
self- propelled or motor-driven vehicle.
(6) Authority to retain. Any business engaged in automotive sales or
repair may retain disassembled, inoperable, junked or wrecked
motor vehicles, truck bodies, tractors or trailers in the open, on
private property, for a period not to exceed 30 days, after which
such vehicles must be removed.
(7) No semitrailer or van box may be used for storage within the
Village without first securing a permit from the Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector. The Zoning Administrator/
Building Inspector may issue a permit not to exceed six months for
temporary use for a semitrailer as storage if he feels it would not be
unsightly nor diminish the quality of the neighborhood. In the event
that the storage is on a construction site, the Zoning Administrator/
Building Inspector may grant an extension if he thinks it is
warranted.
§ 207-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-4
1:291
§ 207-4. Open cisterns, wells, basements or other dangerous
excavations prohibited.
No person shall have or permit on any premises owned or occupied by
him any open cisterns, cesspools, wells, unused basements, excavations or
other dangerous openings. All such places shall be filled, securely covered
or fastened in such manner as to prevent injury to any person and any cover
shall be of such design, size and weight that the same cannot be removed
by small children.
§ 207-5. Abandoned or unattended refrigerators prohibited.
No person shall leave or permit to remain outside any dwelling, building or
other structure or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling
or other structure under his control in a place accessible to children any
abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container
having an airtight door or lid, snap lock or other locking device which
may not be released from the inside unless such door or lid, snap lock or
other locking device has been removed from such icebox, refrigerator or
container or unless such container is displayed for sale on the premises of
the owner or his agent and is securely locked or fastened.
§ 207-6. Abatement of public nuisances.
A. Inspection of premises. Whenever complaint is made that a public
nuisance exists within the Village, the Chief of Police, Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector or other authorized Village employee
shall inspect or cause to be inspected the premises and shall make a
written report of his/her findings to the Village Administrator.
B. Summary abatement.
(1) Notice to owner. If the inspecting officer shall determine that a
public nuisance exists on private property and that there is great
and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or
decency, the Village Administrator or designee may direct the
appropriate personnel to serve notice on the owner, or, if the owner
cannot be found, on the occupant or person causing, permitting, or
maintaining such nuisance and to post a copy of the notice on the
premises. Such notice shall direct the owner, occupant, or person
causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance to abate or
remove such nuisance within 24 hours and shall state that unless
such nuisance is so abated, the Village will cause the same to be
abated and will charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or
person causing, permitting or maintaining the same.
(2) Abatement by Village. If the nuisance is not abated within the time
provided, or if the owner, occupant or person causing the nuisance
cannot be found, the Village Administrator shall direct the
abatement or removal of such nuisance.
§ 207-4 HOBART CODE § 207-6
1:292
§ 207-7. Cost of abatement.
In addition to any other penalty imposed by this Code for the erection,
contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the
cost of abating a public nuisance by the Village shall be collected as a debt
from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the
nuisance, or shall be assessed against the real estate.
C. Abatement by court action. If the inspecting officer shall determine that
a public nuisance exists on private premises but that the nature of such
nuisance is not such as to threaten great and immediate danger to the
public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, he shall file a written
report of his findings with the Village Administrator, who may cause an
action to abate such nuisance to be commenced per Chapter 823 of the
Wisconsin Statutes.
D. Other methods not excluded. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed
as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the Village or its
officials in accordance with the laws of the State of Wisconsin.
A. Wherever this article imposes the cost of abatement as a special charge
against the premises, the Village elects not to be subject to the
administrative review provisions contained within Chapter 68 of the
Wisconsin Statutes, and establishes the following as a complete and
final review procedure: As a condition precedent to challenging any
special charge, the owner of the premises must timely pay the charge in
full under protest to the Village. An appeal shall be to the Village
Administrator and can be undertaken only by filing a written appeal
with the Village Clerk-Treasurer concurrent with the date of payment.
The written appeal shall specify all grounds for challenge to the amount
of the special charge and shall state the amount of charge that the
appellant considers to be appropriate. Failure to timely and properly
appeal shall deprive the Village Administrator of jurisdiction to hear the
appeal.
(1) The Village Administrator shall have 60 calendar days to consider
an appeal under this subsection. In considering an appeal, the
Village Administrator shall determine whether the charge is fair
and reasonable and, in the event the appeal is granted, whether or
not a refund is due the appellant and the amount of the refund. The
Village Administrator shall conduct a formal or informal hearing at
such time and place as designated in a hearing notice to the
appellant, providing five business days' notice to the appellant. The
Village Administrator shall obtain sufficient facts upon which to
make a determination. The decision shall be based upon the
evidence presented. The Village Administrator shall notify the
appellant in writing of the determination by first class mail
addressed to the individual and at the address listed within the
appeal. Service is conclusive upon mailing.
§ 207-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-7
1:293
§ 207-8. Violations and penalties.80
The penalty for violation of any provision of this article shall be as provided
in § 1-3. Each day of continuing violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(2) The decision of the Village Administrator is final except if the owner
of the premises appeals the decision to a court of competent
jurisdiction. Such appeal shall be filed no later than 30 calendar
days after the date of mailing the decision of the Village
Administrator. Such appeal shall be by writ of certiorari and the
reviewing court shall be limited solely to the record created before
the Village Administrator. Costs, but not attorney fees, shall be
awarded to the prevailing party, at the sole discretion of the court.
Failure to timely and properly appeal shall deprive the court of
jurisdiction to hear the appeal.
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 207-7 HOBART CODE § 207-8
1:294
ARTICLE II
Offensive Industries81
[Adopted as § 3.6 of the 2000 Code]
§ 207-9. Abatement or removal.
Any business considered to be nauseous or offensive is declared to be a
public nuisance and an action for the abatement or removal thereof or to
obtain an injunction to prevent the same may be authorized to be brought
and maintained by the Village Board.
§ 207-10. Violations and penalties.82
Any business considered to be nauseous or offensive shall be deemed
unlawful, and any person, firm, or corporation may, at the discretion of the
court, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties provided in § 1-3. Each
day that a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 207-11. Exception.
All farm operations are to be excluded from this article.
81.Editor's Note: The preamble to the ordinance adopting this article reads: "An ordinance
under the provisions of § 66.0415, Wis. Stats., to direct the location, management and
construction of, and license (annually or otherwise), to regulate or prohibit any industry,
thing or place where any nauseous, offensive business is carried on, the ordinance to
apply within the boundaries of the Village of Hobart."
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 207-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-11
1:295
Chapter 215
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 102. Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages — See Ch. 189.
§ 215-1. Rules and regulations.
The purpose of these regulations shall be to protect the parks and parkways
and appurtenances thereto in the Village from fire, abuse and desecration;
to provide for the recreational use of these areas; to control and regulate
traffic and maintain general order therein; and to further the safety, health,
comfort, morals and welfare of all persons while within the limits of the
parks and parkways.
§ 215-2. Closing hours in parks.
§ 215-3. Disorderly conduct.
§ 215-4. Waste disposal.
A. Presence prohibited when closed. All public parks and public
playgrounds in the Village shall be closed from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
No person shall be within the Village parks between these hours.
B. Exemption. The Village Administrator or his designee may grant to any
group wishing to use a specific public park or public playground
permission to use such public park or public playground during closed
hours beyond 10:00 p.m. Permission shall be given in writing and shall
contain the name of the group, the name of the responsible person in
charge of the group, the extended closing time, and the date for which
permission to use the specific public park or public playground beyond
the closed hours is granted.83
A. No person shall use threatening, abusive, insulting, obscene, indecent
language which constitutes a breach of the peace.
B. No person violating any of the prohibitions enumerated in Subsection A
above shall be allowed to remain in any park or parkway.
A. No person shall scatter, drop, or leave any piece of paper, rag, tin can,
plastic, glass, peanut shells, melon rinds, banana peel or other garbage,
dead flowers or other rubbish in any portion of the parks or parkways
except in the receptacles provided for that purpose. All trash created by
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 207-11 HOBART CODE § 215-4
1:296
§ 215-5. Excessive noise prohibited.
Auto radios, portable radios, CD players, recording devices and television
sets must be turned low at all times so as not to be heard from a distance
beyond 50 feet from the instrument. No portable radio or television set shall
be operated within any building unless specifically permitted in connection
with a public gathering or a temporary exclusive use for which a permit has
been granted. No bands or DJs are allowed to set up and perform outside.
§ 215-6. Permit required for advertising; sales.
§ 215-7. Permit for fermented malt beverages in conjunction with
special event.
the person(s) using the park shall be removed from the premises by said
person(s).
B. No person(s) shall deposit, dump, throw or place any earth, rubbish,
dust, manure, paper, garbage or other refuse matter or any sand, stone,
lumber or building material or any substance in the water, grounds or
roadways of any park or parkway without permission of the Village
Board or designee.84
C. Burning of garbage or other rubbish in barrels is prohibited.
D. Glass beverage containers of any kind or measure whatsoever are
prohibited.
E. Special events. The person in charge of a special event is responsible
for the removal of all garbage from the grounds after the event. The
Village will provide the containers with large garbage bags for this
purpose.
F. Recyclables. The Village will provide containers for all recyclables
which will be clearly marked and displayed.
A. No person shall sell, keep or offer for sale any tangible or intangible
article, merchandise or thing; nor solicit for any trade, occupation,
business or profession, or for alms, within any park or parkway, without
the written permission of the Village Park Director.
B. No person shall distribute, post, affix or display any card, handbill, sign,
placard, target, banner, flag (except of the United States), or
advertisement of any kind within any park or parkway, or upon any of
the gates or enclosures thereof without the written permission of the
Village Park Director.
A. Special event permit required. No person or group shall sell, offer for
sale or give away any fermented malt beverages in a Village park in
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 215-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-7
1:297
§ 215-8. Interferences with permittees prohibited.
§ 215-9. Fireworks, weapons, and traps prohibited.
No person shall carry, fire, or discharge any gun, pistol or firearm, nor any
rocket, torpedo or any other fireworks of any description, nor shall any
person hunt with bow and arrow within any park or parkway. The word
"gun" shall include air gun.
§ 215-10. Throwing of stones or missiles, or hitting golf balls
prohibited.
No person shall throw stones or missiles, or hit golf balls in or into any park,
parkway or waterways.
§ 215-11. Making of fires restricted.
§ 215-12. Trespass in parks prohibited.
conjunction with a picnic or other special event without first obtaining
a permit therefor from the Village Board.
B. Issuance; conditions; fee. Such permits may be issued by the Village
Board upon receipt of such information as they may require from the
applicant, and upon the receipt of a permit fee of $10. Permits shall be
valid for that period of time to be specified by the Village Board.
A. No person shall in any manner disturb, harass or interfere with any
person or party holding a written permit as indicated previously, nor
with any of their equipment or property.
B. Permits for the exclusive use of any picnic or play area for any specified
date or time may be granted at the discretion of the Village Park
Director and no person shall in any manner disturb or interfere with
any person or party occupying the ground under such a permit, nor
with any of their equipment or property.
A. No person shall make or kindle a fire for any purpose except in places
provided therefor, and then subject to such regulations as may be
prescribed.
B. The use of charcoal burners and grills in designated picnic areas shall
be permitted, provided lawns and other vegetation are not damaged;
and provided, further, that all unburned coals or ash are disposed of in
such a manner as to prevent fire or damage to any park property.
C. No booyah kettles or other similar cooking utensils are allowed with an
open fire unless placed on a raised steel platform with a minimum of
four inches of air space between ground surface and platform.
§ 215-7 HOBART CODE § 215-12
1:298
§ 215-13. Fish, waterfowl, game birds and animals protected.
No person shall kill, injure or attempt to injure, or unnecessarily disturb
any waterfowl or other birds or animals, wild or domestic including ponies,
within any of the parks or parkways. Nor shall any person rob or disturb the
nest or eggs of any bird or other animal therein.
§ 215-14. Injury to vegetation, structures and equipment
prohibited.
§ 215-15. Camping regulated.
§ 215-16. Traffic codes.
A. No person shall operate a motor vehicle or any other vehicles or ride a
horse or walk in any part of the property in a Village park except upon
facilities provided therefor.
B. Animals are not allowed in parks or parkways except by special
permission of the Village Board or designee.85
C. Dogs may be walked "on leash" on the trail area only in Four Seasons
Park.
D. Owners of dogs are required to pick up and remove from the park any
feces from their dogs.
A. No person shall climb any tree, or pluck any flowers or fruit, wild or
cultivated, or break, cut down, trample upon, remove or in any manner
injure or deface, write upon, defile or ill use any tree, shrub, flower,
flowerbed, turf, fountain, ornament, statue, building, fence, apparatus,
bench, table, official notice, sign, bridge, structure or other property
within any park or parkway.
B. No person in any park or parkway shall remove any device for the
protection of trees or shrubs; nor shall any person fasten a horse or
other animal next to any tree, shrub or grass plot which may become
damaged by the animal.
A. No person shall sleep or camp or lodge in any park or parkway. An
authorized person charged with guarding property overnight for a
special event is exempted from this regulation.
B. No person shall erect a tent or similar appurtenances except with
special permission from the Village Park Director.
A. Parking and driving of any motorized vehicles is prohibited on nonpaved
areas in Village parks or parkways. This shall not apply to
vehicles engaged in construction, maintenance or operation of the
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 215-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-16
1:299
§ 215-17. Shelter; ballfield rental and fees.
It will be necessary to reserve the shelter and/or the ballfield for both
special events and league play. Reservations will be scheduled by the Village
Park Director and will be on a first-come/first-serve basis. Fees will be
reviewed on a yearly basis and will be determined on costs incurred during
the season for maintenance, lighting, and other operating expenses.
§ 215-18. Cleanup.
§ 215-19. Closing.
The responsible person in charge of a special event or softball league will
receive specific regulations on proper closing procedures prior to each
event.
§ 215-20. Violations and penalties.86
Any person violating this chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided
in § 1-3.
§ 215-21. Consumption of intoxicating liquors and fermented malt
beverages in parks.
parks or parkways, nor to vehicles making deliveries to parks or
parkways, nor to emergency vehicles.
B. No parking is allowed in front of the fire station or in places reserved
for Fire Department personnel only, nor in posted areas along the
property.
A. All grounds, buildings and parking areas must be cleaned of any
garbage, rubbish, or refuse after a special event or league softball play.
B. The responsible person in charge will receive a list of specific cleanup
regulations prior to the event.
A. Prohibited. No person shall bring in or consume in any park in the
Village any intoxicating liquors or fermented malt beverages except as
provided in Subsection B below.
B. Exceptions.
(1) Intoxicating liquors and fermented malt beverages may be
consumed in Pine Tree Park and Four Seasons Park subject to the
following conditions:
(a) If any person has consumed excessive intoxicating liquors or
fermented malt beverages, he may be ejected from the park
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 215-16 HOBART CODE § 215-21
1:300
Chapter 221
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Explosives and blasting — See Ch. 156.
Minors — See Ch. 197.
Noise — See Ch. 201.
Nuisances — See Ch. 207.
§ 221-1. Offenses against state laws subject to forfeiture.
The following statutes defining offenses against the peace and good order
of the state are adopted by reference to define offenses against the peace
and good order of the Village, provided the penalty for commission of such
offenses hereunder shall be limited to a forfeiture imposed under § 1-3 of
this Code.
§ 110.075(7) Producing/manufacturing/using inspection sticker
fraudulently.
§ 134.06 Bonus to chauffeurs for purchases, forbidden
§ 134.65 Cigarette and tobacco product retailer license
§ 134.66 Restrictions on sale or gift of cigarettes or tobacco
products
§ 167.10 Regulation of fireworks
§ 175.25 Storage of junked automobiles
§ 218.0145 Used cars/prohibited acts
§ 218.0147 Purchase or lease of motor vehicle by minor
§ 254.76 Causing fires by tobacco smoking
immediately and shall be responsible for any damages he may
have caused in the park.
(b) Any group of 10 or more persons consuming intoxicating
liquors or fermented malt beverages shall have the written
permission of the Village Administrator or his designee.
(c) No person shall bring any alcohol beverages into Pine Tree
Park or Four Seasons Park or possess or consume any alcohol
beverages in Pine Tree Park or Four Seasons Park from the day
after Labor Day until the day after the following Memorial Day.
(2) In all parks in the Village other than Pine Tree Park and Four
Seasons Park, intoxicating liquors or fermented malt beverages
may be consumed only with written permission from the Village
Administrator or his designee.
§ 215-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-1
1:301
§ 254.92 Purchase or possession of cigarettes or tobacco products
by person under 18 prohibited
§ 285.30 Motor vehicle emissions limitations; inspections
§ 450.11(7) Prescription drugs and prescription devices
§ 939.32 Attempt
§ 940.19(1) Battery; substantial battery; aggravated battery
§ 940.20 Battery: special circumstances
§ 940.225(3m) Fourth-degree sexual assault
§ 940.32 Stalking
§ 941.01 Negligent operation of vehicle
§ 941.10 Negligent handling of burning material
§ 941.12(2),(3) Interfering with firefighting
§ 941.13 False alarms
§ 941.20 Endangering safety by use of dangerous weapon
§ 941.23 Carrying concealed weapon
§ 941.235 Carrying firearm in public building
§ 941.24 Possession of switchblade knife
§ 941.26 Machine guns and other weapons; use in certain cases;
penalty
§ 941.2965(2),
(3)(a), (c)(d)
Restrictions on use of facsimile firearms
§ 941.36 Fraudulent tapping of electric wires or gas or water
meters or pipes
§ 941.37 Obstructing emergency or rescue personnel
§ 942.01 Defamation
§ 942.03 Giving false information for publication
§ 942.05 Opening letters
§ 942.06 Use of polygraphs and similar tests
§ 943.01(1) Damage to property
§ 943.012 Criminal damage to or graffiti on religious and other
property
§ 943.017 Graffiti
§ 943.07 Criminal damage to railroads
§ 943.11 Entry into locked vehicle
§ 943.125 Entry into locked coin box
§ 943.13 Trespass to land
§ 943.14 Criminal trespass to dwellings
§ 943.145 Criminal trespass to a medical facility
§ 221-1 HOBART CODE § 221-1
1:302
§ 943.15 Entry onto a construction site or into a locked building,
dwelling or room
§ 943.20 Theft
§ 943.21 Fraud on hotel or restaurant keeper or taxicab operator
§ 943.22 Use of cheating tokens
§ 943.225 Refusal to pay for a motor bus ride
§ 943.23 Operating vehicle without owner's consent
§ 943.24 Issue of worthless checks
§ 943.34 Receiving stolen property
§ 943.37 Alteration of property identification marks
§ 943.38(3) Forgery
§ 943.41(2),
(3)(a-d), (4)(b),
(5), (6)(a), (b)
and (d)
Financial transaction card crimes
§ 943.45 Theft of telecommunications service
§ 943.46 Theft of video service
§ 943.47 Theft of satellite cable programming
§ 943.50 Retail theft; theft of services
§ 943.55 Removal of shopping carts
§ 943.61 Theft of library material
§ 943.70 Computer crimes
§ 944.15 Public fornication
§ 944.17 Sexual gratification
§ 944.20 Lewd and lascivious behavior
§ 944.21 Obscene material or performance
§ 944.23 Making lewd, obscene or indecent drawings
§ 944.30 Prostitution
§ 944.31 Patronizing prostitutes
§ 944.33 Pandering
§ 944.34 Keeping place of prostitution
§ 944.36 Solicitation of drinks prohibited
§ 945.02 Gambling
§ 945.03 Commercial gambling
§ 945.04 Permitting premises to be used for commercial gambling
§ 946.40 Refusing to aid officer
§ 946.41 Resisting or obstructing officer
§ 946.42 Escape
§ 221-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-1
1:303
§ 946.44 Assisting or permitting escape
§ 946.65 Obstructing justice
§ 946.67 Compounding crime
§ 946.69 Falsely assuming to act as public officer or employee or
utility employee
§ 946.70 Impersonating peace officers, firefighters or other
emergency personnel
§ 946.72 Tampering with public records and notices
§ 947.01 Disorderly conduct
§ 947.012 Unlawful use of telephone
§ 947.013 Harassment
§ 947.015 Bomb scares
§ 947.02(3)(4) Vagrancy
§ 947.04 Drinking in common carriers
§ 947.06 Unlawful assemblies and their suppression
§ 948.015 Other offenses against children
§ 948.10 Exposing genitals or pubic area
§ 948.11 Exposing a child to harmful material or harmful
descriptions or narrations
§ 948.21 Neglecting a child
§ 948.40 Contributing to delinquency of a child
§ 948.45 Contributing to truancy
§ 948.51 Hazing
§ 948.60 Possession of a dangerous weapon by a person under 18
§ 948.61 Dangerous weapons other than firearms on school
premises
§ 948.63 Receiving property from a child
§§ 951.01–951.18Crimes against animals
§ 961.38 Prescriptions
§ 961.41(3g) Possession of a controlled substance
§ 961.573(1) Possession of drug paraphernalia
§ 961.574(1) Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia
§ 961.575(1) Delivery of drug paraphernalia to a minor
§ 961.576 Advertisement of drug paraphernalia
§ 221-2. Sexual offender restrictions.
A. Findings and intent.
§ 221-1 HOBART CODE § 221-2
1:304
(1) This section is a regulatory measure aimed at protecting the health
and safety of children in the Village of Hobart from the risk that
sexual offenders convicted of an offense against a child may reoffend
in locations close to where children congregate. Given the
high rate of recidivism for sexual offenders, and that reducing
opportunity and temptation is important to minimizing the risk of
re-offense, there is a need to protect children where they
congregate or play in public places. Therefore, the Village finds and
declares that sexual offenders are a serious threat to the public
safety of children if regulatory measures are not in place that
prohibit their presence in specified areas designated as places
children commonly congregate. The Village of Hobart finds and
declares that in addition to schools and day-care centers, children
congregate or play at child-oriented facilities, such as parks and
playgrounds.
(2) It is not the intent of this section to impose a criminal penalty, but
rather to serve the Village's compelling interest to promote,
protect, and improve the health, safety, and welfare of the children
of the Village by prohibiting convicted sexual offenders from
loitering or being present in specified areas around locations where
children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers. It is the
further intent of this section to recognize that convicted sexual
offenders must reenter the community, and the Village of Hobart
hereby accepts that it has a responsibility to convicted sexual
offenders and the surrounding area municipalities to ensure that,
in addition to promoting regulatory measures aimed at protecting
children, its regulatory measures are not aimed at prohibiting
convicted sexual offenders from being part of this society.
B. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CHILD — A person age 16 or younger for purposes of this section.
DESIGNATED OFFENDER — Any person who is required to register
under Wis. Stats. § 301.45 and is under court-ordered supervision by
the Wisconsin Department of Corrections for any sexual offense against
a child, unless the person is under the age 18 at the time of the offense
and the offender was not tried and convicted of the offense as an adult.
LOITERING — Whether in a group, crowd, or as an individual, to stand
idly about, loaf, prowl, congregate, wander, stand, linger aimlessly,
proceed slowly or with many stops, to delay or dawdle.
MINOR — A person age 17 or younger.
ZONES —
Restricted zones. Certain areas that are designated by the Village
as areas children congregate, including, but not limited to, schools,
parks, playgrounds, licensed day-care centers, or any other place
(1)
§ 221-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-2
1:305
designated by the Village as a place where children are known
to congregate. Restricted zones will not expand beyond the real
estate parcel or parcel(s) upon which the building, park or
establishment is located that instigated the Village's designation of
such restricted zone, but will include contiguous parcels used for
ancillary purposes, such as an athletic field located adjacent to a
school.
Loiter-fee zones. The two-hundred-foot radius surrounding all
restricted zones.
(2)
Restricted Zone Map. An Official Map shall be maintained by the
Village, showing restricted zones designated in red and loiterfree
zones designated in yellow (the "Restricted Zone Map"). The
Village shall update the Restricted Zone Map at least annually to
reflect any changes in the location of restricted zones and loiterfree
zones. Restricted Zone Maps will be available at the Village's
office and on the Village's official website.
(3)
C. Prohibited location and/or acts.
(1) Restricted zones.
(a) Restricted zone restrictions. It is unlawful for any designated
offender to be physically present within a restricted zone under
any of the following circumstances:
[1] When children are present or are reasonably presumed or
known to be present;
[2] Monday through Friday, in a school or day-care center
restricted zone and between 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.; or
[3] In a park or playground restricted zone and between 7:00
a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
(b) Restricted zone restriction exceptions. A designated offender
may be physically present on any day or time within a
restricted zone if all of the following are present:
[1] The designated offender has official business, which is
determined by the reasonable person standard; and
[2] The designated offender is accompanied by another adult
who is not a designated offender.
(2) Loiter-free zones. It is unlawful for a designated offender to loiter
within a restricted zone or loiter-free zone.
(3) Holiday prohibition. It is unlawful for any designated offender to
participate in a holiday event involving children under 16 years of
age, such as distributing candy or other items to children on
Halloween, wearing a Santa Claus costume on or preceding
§ 221-2 HOBART CODE § 221-2
1:306
§ 221-3. Throwing or shooting missiles and projectiles.
No person shall throw or shoot any object, stone, snowball or other missile
or projectile, by hand or by any other means, at any person or at, in or
into any building, street, sidewalk, alley, highway, park, playground or other
public place within the Village.87
§ 221-4. Obstructing streets and sidewalks prohibited.
No person shall stand, sit, loaf, loiter or engage in any sport or exercise
on any public street, sidewalk, bridge or public ground within the Village
in such manner as to prevent or obstruct the free passage of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic thereon or prevent or hinder free ingress to or egress from
any place of business or amusement or any church, public hall or meeting
place.
§ 221-5. Loud and unnecessary noise prohibited. [Amended
11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-24]
Christmas or wearing an Easter Bunny costume on or preceding
Easter. Holiday events in which the designated offender is the
parent or guardian of the children involved, and no non-familial
children are present, are exempt from this subsection.
D. Penalties. A person who violates this section shall be punished by a
forfeiture not exceeding $2,000, together with the actual costs of
prosecution, including attorney fees, if necessary.
A. General prohibition. No person shall make or cause to be made any
loud, disturbing or unnecessary sounds or noises which may annoy or
disturb a person of ordinary sensibilities in or about any public street,
alley or park or any private residence, unless specified in Subsections
B, C and D below.
B. Construction noise. The erection, excavation, demolition, alteration or
repair of any building, as well as the operation of any construction
equipment or any other similar equipment attended by loud or unusual
noise, concussions or disturbing sounds other than between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekdays and 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on
Saturdays, Sundays and public holidays.
C. Municipal operations exempted. This section shall not apply to public
utilities and public works projects and operations during daytime hours
Monday through Saturday, however, the noise shall be minimized
through proper equipment operations and maintenance. Emergency
short-term operations necessary to protect the health and welfare of
the citizens shall be exempted from this section. Any noise required
87.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 3.804, Sale and discharge of fireworks restricted, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015.
§ 221-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-5
1:307
§ 221-6. Loitering.
specifically by law for the protection, health, welfare, or safety of
people or property shall be exempted from this section.
D. Other exemptions. All other exemptions to this section may be granted
by the Police Chief or Village Administrator or their designees.
A. Loitering or prowling prohibited, generally. No person shall loiter or
prowl in a place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding
individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of
persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may
be considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted is the
fact that the person takes flight upon appearance of a police or peace
officer, refuses to identify himself or manifestly endeavors to conceal
himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other
circumstances makes it impracticable, a police or peace officer shall,
prior to any arrest for an offense under this subsection, afford the
person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be
warranted by requesting him to identify himself and explain his
presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under
this subsection if the police or peace officer did not comply with the
preceding sentence or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by
the person was true and if believed by the police or peace officer at the
time would have dispelled the alarm.
B. Obstruction of traffic by loitering. No person shall loaf or loiter in a
group or crowd upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, street
crossings or bridges or in any other public place within the Village in
such manner as to prevent, interfere with or obstruct the ordinary free
use of such public streets, alleys, sidewalks, street crossings or bridges
or other public places by persons passing along and over the same.
C. Loitering after being requested to move.
(1) In groups or crowds. No person shall loaf or loiter in a group or a
crowd upon the public streets or sidewalks or in adjacent doorways
or entrances, on street crossings or bridges, or in any other public
place, or on any private premises without invitation from the owner
or occupant, after being requested to move by any police officer or
by any person in authority at such places.
(2) In places of public assembly or use. No person shall loiter, lounge
or loaf in or about any depot, theater, dance hall, restaurant, store,
mall, public sidewalk, public parking lot or other place of assembly
of public use after being requested to move by any police officer or
by any person in authority at such place. Upon being requested to
move, a person shall immediately comply with such request by
leaving the premises or the area thereof.
§ 221-5 HOBART CODE § 221-6
1:308
§ 221-7. Littering prohibited.
§ 221-8. Obedience to officers.
No person shall resist or interfere with any officer of the Village while such
officer is doing any act in his official capacity and with lawful authority; nor
shall any person refuse to assist an officer in carrying out his duties when
so requested by the officer.
§ 221-9. Use of off-road motorized vehicles. [Amended 6-7-2016 by
Ord. No. 05-2016]
(3) Obstructing highways. No person shall obstruct any street, bridge,
sidewalk or crossing by lounging or loitering in or upon the same
after being requested to move on by any police officer.
D. Loitering in school and playground areas. No person not in official
attendance or on official school business shall enter into, congregate,
loiter, wander, stroll, stand or play in any school building or in or about
any playground area adjacent thereto within the Village on official
school days.
A. No person shall throw, deposit, place or dump any glass, refuse, waste,
filth, tires, wood waste, grass clippings, weeds, shingles, waste from
cement trucks or any other litter upon the streets, alleys, highways,
public parks or other property of the Village or upon any private
property or upon the surface of any body of water within the Village.
B. No person shall place anything in a privately owned dumpster not
owned by them. No person shall place nonrecyclables at a recycling
center.
A. Defined. An "off-road motorized vehicle" is defined as a vehicle not
licensed for operation on highways by the state.
B. Restricted. No person shall operate any off-road motorized vehicle on
any public roadway in the Village except on duly designated highways,
streets or roadways.
C. Off-road motorized vehicles allowed.
(1) A person may operate an off-road motorized vehicle on land owned
by the operator thereof or a member of his immediate family.
(2) A person may operate an off-road motorized vehicle on
undeveloped private property in the Village, provided that, at the
time of the operation, the person has on his person written
permission from the owner of the property to operate off-road
motorized vehicles on such private property.
D. Public safety vehicles are exempt from this section.
§ 221-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-10
1:309
§ 221-10. Found property.
§ 221-11. Trespassing in vehicles.
No person shall enter a motor vehicle, aircraft or watercraft or any part
thereof belonging to another without the consent of the person in lawful
possession of the vehicle, aircraft or watercraft.
§ 221-12. Traps restricted.
No person shall use a killer trap (conibear type trap) or steel-jawed (leg
hold) trap within the Village without DNR permits. Live traps that do not
injure the animal are not prohibited by this section.
§ 221-13. Fraudulent return of merchandise.
No person shall return merchandise to a merchant for the purpose of
claiming a cash refund or credit if the person deceives the merchant by
doing any of the following:
§ 221-14. Fraud on residential landlords prohibited.
A. When goods or money are found in the Village and the person finding
the goods or money does not know the identity of the owner, the person
finding the goods or money shall notify the Police Department and
permit such Department to take possession thereof.
B. The Police Department shall attempt to identify and notify the owner of
the goods or money and deliver the same to the owner if he appears at
the Department offices to take possession.
C. If the owner cannot be identified or notified within 30 days of the time
the Police Department takes possession, possession shall be returned to
the person who found the goods or money except as prohibited by
§ 66.0139, Wis. Stats., or other state or federal law.
D. If the person declines to take the goods or money, the property may be
disposed of in accordance with § 66.0139, Wis. Stats.88
A. Represents that such person purchased the merchandise when the
person did not purchase it.
B. Represents that the merchandise was purchased from a particular
merchant when it was not purchased from that merchant.
C. Represents that the merchandise was purchased for a particular price
when it was purchased for a lower price.
D. Gives the merchant a false name or address.
88.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 3.823, Obscene material and performances prohibited, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015.
§ 221-10 HOBART CODE § 221-14
1:310
A. Prohibited acts. Any person who with intent to defraud does any of the
following shall be guilty of violating this section:
(1) Intentionally absconds without paying rent that has been
contractually agreed upon in an oral or written lease with a
landlord. Prima facie evidence of intentionally absconding will be
established if a tenant fails to pay rent due prior to the vacating of
the rental premises by the tenant and the nonpayment of such rent
continues for a period of five days after vacation of the premises;
or
(2) Issues any check, money order or any other form of bank or
monetary draft as a payment of rent, where such document lacks
sufficient funds, where the account is closed or where such draft is
unredeemable in any other form or fashion. Prima facie evidence of
intention to defraud will be established if a tenant fails within five
days of a written demand by the landlord or agent to pay in full the
total amount of the draft presented as rent payment plus any bank
charges to the landlord attributable to the unredeemability of the
draft.
B. Applicability. This section shall apply to rental agreements between
residential landlords and tenants only. The words and terms used in this
section shall be defined and construed in conformity with the provisions
of Ch. ATCP 134, Wis. Adm. Code, Ch. 704, Wis. Stats., and
§ 990.001(1), Wis. Stats. The act of service by a landlord of a legal
eviction notice or notice to terminate tenancy shall not in itself act as a
bar to prosecution under this section.
C. Procedure. An officer may issue a citation only when the complainant
provides the following:
(1) The name and current address of the tenant, a copy of the subject
lease agreement or sworn testimony of the terms of the subject oral
lease.
(2) The amount of rent due, date it was due, date the tenant actually
vacated the premises and testimony that the rent remained unpaid
for not less than five days after vacating and that the tenant did not
notify or attempt to notify the complainant of tenant's new address
or that tenant knowingly gave complainant a false address.
(3) As to an unredeemable payment, the document used for attempting
rent payment, the written demand for payment of the full amount
plus bank charges, proof that the tenant received the written
demand and testimony that at least five days have elapsed since the
demand was received and no payment has been made.
§ 221-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-15
1:311
§ 221-15. Misuse of statewide emergency services number 911
prohibited. [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
The Village hereby adopts § 256.35, Wis. Stats. Any person who
intentionally dials the telephone number 911 to report an emergency,
knowing in fact that the situation which he or she reports does not exist,
shall be fined in accordance with the statute.
§ 221-16. Trespass to buildings, structures or business.
§ 221-17. Violations and penalties.
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who shall violate any
provision of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-3
of this Code. In addition to any penalty imposed for violation of this chapter
adopting § 943.01(1), Wis. Stats., any person who shall cause physical
damage to or destroy any public property shall be liable for the costs of
replacing or repairing such damaged or destroyed property. The parent
of any unemancipated minor child who violates this chapter adopting
§ 943.01(1), Wis. Stats., may also be held liable for the cost of repairing such
damaged or destroyed property in accordance with § 895.035, Wis. Stats.
§ 221-18. Key lock boxes required on exterior of certain structures
for public safety purposes. [Added 9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-02]
A. Permission required. No person shall enter any building, structure,
business or property of another without the permission of the owner or
person in charge.
B. Presumption. Permission to enter shall be presumed when the area is
normally open to the public. Permission may be withdrawn by the
owner or person in charge.
C. Authority to climb. No person shall climb any utility pole within the
Village unless that person has been duly authorized by the Village and/
or the utility. No person shall attempt to remove or remove from any
utility pole any Village property, including but not limited to flags and
decorations, unless that person has been duly authorized by the Village
and/or the utility.
A. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definition
applies:
LOCK BOX — A keyed steel lock box container, UL approved, with a
high-security lock and designed to be either surface or recess mounted
on a building to secure keys to such building. This box is designed to
hold keys for emergency entry into buildings. Lock box keys shall be
kept by the Hobart/Lawrence Police, and the Hobart Fire Department.
B. Requirement and location. A lock box shall be required on all
commercial and industrial structures, multifamily residential structures
of four or more units, government structures, nursing care facilities and
§ 221-15 HOBART CODE § 221-18
1:312
in any other building in the Village as ordered by the Fire Chief and
Police Chief.
(1) The lock box shall be mounted in an accessible location approved
by the Fire Chief and Police Chief.
(2) The particular model of lock box shall also be approved by the Fire
Chief and Police Chief and shall contain the following keys
necessary to provide emergency access:
(a) Keys to locked points of ingress whether on the interior or
exterior of such building; keys to locked mechanical equipment
rooms, keys to locked electrical rooms; keys to elevator
controls; and keys to other areas as directed by the Fire Chief
and Police Chief.
(3) Each key shall be legibly labeled to indicate the lock that a certain
key opens.
(4) The Fire Chief shall designate the type of key lock box system to be
implemented within the Village of Hobart and shall have the
authority to require all structures to use the designated and
approved system.
(5) The owner or operator of a structure required to have a key lock
box shall, at all times, keep keys in the lock box that will allow
access.
(6) The Police Chief and Fire Chief shall be authorized to implement
rules and regulations for the use of the lock box system.
(7) The Police Chief and Fire Chief shall promulgate and enforce
procedures to protect the security of the department's master key
lock box key.
C. New construction exemption. All newly constructed structures subject
to this section shall have the key lock box installed and operational
prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit, unless the Fire Chief
grants an exemption to this requirement and determines that a lock box
is not necessary. It shall be the sole discretion of the Fire Chief to
determine whether to exempt a newly constructed structure from the
key lock box installation requirement.
D. Maintenance. The owner of any building within the scope of this section
shall maintain the lock box in good working order and be responsible to
assure that keys maintained within the lock box are current keys to the
existing locks in the building. When a change of locks within a building
is necessary, the owner shall advise the Fire Chief and Police Chief
thereof and place new keys in the lock box.
E. Unauthorized key removal prohibited. No person, except authorized
fire department, law enforcement personnel, or emergency responders
§ 221-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-18
1:313
§ 221-19. Public safety and fire emergency response cost recovery.
[Added 9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-03]
shall remove any key from a lock box without the authorization of the
building owner.
F. Compliance.
(1) New construction. No occupancy permit shall be issued under
§ 295-338 of this Code for any building within the scope of this
section which does not comply with Subsection B above, unless a
variance has been granted under Subsection C above.
(2) Existing buildings. All existing buildings within the scope of this
section shall comply with Subsection B above no later than six
months from the date the building owner is notified by the Village
of the requirements of this section. After such six-month period,
any building which fails to so comply shall not be occupied, rented,
or otherwise used until all requirements of this section have been
met.
G. Penalty. Any person who violates a provision of this section shall be
subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-3 of this Code.
A. Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the
meaning of the terms used in this section shall be as follows:
ASSESSABLE COSTS — Those costs for services incurred by the Village
in connection with a response to a public safety or fire emergency
incident, including, but not limited to, the actual labor and material
costs of the Village (including, without limitation, employee wages,
fringe benefits, administrative overhead, costs of equipment, costs of
equipment operation, costs of materials, costs of transportation, costs
of material disposal and costs of contracted labor) whether or not the
services are provided by the Village or by a third party on behalf of
the Village; service charges and interest; attorneys' fees, litigation costs
and any costs, charges, fines or penalties to the Village imposed by any
court or state or federal governmental entities.
BOMB THREATS — The verbal or written threat of a bomb or other
explosive device which if discharged as threatened would violate a
federal, state or local law.
EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE — Emergency medical, public safety,
police, fire or civil defense services.
EXCESSIVE REQUESTS FOR EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE — Any
request for emergency assistance made to a particular location or
premises if such location or premises has requested emergency
assistance more than three times in the preceding 30 days.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL INCIDENT OR EMERGENCY — Any
occurrence, incident, activity, accident or emergency where a release
of hazardous materials occurs or is reasonably imminent and where the
§ 221-18 HOBART CODE § 221-19
1:314
Fire Chief or his or her designee has so declared such activity, accident
or emergency a hazardous material incident or emergency.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Those elements, substances, wastes or
byproducts, including, but not limited to, combustible liquid, flammable
gas, explosives, flammables, poisons, organic peroxides, oxidizers,
pyrophorics, unstable reactive matter, water reactive matter, petroleum
products, anti-freeze, polychlorinated biphenyls and asbestos, which
are or are potentially harmful to the environment or human or animal
life, or which pose an unreasonable or imminent risk to life, health
or safety of persons or property, or to the ecological balance of the
environment as determined by the Fire Chief or the senior fire official
of the Village in charge at the scene.
ILLEGAL FIRE — A fire set or determined to have been set in violation
of a federal, state or local law and shall include an arson fire and a fire
set in violation of a no-burning ban or order. An illegal fire does not
include an unintentional fire or fire caused by an act of God.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any self-propelled or towed vehicle designed or
used on the public streets, roads and highways to transport passengers
or property which is required to be registered for use upon such public
streets, roads and highways and, for the purposes hereof, all trailers or
appurtenances attached to any motor vehicle.
PUBLIC SAFETY OR FIRE EMERGENCY INCIDENT — Requests for
emergency assistance, a false alarm, a hazardous material incident or
emergency, an illegal fire, bomb threats, threats of harm to oneself or
others, a structure demolition, or a utility line failure.
RELEASE — Any actual or threatened spilling, leaking, pumping,
pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, leaching, dumping
or disposing into the environment, including, but not limited to, the air,
soil, groundwater and surface water.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Any individual, firm, corporation, association,
partnership, commercial entity, consortium, joint venture, government
entity or any other legal entity responsible for a public safety or fire
emergency incident or any owner, tenant, occupant or party in control
of real or personal property from which, onto which or related to which
there is a public safety or fire emergency incident, including heirs,
estates, successors, agents or assigns.
STRUCTURE DEMOLITION — The tearing down of a structure
damaged by fire which the Fire Chief, or his or her designee, has
determined must be promptly demolished to protect public safety.
THREATS OF HARM TO ONESELF OR OTHERS — The verbal or
written threat of physical harm to oneself or another or another's
property which if carried out would be a violation of federal, state or
local law.
UTILITY LINE FAILURE — The disabling of any transmission or service
line, cable, conduit, pipeline, wire or the like used to provide, collect or
§ 221-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-19
1:315
transport electricity, natural gas, communication or electronic signals
(including, but not limited to, telephone, computer, cable television
and stereo signals or electronic impulses), water or sanitary or storm
sewage.
VILLAGE — The Village of Hobart, Brown County, Wisconsin.
B. Cost recovery authorization and procedure.
(1) The Village may recover all assessable costs in connection with a
public safety or fire emergency incident from any or all responsible
parties jointly or severally.
(2) The Village Administrator or his or her designee shall determine
the total assessable costs and shall in consultation with other
Village personnel involved in responding to a public safety or fire
emergency incident determine whether to assess any, all or part of
such costs against any of the responsible parties. In making such
determination, the following shall be considered:
(a) The total assessable costs;
(b) The risk the public safety or fire emergency incident imposed
on the Village, its residents and their property;
(c) Whether there was any injury or damage to person or property;
(d) Whether the public safety or fire emergency incident required
evacuation;
(e) The extent the public safety or fire emergency incident
required an unusual or extraordinary use of Village personnel
and equipment; and
(f) Whether there was any damage to the environment.
(3) After consideration of the factors in Subsection B(2) above, the
Village Administrator may allocate assessable costs among and
between responsible parties, including allocating all or some of
such costs jointly and severally against more than one responsible
party regardless of whether a responsible party is subject to other
legal liability or fault.
(4) If the Village Administrator determines not to assess all or a part of
assessable costs against a responsible party, such determination
shall not limit or extinguish the liability of the responsible party to
other parties.
C. Billing and collection of assessable cost. After determining to assess
assessable costs against a responsible party, the Village Clerk shall mail
an itemized invoice to the responsible party at its last known address.
Such invoice shall be due and payable within 30 days of the date of
mailing, and any amounts unpaid after such date shall bear a late
payment fee equal to 1% per month or fraction thereof that the amount
§ 221-19 HOBART CODE § 221-19
1:316
due and any previously imposed late payment fee remains unpaid. If
a responsible party appeals assessable costs pursuant to Subsection
D below, such costs, if upheld, in whole or in part, shall be due and
payable 30 days from the date of determination of the appeal, and any
late payment fees shall apply thereafter.
D. Procedure for appealing assessable costs. Any responsible party who
receives an invoice for assessable costs shall have an opportunity to
meet with the Village Administrator or his or her designee to request a
modification of assessable costs. The responsible party shall request in
writing such meeting within seven calendar days of the date of the
invoice assessing the assessable costs. If, after meeting with the Village
Administrator, or his or her designee, the responsible party is not
satisfied with the determination of the Village Administrator, the
responsible party may request an opportunity to appear before the
Village Board of Trustees to further request a modification of
assessable costs. A responsible party who desires to appear before the
Village Board of Trustees must file a written request to appear before
the Village Board of Trustees with the Village Administrator within
seven calendar days of the date of the meeting with the Village
Administrator. Upon receipt of such request, the Village Administrator
will place the responsible party's request for a modification of
assessable costs on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled Village
Board of Trustees meeting. Any filed request to appear shall specifically
identify and explain all reasons why the responsible party believes the
assessed costs should be modified. Any reason, basis or argument for
modification of assessable costs not set forth in the request to appear
shall be deemed waived by the responsible party. Failure to timely file a
written request to appear shall constitute a waiver of the responsible
party's right to appear before the Village Board of Trustees; and shall
further constitute the responsible party's agreement to pay the
assessable costs invoiced. After a responsible party has been given an
opportunity to appear before it, the Village Board of Trustees shall
promptly determine whether to confirm, modify or void the payment of
assessable costs invoiced.
E. Assessable costs a lien upon property. Assessable costs assessed
against a responsible party that are not paid when due, including late
payment fees, shall constitute a lien upon the real property owned by
the responsible party, from which, upon which or related to which the
public safety or fire emergency incident occurred. The Village Clerk
shall, on November 15 of each year, certify to the Brown County
Treasurer the fact that such special charges are delinquent and unpaid.
The Brown County Treasurer shall then enter the special charges on the
next general tax roll as a charge against the affected property, and the
lien thereon shall be enforced in the same manner as provided and
allowed by law for delinquent and unpaid real property taxes.
F. Remedies. In addition to the remedy set forth in Subsection E above,
the Village shall be entitled to pursue any other remedy or may institute
§ 221-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-19
1:317
§ 221-20. Cleanup of clandestine drug lab sites and chemical dump
sites. [Added 9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-04]
any appropriate action or proceeding in a Wisconsin court of competent
jurisdiction as permitted by law to collect assessable costs from a
responsible party.
G. No limitation of liability. The recovery of assessable costs described
above does not limit the liability of a responsible party under applicable
local, state or federal law.
H. Severability. Should any provision or part of this article be declared by a
court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, the same
shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any other provision or
part which shall remain in full force and effect.
A. Interpretation and application. In the interpretation and application of
this section, the provisions herein shall be construed to protect the
public health, safety and welfare. Where the conditions imposed by any
provision of this section are either more or less restrictive to the public
than comparable provisions imposed by any other law, ordinance,
statute, or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more
restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements on the
public shall prevail. Should any court of competent jurisdiction declare
any section or subpart of this section to be invalid, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the section as a whole or any part thereof, other
than the provision declared invalid.
B. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms or
words shall be interpreted as follows:
CHEMICAL DUMP SITE — Any place or area where chemicals or other
waste materials used in a clandestine drug lab operation have been
located.
CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB OPERATION — The unlawful manufacture
or attempt to manufacture a controlled substance.
CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITE — Any place or area where law
enforcement has determined that an unlawful clandestine drug lab
operation exists or existed. A clandestine drug lab site may include,
but is not limited to, dwellings, accessory buildings, structures or units,
vehicles, boats, trailers or any other area or locations.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — Any drug, substance or immediate
precursor in Ch. 961, Wis. Stats., together with any amendments or
modifications thereto. The term shall not include distilled spirits, wine,
malt beverages, intoxicating liquors or tobacco.
DIRECTOR OF NEIGHBORHOOD SERVICES — The Director of
Neighborhood Services for the Village of Hobart or his/her duly
authorized representative(s).
§ 221-19 HOBART CODE § 221-20
1:318
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE — Waste generated from a
clandestine drug lab operation.
MANUFACTURE — In places other than a pharmacy, means and
includes the production, cultivation, quality control, and
standardization, by mechanical, physical, chemical or pharmaceutical
means, and the packing, repacking, tableting, encapsulating, labeling,
relabeling, or filling of a controlled substance.
OWNER — Any person(s), firm(s), corporation(s) or other entity who or
which owns, in whole or in part, the land, building, structure, vehicle,
boat, trailer or other location associated with a site.
SITE — A chemical dump site and/or clandestine drug lab site.
VILLAGE — The Village of Hobart, Brown County, Wisconsin.
C. Declaration of site as a public health nuisance. A site, all areas in
proximity to a site, and all personal property located on areas in
proximity to a site, are potentially unsafe due to health hazards and are
hereby declared to be a public health nuisance.
D. Law enforcement action.
(1) When a law enforcement authority determines the existence of a
site, the site and all personal property located in proximity to the
site shall be declared a public health nuisance. Law enforcement
authorities who identify conditions associated with a site are
authorized to take the following action:
(a) Promptly notify the Director of Neighborhood Services, child
protection officials, public health authorities, and the
appropriate enforcement division of the Drug Enforcement
Administration of the United States Justice Department. This
notice must, at a minimum, identify the location of the site, the
property owner, if known, and the conditions found on the site.
(b) Treat, store, transport or dispose of all household hazardous
waste found at the site in a manner consistent with state and
federal rules and regulations.
(c) Issue a temporary declaration of public health nuisance for the
site and post a copy of the declaration on all doorway
entrances to the site or, in the case of bare land, post the
declaration in several conspicuous places on the property. This
temporary declaration of public health nuisance issued by law
enforcement shall not expire until after the Director of
Neighborhood Services inspects the site and determines the
appropriateness of issuing a permanent declaration of public
health nuisance.
(d) Notify all persons occupying the site that a temporary
declaration of public health nuisance has been issued.
§ 221-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-20
1:319
(e) Require all persons occupying the site to immediately vacate
the site, to remove all pets from the site, and not to return to
the site without written authorization from the Director of
Neighborhood Services.
(f) Notify all occupants vacating the site that all personal property
at the site may be contaminated with dangerous chemical
residue.
(g) After all occupants have vacated the site, put locks on each
doorway entrance to any buildings located on the site to
prohibit unauthorized access to the site.
(2) Prompt notification of the persons and organizations mentioned
above may be delayed to accomplish appropriate law enforcement
objectives, but only to the extent that public health and child
protection responsibilities are not unnecessarily compromised.
E. Seizure of property. When the site is inside a vehicle, boat, trailer or
other form of movable personal property, law enforcement authorities
shall immediately seize it and not allow it to be transported except to a
more secure location. In such circumstances, all other requirements of
this section shall be followed as closely as possible given the specific
type of property in which the site is discovered.
F. Action by building inspector.
(1) Inspection and declaration of nuisance. Within 48 hours of
notification that law enforcement authorities have determined the
existence of a site, the Director of Neighborhood Services shall
cause the site to be inspected to determine whether a permanent
declaration of public health nuisance should be issued. Based on
the results of the inspection, the Director of Neighborhood Services
may then promptly issue a permanent declaration of public health
nuisance and a do-not-enter, unsafe-to-occupy order for the site to
replace the temporary declaration issued and posted by law
enforcement. A copy of the permanent declaration and order shall
be posted on all doorway entrances to the site or, in the case of bare
land, shall be posted in several conspicuous places on the property.
(2) Abatement order. Within 24 hours after the permanent declaration
of public health nuisance has been issued and posted, the Director
of Neighborhood Services shall send written notice to the site
owner ordering abatement of the public health nuisance. The
abatement order shall include the following information:
(a) A copy of the declaration of public health nuisance and do-notenter,
unsafe-to-occupy order and a copy of this section;
(b) Information about the potentially hazardous condition of the
site;
§ 221-20 HOBART CODE § 221-20
1:320
(c) Notification of the immediate suspension of the site's rental
license if applicable; and
(d) Information that may help the owner locate appropriate
services necessary to abate the public health nuisance.
(3) Notice to concerned parties. Within three days after the permanent
declaration of public health nuisance has been issued and posted,
the Director of Neighborhood Services shall also mail a copy of the
permanent declaration of public health nuisance, a copy of this
section, and a notification of the suspension of the site's rental
licenses, if applicable, to the following concerned parties at their
last known address:
(a) Occupants or residents of the site if the identities of such
persons are known; and
(b) Neighbors in proximity to the site who may be affected by the
conditions found, as determined by the Director of
Neighborhood Services; and
(c) The Hobart Village Administrator; and
(d) The Hobart Chief of Police or his/her duly authorized
representative(s); and
(e) The Drug Enforcement Administration of the United States
Justice Department; the Brown County Health Department, the
Wisconsin Department of Health, and the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources.
(4) Modification or removal of declaration. The Director of
Neighborhood Services is authorized to modify or remove the
permanent declaration of public health nuisance after he or she
receives documentation from a Village-approved environmental
hazard testing and cleaning firm stating that the suspected health
and safety risks, including those to neighbors and potential
dwelling occupants, either do not exist or have been sufficiently
abated or corrected to justify amendment or removal of the
declaration.
G. Site owner's responsibility to act. Within 10 business days of the date
the abatement order is mailed to the owner of the site, the owner shall
accomplish the following:
(1) Provide the Director of Neighborhood Services with written
notification:
(a) That the owner has confirmed that all persons and their pets
have vacated the site;
(b) Of the name(s) of all children who the owner believes were
residing at the site; and
§ 221-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-20
1:321
(c) That the site will remain vacated and secured until the public
health nuisance is completely abated as required by this
section.
(2) Contract with one or more Village-approved environmental hazard
testing and cleaning firms to conduct the following work in
accordance with the most current state and federal health
guidelines:
(a) A detailed on-site assessment of the extent of contamination at
the site and the contamination of the personal property
therein;
(b) Soil testing of the site and testing of all property and soil in
proximity to the site which the environmental hazard testing
and cleaning firm determines may have been affected by the
conditions found at the site;
(c) A complete cleanup of the site (including but not limited to the
cleanup or removal of plumbing, ventilation systems, fixtures
and contaminated soil) or a demolition of the site and a
complete cleanup of the demolished site;
(d) A complete cleanup, or disposal at an approved dump site, of
all personal property in the site;
(e) A complete cleanup of all property and soil in proximity to the
site which is found to have been affected by the conditions
found at the site;
(f) Remediation testing and follow-up testing, including but not
limited to testing of the ventilation system and plumbing, to
determine that all health risks are sufficiently reduced,
according to state and federal health guidelines, to allow safe
human occupancy and use of the site and use of the personal
property therein and of all property and soil in proximity to the
site;
(g) Provide the Director of Neighborhood Services with the
identity of the testing and cleaning firm with which the owner
has contracted for abatement of the public health nuisance as
required above; and
(h) Provide the Director of Neighborhood Services with a written
cleanup schedule with reasonable deadlines for completing all
actions required by the abatement order.
H. Site owner's verification of compliance. The site owner must meet all
deadlines established on the cleanup schedule. Pursuant to the
deadlines established by the cleanup schedule, the site owner is
required to provide the Director of Neighborhood Services with a
signed statement from a Village-approved environmental hazard testing
§ 221-20 HOBART CODE § 221-20
1:322
and cleaning firm that the site, all personal property therein and all
property and soil in proximity to the site, is safe for human occupancy
and use and that the cleanup was conducted in accordance with the
most current state and federal health guidelines.
I. Site owner's responsibility for costs. The site owner is responsible for
all costs, including those of the Village, of dealing with and abating the
public health nuisance, including contractors' fees and the Village's
costs for services performed in association with the site. The Village's
costs may also include, but shall not be limited to:
(1) Posting of the site;
(2) Notification of affected parties;
(3) Securing the site, providing limited access to the site, and
prosecution of unauthorized persons found at the site;
(4) Expenses related to the recovery of costs, including the assessment
process;
(5) Laboratory fees;
(6) Cleanup services;
(7) Administrative fees;
(8) Legal fees; and
(9) Other associated costs.
J. Village action and recovery of costs.
(1) If the site owner fails to comply with any of the requirements of this
section, the Director of Neighborhood Services is authorized to
take all reasonable actions necessary to abate the public health
nuisance, including, but not limited to, contracting with a Villageapproved
environmental hazard testing and cleaning firm to
conduct the work outlined in Subsection F(2) above.
(2) If the costs to clean the site or to clean or dispose of the personal
property at the site are prohibitively high in relation to the value of
the site or the personal property, the Village is authorized to
remove or demolish the site, structure or building and/or dispose of
the personal property therein. These actions shall be taken in
accordance with the provisions of § 66.0413, Wis. Stats., together
with any amendments or modifications thereto.
(3) If the Village abates the public health nuisance, in addition to any
other legal remedy, the Village shall be entitled to recover all of its
out-of-pocket costs plus an additional 25% of such costs for
administrative and legal expense. The Village may recover its costs
both by civil action against the owner of the site, and by assessing
such costs as a special charge against the site to be collected at the
§ 221-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-20
1:323
time real estate taxes are due and payable. The Director of
Neighborhood Services is authorized to notify any lien and/or
mortgage holders of the circumstances affecting the site.
K. Recovery of costs from persons causing damage. No provision of this
section shall limit the ability or right of any impacted individual(s) or
entity to recover costs specified under this section from any person(s)
or other entity contributing to the creation of a public health nuisance,
such as the operators of the site, and/or from other lawful sources.
L. Site owner and address. When the site is real property and the owner or
the address of the owner of the site is unknown, the owner and the
owner's address is deemed to be that of the property's taxpayer's name
and address as that information is maintained by the county auditor's
office. When the site is a vehicle, boat or trailer and the owner or the
address of the owner of the site is unknown, the owner and the owner's
address is deemed to be that of the person on file as the owner on the
current or most recent title to the vehicle, boat or trailer.
M. Unauthorized removal of postings. It is unlawful for any person, except
those authorized by the Village, to remove a temporary or permanent
declaration of public health nuisance and/or do-not-enter, unsafe-tooccupy
order from a site.
N. Entry into or onto site. While a declaration of public health nuisance for
an affected site is in effect and has been posted at the site, no persons
are permitted inside the site or on the site property without the prior
written consent of the Director of Neighborhood Services or as
otherwise authorized by this section. To confirm compliance with this
section and to execute their duties under this section, law enforcement
officers, the Director of Neighborhood Services, and any persons
designated by the Building Inspector may enter onto the site property
or enter into the site at any time while a declaration of public health
nuisance is in effect for the site.
O. Removal of personal property from the site. While a declaration of
public health nuisance for an affected site is in effect and has been
posted at the site, no personal property may be removed from the site
without prior written consent from the Director of Neighborhood
Services. Consent to remove personal property shall only be granted at
the discretion of the Director of Neighborhood Services, and only in
cases of hardship after:
(1) A Village-approved environmental hazard testing and cleaning firm
has advised the Village, in writing, that the item(s) of personal
property can be sufficiently cleaned to remove all harmful
contamination; and
(2) The owner of the personal property agrees in writing:
(a) That the owner is aware of the danger of using the
contaminated property;
§ 221-20 HOBART CODE § 221-20
1:324
Chapter 227
PROPERTY, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 215. Zoning — See Ch. 295.
(b) That the owner will thoroughly clean the property to remove all
contamination before the property is used; and
(c) That the owner releases and agrees to indemnify the Village,
its agents, employees, assigns and the Village of Hobart Board
of Trustees from all liability to the owner and/or third persons
for injuries or damages caused, or alleged to have been caused,
by the contaminated property.
P. Penalties. Any person(s), firm(s), corporation(s), or other entity/entities
violating any provision of this section shall, in addition to any costs
above set forth, also be subject to the penalties as provided in § 1-3 of
this Code together with the costs of prosecution. The default of
payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution may result in
imprisonment in the Brown County jail until said forfeiture and costs
are paid, but not to exceed six months.
§ 221-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-20
1:325

ARTICLE I
Obstructions and Encroachments
[Adopted as § 4.4 of the 2000 Code]
§ 227-1. Prohibited obstructions and encroachments.
No person shall encroach upon or obstruct or encumber any road, sidewalk,
public grounds or land dedicated to public use or any part thereof or
permit such encroachment or encumbrance to be placed or remain on
any public right-of-way. Examples include but are not limited to fences,
plantings, decorative monuments, lights, drain tile, etc. Any damage to
or costs incurred for removal of said items or delays in maintenance or
construction operations by the Village or its representatives as a result of
items within the right-of-way shall be borne by the responsible property
owner.
§ 227-2. Exceptions.
The prohibition of § 227-1 shall not apply to the following:
§ 227-3. Violations and penalties.
Penalties shall be as set forth in § 1-3.
A. Public utility encroachments authorized by the Village of Hobart.
B. Building material when placed upon the roadway or sidewalk upon
conditions prescribed by the Public Works Director, Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector or their designee, who may require
such materials to be protected by barricades or appropriate lights.
C. Signs permitted under Chapter 295, Zoning.
D. Approved mailboxes.
E. Special exceptions as made by the Zoning Administrator/Building
Inspector in writing.
§ 227-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-3
1:327

ARTICLE II
Damaging Curbs
[Adopted as § 3.821 of the 2000 Code]
§ 227-4. Driving over curbs.
No person shall run a vehicle over a curb in the Village, unless that curb
shall have been properly blocked or planked to ensure no damage to the
curb.
A. "Properly blocked" means adequately covered behind the curb with
crushed stone to a sufficient depth to protect the back of the curb and
four-by-four planking in front of the curb. All tires crossing the curb
shall be supported in this manner. This requirement may be waived by
the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector for good cause.
§ 227-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-4
1:329
Chapter 233
SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Direct sellers — See Ch. 142.
§ 227-4 HOBART CODE § 227-4
1:330
ARTICLE I
Closing-Out Sales
[Adopted as § 3.819 of the 2000 Code]
§ 233-1. Sales regulated.
No person shall conduct a "closing out" sale of merchandise in the Village
except as hereinafter provided.
§ 233-2. License required.
Every person shall obtain a Village "closing-out sale license" before retailing
or advertising for retail any merchandise represented to be merchandise of
a bankrupt, insolvent, assignee, liquidator, adjuster, administrator, trustee,
executor, receiver, wholesaler, jobber, manufacturer, or of any business that
is in liquidation, that is closing out, closing or disposing of its stock or a
particular part or department thereof, that has lost its lease or has been or
is being forced out of business, that is disposing of stock on hand because
of damage by fire, water, smoke or other cause, or that for any reason is
forced to dispose of stock on hand. This license shall be obtained in advance
if the advertisement or representation, expressed or implied, tends to lead
people to believe that this sale is a selling out or closing out sale.
§ 233-3. License application.
Every person requiring a "closing-out sale license" shall make an
application in writing to the Village Clerk-Treasurer on the form provided by
the Clerk-Treasurer and attach thereto an inventory containing a complete
and accurate list of the stock of merchandise on hand to be sold at such
sale and an affidavit by the applicant or his duly authorized agent that
the inventory is true and correct to the knowledge of the person making
such affidavit. The affidavit shall include the names and addresses of the
principals, such as the partners, officers and directors and the principal
stockholders and owners of the business, and of the inventoried
merchandise.
A. The inventory shall contain the cost price of the articles listed therein,
together with the date of purchases and the identity of the seller. If the
merchandise was purchased for a lump sum or other circumstances
make the listing of the cost price for each article impracticable, the
inventory shall state the lump sum paid for such merchandise and the
circumstances of the purchase.
B. The application shall also specify the name and address of the applicant
and, if an agent, the person for whom he is acting as an agent, the place
at which the sale is to be conducted and the period of time the proposed
sale is to take place. The license shall specify the period for which it is
granted, which shall not exceed 60 successive days, Sundays and legal
holidays excepted, from the date of the license.
§ 233-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-4
1:331
§ 233-4. Extension of license period.
§ 233-5. Sale of additional merchandise.
It shall be unlawful to sell, offer or expose for sale at any sale for which
a license is required by this chapter any merchandise not listed in the
inventory required by § 233-3 herein. Any merchant may, however, in the
regular course of business, conduct a "closing out" sale of merchandise and
at the same time sell other merchandise, if the merchandise for the sale of
which a license is required shall be distinguished by a tag or otherwise so
that the "closing out" merchandise is readily ascertainable to prospective
purchasers. The merchant shall not label or tag other merchandise in a
manner to indicate, or lead a prospective purchaser to believe that such
merchandise is of the class or classes for which a license is required.
Each article sold in violation of the provisions hereof shall constitute a
separate offense, and any false or misleading statement in the required
inventory, application or extension application shall constitute a violation of
this chapter.
§ 233-6. Verification of inventory.
The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall verify the details of the inventory filed in
connection with an application for this license and shall also verify the items
of merchandise sold during any sale under this chapter. No licensee shall
A. The period of time that a sale may be conducted may be extended by the
Village Clerk-Treasurer if, at any time during the term of the license, a
written application for such extension, duly verified by affidavit of the
applicant, is filed by the licensee with the Village Clerk-Treasurer.
B. This application shall state the amount of merchandise listed in the
original inventory which has been sold and the amount which still
remains for sale and shall state the time for which an extension is
requested.
C. No extension shall be granted if any merchandise has been added to the
stock listed in the inventory since the date of the license. The applicant
shall satisfy the Village Clerk-Treasurer by affidavit, or as otherwise
directed by him, that no merchandise has been added to the stock since
the date of issuance of the license.
D. The Village Clerk-Treasurer may grant or deny the application. If
granted, the period of the extension shall be determined by the Village
Clerk-Treasurer, but shall not exceed 30 days from the expiration of the
original license. If the extension is granted, it shall be issued by the
Village Clerk-Treasurer upon the payment of an additional license perday
fee, in an amount as set from time to time by resolution of the
Village Board, for the time during which it is granted.89
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 233-4 HOBART CODE § 233-6
1:332
refuse to furnish on demand to the Village Clerk-Treasurer, or any person
designated by him for that purpose, all the facts connected with the stock
on hand or any other information that he may reasonably require in order to
make a thorough investigation of all phases of the sale, so far as they relate
to the rights of the public.
§ 233-7. Fees.90
The fee for such licenses shall be as set from time to time by the Village
Board, based on length of license and price of the inventory.
§ 233-8. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to sales by public officers or sales under judicial
process.
§ 233-9. Violations and penalties.91
Any person violating this chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided
in § 1-3.
90.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
91.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 233-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-9
1:333
Chapter 237
SEWER USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water — See Ch. 273. Zoning — See Ch. 295.
§ 233-9 HOBART CODE § 233-9
1:334
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 237-1. Purpose; intent.
This chapter regulates the use of public and private sewers and drains,
connections to the public sewerage system, discharge of septage into the
public sewerage system, and the discharge of waters and wastes into the
public sewerage system within the Village of Hobart. It also provides for and
explains the method used for levying and collecting wastewater treatment
service charges, sets uniform requirements for discharges into the
wastewater collection and treatment systems, and enables said Village to
comply with administrative provisions, and other discharge criteria which
are required or authorized by the State of Wisconsin or federal law. Its
intent is to derive the maximum public benefit by regulating the
characteristics of wastewater discharged into the sewerage system.
§ 237-2. Regulation; revenues; effect on other provisions.
This chapter provides a means for regulating the use of public sewers,
effectuating connections thereto, determining wastewater volumes,
constituents and characteristics, the setting of charges and fees, and the
issuing of permits to certain users. Revenues derived from the application of
this chapter shall be used to defray the costs of operating and maintaining
the wastewater collection and treatment systems and to provide sufficient
funds for capital outlay, debt service costs and capital improvements. The
charges and fees herein have been established pursuant to requirements of
the Wisconsin Statutes. This chapter shall supersede any previous chapters,
rules or regulations of the Village relating to the subject matter hereof; and
shall repeal all parts thereof that may be inconsistent with this chapter.
If there is any conflict between this chapter and any applicable Wisconsin
Statute, the Wisconsin Statute shall control in such instance.
§ 237-3. Legal authority.92
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the power and authority conferred by
Ch. 61, Wis. Stats., §§ 66.0827 and 66.0821, Wis. Stats., as amended from
time to time.
§ 237-4. Organization.
The Village of Hobart/Hobart Utility District shall have all of the power and
authority authorized by applicable statutes, and nothing contained in this
chapter shall prohibit or otherwise limit the exercise of all such statutory
power and authority.
92.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 237-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-5
1:335
§ 237-5. Curative provisions.
All acts or actions performed or done by or on behalf of the Village of
Hobart/Village Utility District, or Hobart Sanitary Districts prior to the
effective date of this chapter are hereby ratified, confirmed and declared to
be valid.
§ 237-6. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this chapter shall be as follows:
APPROVING AUTHORITY OF THE VILLAGE/UTILITY DISTRICT — The
Village Board or its duly authorized committee, agent or representative.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building or structure and conveys it to the
building sewer.
BUILDING SEWER — The pipe extension beginning at the outside of the
inner face of the building wall, to a point of connection with the public
sewer.
CARBONACEOUS BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (CBOD) — The
quantity of oxygen used in the biochemical degradation of organic material
in five days at 20° C. when the oxidation of reduced forms of nitrogen is
prevented by the addition of an inhibitor. This analytical procedure shall be
performed in accordance with Standard Methods.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS — Carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand,
suspended solids, and total kjeldahl nitrogen, plus additional pollutants
identified in the WPDES permit for the publicly owned treatment works
receiving the pollutant if such works were designed to treat such additional
pollutants to a substantial degree.93
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. Wastewater or septage shall be considered free of
floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not
interfere with the collection or treatment system.
GARBAGE — The residue from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing
of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of food products and
produce.
GBMSD ORDINANCE — The Sewer Use Ordinance of the Green Bay
Metropolitan Sewerage District (herein "GBMSD") adopted on December
18, 1989, and any amendments thereto or restatements thereof.
GROUND GARBAGE — The residue from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such degree that all
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 237-5 HOBART CODE § 237-6
1:336
particulates will be no greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension and will be
carried freely in suspension under normal flow conditions in sewers.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS OR WASTEWATER — Wastewater or
septage with pollutants of such a strength that will adversely affect or
disrupt the wastewater treatment processes or effluent quality or sludge
quality if discharged to the sewerage system facility.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — The wastewater from an industrial process, trade,
or business, as distinct from sanitary sewage, including cooling water and
the discharge from sewage treatment facilities.
LOCAL DISTRIBUTION PIPES — Have laterals and provide local public
water or public sewer service to individual residences and other buildings
servicing water and sewer customers.
MAY — Is permissible.
MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER — The wastewater of a municipality, including
that of the Village of Hobart/Hobart Utility District. From the standpoint
of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes
from residential, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions,
together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may
have inadvertently entered the sewerage system of the municipality.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet, including storm sewers, into a
watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or
groundwater.
PARTS PER MILLION — A weight-to-weight ratio; the parts per million
value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million
gallons of water.
PERSON — Any and all persons, including any individual, firm, company,
municipal or private corporation, association, society, institution,
enterprise, government agency or other entity.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of hydrogen ion concentration. The
concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions in grains per liter of solution.
Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and a hydrogen ion
concentration of 101.
PHOSPHORUS — The quantity of phosphorous as determined in accordance
with Standard Methods.
PUBLIC SEWER — Any sewer owned or provided by or subject to the
jurisdiction of the Village of Hobart or any other municipality.
SANITARY SEWAGE — A combination of liquid and water-carried wastes
discharged from toilets and/or sanitary plumbing facilities, together with
such ground, surface and stormwaters as may have inadvertently entered
the sewerage system.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions,
§ 237-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-6
1:337
together with small quantities of ground, storm and surface waters that are
not admitted intentionally.
SEPTAGE — The wastewater or contents of septic or holding tanks, closing
chambers, grease interceptors, seepage beds, seepage pits, seepage
trenches, privies or portable rest rooms.
SEWER SERVICE CHARGE — A service charge levied on users of the
wastewater collection and treatment facilities for payment of use-related
capital expenses as well as the operation and maintenance costs, building
replacement costs, of said facilities.
SEWER SYSTEM — The public sanitary sewers within a sewerage system.
The facilities which convey wastewater from individual structures, from
private property to the public sanitary sewer, or its equivalent, are
specifically excluded from the definition of "sewer system"; except that
pumping units and pressurized lines for individual structures or groups of
structures may be included as part of a sewer system when such units are
cost-effective and are owned and maintained by the Village of Hobart. For
example, a building sewer is not part of the sewer system.
SEWER TRANSMISSION MAIN (also called "SEWER INTERCEPTOR") —
A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport wastewaters from collector
sewers to a treatment facility.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM — All structures, conduits and pipes, by which sewage
is collected, treated, and disposed of, except plumbing inside and in
connection with buildings served, and service pipes, from building to street
main, i.e., a building sewer.
SHALL — Is mandatory.
SLUG LOAD — Any substance release at a discharge rate and/or
concentration which cause interference to wastewater treatment processes
or plugging or surcharging of the sewer system.
STANDARD METHODS — The examination and analytical procedures set
forth in the most recent edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Wastewater" published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water
Environment Federation and is in compliance with Federal Regulations
40 CFR 136, "Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis of
Pollutants," all as amended from time to time.
STATS. — The Wisconsin Statutes in effect from time to time.
STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed "STORM SEWER") — Drain or sewer
for conveying surface water, groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted
water from any source.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — That portion of the rainfall that is collected and
drained into the storm sewers.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of, or are
in suspension in, water, wastewater, septage, or other liquids, and that are
§ 237-6 HOBART CODE § 237-6
1:338
removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods and
referred to as "nonfilterable residue."
TOTAL KJELDAHL NITROGEN (TKN) — The quantity of organic nitrogen
and ammonia as determined in accordance with Standard Methods.
VILLAGE — The Village of Hobart, a municipal corporation located in Brown
County, Wisconsin.
VILLAGE BOARD — The Village Board of the Village.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES — The structures, equipment, and processes
required to collect, carry away, store, and treat domestic and industrial
waste and septage and dispose of the effluent and sludge.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS — An arrangement of devices and
structures for treating wastewater, septage, industrial waste, and sludge.
Sometimes used as synonymous with waste treatment.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water,
either continuously or intermittently.
WATER TRANSMISSION MAIN — A water pipe which is 12 inches or more
in diameter and whose primary purpose is to transport potable water from
water supply sources to local distribution pipes. Water transmission mains
do not have laterals and local distribution pipes are not allowed.
§ 237-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-6
1:339

ARTICLE II
Management, Operation and Control
§ 237-7. Management.
The management, operation, and control of the sewer system for the Village
of Hobart shall be vested in the Village Board. All records, minutes and all
written proceedings thereof shall be kept by the Village Clerk-Treasurer.
The Clerk-Treasurer shall keep all the financial records thereof.
§ 237-8. Construction authority.
The Village Board shall have the power to construct sewer lines for public
use, and shall have the power to lay sewer pipes in and through the
public alleys, streets, and public grounds located within the Village; and
generally, to do all such work as may be found necessary or convenient
in the management of the sewer system. The Village Board shall have
power by itself, its officers, agents, and servants, to enter into any land
in the Village for the purpose of making examination or supervise in the
performance of their duties under this chapter, without liability therefor,
and the Village shall have power to purchase and acquire for the Village all
real and personal property which may be necessary for construction of the
sewer system, or for any repair, remodeling, or additions thereto.
§ 237-9. Owner's maintenance of building sewer.
The owner of property abutting a public sewer shall maintain sewer service
from the public sewer main to the structure or building on the owner's
property, including all controls between the same, without expense to the
Village, except when they are damaged as a result of negligence or
carelessness on the part of the Village. Without intending to limit the
generality of the foregoing, the owner has the sole responsibility for the
repair and maintenance of all building sewers; and the ownership thereof
shall at all times be vested in such property owner. All sewer services must
be maintained free of defective conditions, by and at the expense of the
owner or occupant of the property. When any sewer service is to be relaid
and there are two or more buildings on such service, each building shall
be disconnected from such service and a new sewer service, with individual
service connections, shall be installed for each building. In the event of any
obstruction of, damage to or repair of a building sewer, the same shall be
the responsibility of the property owner, except as otherwise provided for in
this chapter.
§ 237-10. Title to real estate and personal property.
All property, real, personal, and fixed, including but not limited to
easements, acquired for the construction of the sewer system, and all plans,
specifications, diagrams, papers, books and records connected therewith,
and all buildings, machinery, and fixtures pertaining thereto, shall be the
property of and titled in the name of the Village. Nothing contained in this
§ 237-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-10
1:341
chapter shall be construed as revoking, changing, abandoning or otherwise
altering any conveyance of property previously made to the Village or
Village Sanitary Districts prior to the effective date of this chapter; and such
title shall be deemed to be vested in the Village as provided for herein.
§ 237-10 HOBART CODE § 237-10
1:342
ARTICLE III
Administrative Rules and Regulations
§ 237-11. General provisions.
The following rules and regulations for the government of licensed
plumbers, sewer users, property owners and others, are hereby adopted
and established:
A. Agreement to rules and regulations. All persons now receiving
sewerage service from the Village or who may hereafter make
application for such service or who otherwise receive such service,
shall be considered as having agreed to be bound by all of the terms and
provisions of this chapter, as amended from time to time; and such
agreement is a condition precedent to the provision of such sewerage
service.
B. Application for service. Every person desiring to connect property,
buildings or structures to public sewers shall make application in
writing to the Village on such forms as are prescribed for that purpose
prior to commencing use of such service. The application must describe
fully and truthfully all the wastes which are anticipated to be
discharged. If the applicant is not the fee simple owner of the property,
the written consent of the owner must accompany the application.
Persons connected to the public sewers of the Village are referred to
herein as "users." By submitting such an application, all users are
deemed to have agreed to be bound by this chapter, as amended from
time to time. If it appears that the service applied for will not provide
adequate service for the contemplated use, the Village Board may
reject the application. If the Village Board approves the application, it
shall issue a connection permit as shown on the application. No service
shall be provided or application approved without prior payment of all
applicable fees.
C. Application fee waiver. Where the application for service is for a
connection to the Village's public sewers, the application shall be
accompanied by an application fee in an amount to be determined from
time to time by the Village Board. Such fee shall cover the cost of
processing the application and inspection of the Village Board.
Application fees may vary in amount between residential users and
commercial/industrial users. The payment of this fee shall be in
addition to any connection fees that may be charged to or on account of
new users by the Village Board or by GBMSD.
D. Inspections. Any connection to the public sewers within the Village
shall be subject to the prior inspection and approval of the work by any
authorized representative of the Village. No trench or other excavation
shall be filled, or any connection completed, without such prior
inspection. The applicant requesting the connection shall reimburse the
Village for all inspection costs incurred, if not previously paid as part of
the application fee.
§ 237-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-11
1:343
§ 237-12. Plumbers.
No plumber, pipe fitter, or other person will be permitted to do any
plumbing or pipe-fitting work in connection with the sewer system without
first receiving a license from the State of Wisconsin and obtaining
permission from the Village in which the work is to be performed. All service
connections to the sewer main shall comply with the state plumbing code,
as amended.
§ 237-13. Mandatory connections.
E. Disconnection and refusal of service. Sewer service may be
disconnected or refused for any of the following reasons:
(1) Violation of this chapter, as amended from time to time;
(2) Violation of the GBMSD ordinance, as amended from time to time;
(3) Failure to pay the application fee, any connection fee or delinquent
account of the user.
F. Disconnection for delinquent accounts. A bill for service is delinquent if
unpaid after the due date shown on the bill. The Village may disconnect
service for a delinquent bill by giving the user at least eight calendar
days prior to disconnection, a written disconnect notice which may be
included in the bill for service. For purposes of this rule, the due date
shall not be less than 20 days after issuance of the bill. The Village may
disconnect without notice where a dangerous condition exists for as
long as the condition exists. Service may be denied to any user for
failure to comply with the applicable requirements of these rules and
regulations or if a dangerous or unsafe condition exists on the user's
property.
G. Subsequent amendments. The Village Board reserves the right to
subsequently amend, modify, repeal and modify, any or all provisions of
this chapter.
A. In order to assure preservation of public health, comfort and safety, the
owner of each parcel of land adjacent to a sewer main on which there
exists a building usable for human habitation, or in a block through
which such system is extended, shall connect all existing interior sewer
plumbing to such sewer on or before 90 days from the date the Village
gives written notice to the property owner requiring connection. The
Village shall give the notice requiring connection within 14 days of
completion of final construction. If any person fails to connect within
the ninety-day period specified above, the Village may provide written
notice of noncompliance, and if the owner fails to bring the system into
compliance within 10 days, the Village of Hobart may issue a separate
citation for each day of noncompliance or may cause connection to be
made, and the expense thereof shall be assessed as a special tax against
the property. Notwithstanding the requirements set forth above, a
§ 237-11 HOBART CODE § 237-13
1:344
§ 237-14. Building sewer connection expense.
Persons attaching to a public sewer shall have the building sewer, or lateral,
installed at their own cost and expense.
§ 237-15. Tap permits.
After sewer connections have been introduced into any building or upon
any premises, no plumber shall make any alterations, extensions, or
attachments, unless the party ordering such tapping or other work exhibits
the proper permit for the same from the Village.
§ 237-16. Obstruction of building sewers in public right-of-way.
In the event of any blockage, drainage or break in any building sewer, which
occurs within a public street, alley, highway or other public right-of-way, the
Village shall have the exclusive right and option to repair the building sewer
within said street, alley, highway, or right-of-way. In such event, the owner
of the building sewer shall promptly reimburse the Village for all costs so
incurred. If not so reimbursed, the same shall be added to the owner's
sewer service charges and collected in the same manner as such changes
are so collected.94
property owner shall not be required to connect if the property is
located along a major sewer transmission main route and the Village
does not provide local sewer collection mains for service to properties
along the transmission main. Further, the requirement to connect to
public sewer may be delayed during the frost season if the Village
Board, in its sole discretion, decides to delay the effective date of the
notice until after the frost season has passed. Finally, the requirement
to connect to public sewer will be voluntary as long as a residence
is more than 400 feet from the property line where a sewer main is
installed and running past such residence.
B. If the Village of Hobart causes a connection to be made as provided
above, the affected property owner may, within 30 days after the receipt
of written notice from the Village that work has been completed, file a
written notice with the Clerk-Treasurer of the Village requesting a
hardship exception based upon an inability to pay the assessment in one
lump sum, and further requesting that the assessment be levied in two,
three, four or five annual installments. If the Village Board grants this
hardship exception, interest shall accrue on the deferred balance of the
assessment in the amount not to exceed 15% per annum, as determined
by the Village Board and, in addition, the deferred balance of the
assessment shall be a special tax lien on the subject property.
94.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 11.416, which immediately followed this section, was repealed
3-19-2013.
§ 237-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-17
1:345
§ 237-17. User use only.
No user shall allow other persons or other services to connect to the sewer
system through their lateral or building sewer.
§ 237-18. Discontinuance of service.
Whenever any person desires to discontinue sewer service from the system,
the Village must be notified in writing prior to such disconnection.
Disconnection shall only be allowed where a structure is demolished. The
fact that a structure is vacant shall not entitle the proper owner to
discontinue sewer service or to an abatement of sewer service charges.
§ 237-19. User to permit inspection.
Every user shall permit the Village or its duly authorized agent, at all
reasonable times to enter their premises or building to examine the pipes
and fixtures, and the manner in which the drains, and sewer connections
operate; and the user must at all times, frankly and without concealment,
answer all questions put to them relative to its use, all in accordance with
this chapter and § 196.171, Wis. Stats., to the extent applicable.
§ 237-20. Village responsibility.
It is expressly stipulated that no claim shall be made against the Village, its
Trustees, agents, employees and representatives by reason of the breaking,
clogging, stoppage, or freezing of any pipes; or from any damage arising
from repairing mains, making corrections or extensions or any other work
that may be deemed necessary. The right is hereby reserved to cut off
sewer service at any time for the purpose of repairs or any other necessary
purpose, any permit granted or regulations to the contrary notwithstanding.
Whenever it shall become necessary to shut off the sewer, the Village shall,
if practicable, give notice to each and every user within the affected area of
the time when such service will be shut off.
§ 237-21. Excavations within public right-of-way.
A. In making excavations in public streets or other public highways for
laying pipe or making repairs, the paving and the earth removed must
be deposited in a manner that will result in the least inconvenience to
the public. Prior to commencing any such excavations, an excavation
permit shall be obtained from the Village. In connection therewith, the
person making application for such permit shall comply with such terms
and conditions as the Village may impose with respect to such
excavation. Further, the person obtaining the permit shall guarantee
that all excavation and repair of streets and the construction of facilities
shall be free from defect in material and installation for a period of one
year following completion of construction. No person shall have any
such excavation made in any street or highway open at any time without
barricades; and during the night, warning lights must be maintained at
such excavations. In refilling the opening, after the pipes are laid, the
§ 237-17 HOBART CODE § 237-21
1:346
§ 237-22. Tapping the mains.95
Connections to the sewer system other than building sewer connections
shall be done only in accordance with the GBMSD Sewer Use Ordinance, as
amended.
§ 237-23. Installment of building sewers.96
All building sewers on private property shall be installed in accordance
with Ch. SPS 382, Wis. Adm. Code, "Design, Construction, Installation,
Supervision, and Inspections of Plumbing," as amended. All laterals shall
be inspected. The building sewer and/or private interceptor main sewer
shall be inspected upon completion of placement of the pipe and before
backfilling and tested before or after backfilling.
§ 237-24. Application of GBMSD ordinance.97
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, any connection
to the public sewers shall be subject to the provisions of the GBMSD Sewer
Use Ordinance, as amended from time to time, to the extent applicable.
In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the
GBMSD ordinance, the GBMSD ordinance shall control.
§ 237-25. New connections.
earth must be laid in layers of not more than nine inches in depth,
and each layer thoroughly compacted to prevent settling. This work,
together with the replacing of sidewalks, ballast and paving, must be
done so as to make the street as good, at least, as before it was
disturbed, and satisfactory to the Village. No opening of the streets for
tapping the pipes will be permitted when the ground is frozen, except in
emergency situations or except as the Village may otherwise expressly
allow in writing.
B. Any excavation performed under this section shall be subject to the
inspection of the Village, and no work shall be deemed completed
unless and until accepted by the Village. All work performed under this
section and the inspection thereof shall be at the cost of the person
obtaining the excavation permit described herein.
A. New connections to the Sanitary District's sewer system will be allowed
only if there is available capacity in all of the downstream wastewater
collection and treatment facilities of the Village and GBMSD.
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
97.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 237-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-25
1:347
B. Initial users of the public sanitary sewer system shall pay a one-time
connection charge to be determined by resolution of the Hobart board
of Trustees. This connection charge must be paid in full prior to
connecting to the sewer system. This charge is in addition to the permit
fee.
§ 237-25 HOBART CODE § 237-25
1:348
ARTICLE IV
Use of Public Sewer
§ 237-26. No clean water discharges.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters
such as stormwater, ground water, roof rain, subsurface, drainage or
collecting water to any sanitary sewer.
§ 237-27. Compliance with GBMSD ordinance.
No person shall discharge wastes into a public sewer within the Sanitary
District, except in accordance with the provisions of the Sewer Use
Ordinance adopted 7-23-1985, the GBMSD ordinance, as amended from
time to time.
§ 237-28. Special arrangements.
No provision contained in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting
any special agreement between the Village and any person whereby an
industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be admitted to the
wastewater collection and treatment facilities, either before or after
pretreatment, provided that there is no impairment of the functioning of the
wastewater collection and treatment facilities by reason of the admission of
such wastes.
§ 237-29. No discharge to violate general permit for bypassing.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any waters,
wastewaters or other substances of any kind or nature that will result in or
otherwise cause a violation of any general permit for bypassing issued by
the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and held by the Village.
§ 237-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-29
1:349

ARTICLE V
Public Sewer Main Extensions
§ 237-30. Application and approval.
The extension of public sewer mains to serve new customers/users is
subject to the prior review and approval of the Village Board and any
other governmental agency having appropriate jurisdiction thereof. Any
person seeking to develop real property and requiring sewer service in
connection with such development, shall make application to the Village
for a public sewer main extension, if so required in order to serve such
development. Such application shall be in writing and shall set forth the
following information:
§ 237-31. Conditions of approval.
The Village shall have the sole discretion to approve or disapprove the
requested public sewer main extensions. In granting such approval, the
Village Board may condition its approval upon compliance with:
A. Name of development and the legal description of the property
involved.
B. Plat map or certified survey map or other map showing street layout
and lot sizes.
C. Zoning of the property.
D. Proposed plans and specifications for the sewers.
E. Name and address of consulting engineer.
F. Number of housing units and/or other units to be constructed.
G. Such additional information as the Village may require.
A. Any applicable ordinances of the Village, GBMSD or Brown County.
B. Any applicable statute, rules, orders or codes of the State of Wisconsin.
C. The preparation of plans and specifications for the sewer main
extension, subject to the approval of the Village and its consulting
engineer.
D. The applicant making and installing the public sewer main extension at
his/her/its/sole cost and expense or otherwise providing surety bond or
other security to ensure that the main will be so constructed within a
reasonable period of time.
E. The dedication of such rights-of-way, easements and sewerage facilities
as the Village may reasonably require.
F. The payment of all costs and expenses incurred or to be incurred by the
Village in connection with the review and approval of such sewer
§ 237-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-31
1:351
§ 237-32. Contract for sewer improvements.
The Village Board may require the person filing an application pursuant
to § 237-30 hereof, to enter into a written development agreement with
the Village, as a condition of the approval of the sewer main extension.
Such agreement shall define the scope of the work, the obligations of
the applicant to construct the sewer facilities, the requirement of security
for performance of the applicant's obligations set forth therein, and such
other matters as the Village may reasonably determine, the applicant shall
reimburse the Village for all attorney's fees incurred hereunder.
§ 237-33. Sewer extension by district.
The Village may, on its own, cause any public sewer main to be extended at
such time and under such conditions as the Village deems appropriate in its
sole discretion.
§ 237-34. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the following meaning under this chapter:
DEBT SERVICE CHARGES — Includes all costs associated with repayment
of debt incurred for the construction and/or rehabilitation of the wastewater
collection system and treatment facility.
NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTEWATER — Wastewater with
concentrations of CBOD, suspended solids, nitrogen and phosphorus
greater than 200, 200, 50 and 12 milligrams per liter (mg/l), respectively.
NORMAL USER — A user whose contributions to the sewerage system
consist only of normal domestic strength wastewater originating from a
house, apartment, flat, or other living quarters occupied by a person or
persons constituting a distinct household, business or commercial
enterprise.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS — Includes all costs associated
with the operation and maintenance of the sewerage system, including but
not limited to administrative costs and expenses.
REPLACEMENT COSTS — Includes all costs necessary to replace
equipment as required to maintain capacity and performance during the
design life of the sewerage facilities. When required by appropriate
authority having jurisdiction thereof, a separate, segregated, distinct
extension, including but not limited to engineers' fees, attorneys' fees,
inspection fees and other similar costs and expenses.
G. The payment of any applicable connection fees due or to become due
pursuant to this chapter.
H. Any other condition determined by the Village to be fair and reasonable
in order to protect the interest of the Village in connection with the
proposed development.
§ 237-31 HOBART CODE § 237-34
1:352
replacement fund shall be established and used only for replacement of
equipment.
RESTAURANT STRENGTH WASTEWATER — All restaurants within the
Village shall be charged at the residential rate beginning with the first
quarter of 2000.
§ 237-35. Measurement.
The unit of volume measurement for wastewater or other wastes discharged
into the Village's sewerage system shall be 1,000 gallons, United States
Liquid Measure. The unit for assessing costs with respect to strength
wastewater parameters shall be avoirdupois pounds.
§ 237-36. Policy.
It shall be the policy of the Village to obtain sufficient revenues to pay the
costs of the operation and maintenance of the sewerage system including
debt service and replacement fund (i.e., a cash account to be used for
future, expenditures for obtaining or installing replacement equipment
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary to maintain the capacity
and performance of the sewerage system during the service life for which
such facilities were designed and constructed), through a system of sewer
service charges as defined in this chapter. The system shall assure that each
user of the sewerage system pays their fair and proportionate share of the
cost of such facilities.
§ 237-37. Sewer service charge generally.
Charges to each user shall be based on wastewater parameters established
from time to time by the Village Board. The sewer service charges shall
consist of the sum of the annual debt service charges, all annual operation
and maintenance costs, all replacement costs, and all sewer service charges
levied or assessed to the Village by GBMSD.
§ 237-38. Biennial review.
The sewer service charges of the Village shall be reviewed not less than
biennially. Sewer service charges shall be adjusted as required, to reflect
actual number and size of users and actual costs. Users will be notified
annually on the portion of such sewer service charges attributable to
operation and maintenance, debt service, and replacement costs. For
purposes hereof, the Village may satisfy this notice requirement by
including in the budget summary required to be published under § 65.90,
Wis. Stats., a statement of the aforesaid components of the sewer service
charges, based on the results of operations for the preceding fiscal year.
§ 237-39. Sewer service charges.
A sewer service charge is hereby imposed upon each lot, parcel of land,
building, or premises served by the public sewer or otherwise discharging
§ 237-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-39
1:353
sewage, including industrial wastes, into the public sewerage system. Such
sewer service charge shall be payable as hereinafter provided and an
amount determined as follows:
A. Category A. Service charges shall be imposed on each user whose
water use is metered and whose sewer discharges are normal domestic
strength wastewater. The Category A service charge is of the following
form:
Service charge = Customer charge + volume charge
Customer
charge
= A flat rate based on the size of the water meter
Volume charge = The volume of metered water in thousands of
gallons multiplied by the volume rate
Volume rate = The volume unit price for sewer service
expressed in dollars per 1,000 gallons, as
determined by the Village
B. Category B.
(1) Service charges shall be imposed on each user whose water use is
not metered and whose sewage discharges are normal domestic
strength wastewater. The Category B sewer service charge shall be
of the form as follows:
Service
charge
= Equivalent Residential Units (ERUs) multiplied
by the Equivalent Residential Unit Rate (ERU
rate)
A single ERU = Shall mean a single-family residential dwelling
unit that discharges normal domestic strength
wastewater
RU rate = The average cost of providing wastewater
service to a residential customer for all
calendar quarter, plus proportional share of the
administrative and billing costs of the Village.
(2) No user shall be assigned less than one ERU. The number of
residential unit equivalents for nonresidential users shall be as
determined by the Village Board from time to time.
C. Category C. Service charges shall be imposed on users whose sewage
discharges are high-strength wastewater having organic
concentrations of carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand (CBOD)
greater than 200 milligrams per liter (mg/l) and/or suspended solids
greater than 200 milligrams per liter (mg/l) and/or suspended solids
(TKN) greater than 50 milligrams per liter (mg/l) and/or phosphorus
greater than 12 milligrams per liter (mg/l). The minimum Category C
service charge shall be based on a concentration of 20 mg/l CBOD, 200
mg/l suspended solids, 50 mg/l TKN and 12 mg/l phosphorus. The form
of the Category C service charge is as follows:
§ 237-39 HOBART CODE § 237-39
1:354
§ 237-40. Rate determinations.
The Village Board shall determine each year the rates referred to in
§ 237-39 hereof, and the Village Board shall have the right to amend, modify,
adjust or change the rates at any time and from time to time.
§ 237-41. Credits for water not discharged to public sewers.
In the event any user who is required to pay Category A service charges can
demonstrate to the reasonable satisfaction of the Village Board that such
user does not discharge significant amounts of the water consumed by such
user into the public sewers, the Village Board may authorize a reduction of
the volume of wastewater that would otherwise be assigned to such user
by application of this chapter. In authorizing a reduction, the Village Board
may require the user, at its own expense, to make necessary changes in the
water piping and install couplings so that a water meter can be set that will
read only water that is ultimately discharged into the public sewers.
Service charge = Customer charge + volume charge + high
strength surcharge
Customer charge = A flat rate based on the size of the water meter
Volume charge = The volume of metered water in thousands of
gallons multiplied by the volume rate
Volume rate = The volume unit price for sewer service
expressed in dollars per 1,000 gallons, as
determined by the Village
High strength
surcharge
= The excessive CBOD, suspended solids, TKN
and phosphorus multiplied by the respective
CBOD, suspended solids, TKN and phosphorus
rates. The excessive CBOD, suspended solids,
TKN and phosphorus are the portions of each of
these constituents that are in excess of normal
domestic strength wastewater. The excessive
amounts of CBOD, suspended solids, TKN and
phosphorus are expressed in pounds and their
respective rates are expressed in dollars per
pound.
D. Reassignment of categories of sewer users. The Village may reassign
sewer users into appropriate sewer service charge categories if
wastewater sampling programs and other related information indicate
a change of categories is necessary or otherwise required.
§ 237-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-41
1:355

ARTICLE VI
Control of Industrial Wastes
§ 237-42. General.
§ 237-43. Control manholes.
§ 237-44. Wastewater measurement, sampling and reporting.99
Wastewater flow measurements sampling and reporting shall be done in
accordance with the GBMSD ordinance, as amended from time to time.
A. An "industrial discharge" or "industrial waste" shall have the same
meaning as provided for in the GBMSD ordinance, as amended from
time to time.
B. Each person discharging industrial waste into the public sewers of the
Village shall comply with all applicable provisions of the GBMSD
ordinance. No person shall discharge any industrial waste that contains
substances or possesses characteristics that are detrimental to the
Village's sewerage collection system. In such event, the Village Board
may impose any of the alternatives provided for in the sewer use
section of the GBMSD ordinance, as amended from time to time.98
A. Each person discharging industrial waste into a public sewer shall
construct and maintain one or more control manholes or access points
to facilitate observation, measurement, and sampling their waste,
including domestic sewage.
B. Control manholes or access facilities shall be located and built at such
location and in such manner as may be acceptable to GBMSD. If
measuring devices are to be permanently installed, they shall be of a
type acceptable to GBMSD.
C. Control manholes, access facilities and related equipment shall be
installed by the person discharging industrial waste at its expense and
shall be maintained by the person discharging the waste so as to be in
safe condition at all times. Plans for installation of the control manholes
or access facilities and related equipment shall be approved by the
GBMSD ordinance prior to the beginning of construction.
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
99.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 237-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-44
1:357

ARTICLE VII
Discharge of Holding Tank Waste and Other Waste
§ 237-45. General.
For purposes of this chapter, the terms "holding tank waste" and "licensed
disposer" shall have the same meaning as provided for in the GBMSD
ordinance, as amended from time to time.
§ 237-46. Prohibition of discharge into public sewers.100
No person, including a licensed disposer, shall discharge any holding tank
waste, or any other similar waste, into any manhole or other opening
in a public sewer owned or maintained by the Village. Instead, all such
discharges of holding tank wastes shall be made pursuant to the GBMSD
ordinance, as amended from time to time.
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 237-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-46
1:359

ARTICLE VIII
Billing and Payment of Sewer Service Charges
§ 237-47. Calculation.
Sewer service charges that are to be assessed to users shall be computed
by the Village according to the rates and methodology presented §§ 237-36
through 237-41 of this chapter.
§ 237-48. Billing.
Sewer service charges shall be billed to each user on a calendar-quarter
basis (or more frequently if so determined by the Village Board). Such
charges shall be payable to the Village not later than 20 days after the date
of the bill, unless the Village has extended the time for payment.
§ 237-49. Penalty for delinquent payments.
A penalty equal to 1 1/2% per month of the delinquent amount shown on any
bill for services shall be added to all bills not paid by the date fixed therein
for final payment.
§ 237-50. Remedies for failure to make payments.
§ 237-51. Obligation for payment.
The obligation for payment of sewer service charges, connection fees or
other charges due the Village shall be a joint and several obligation of
the user and property owner, where the user and property owner are not
the same person. To the end that there may be attempts at avoidance of
payment of such charges and fees by non-property owner users, and to
overcome the same, the Village may send the bill for such a user in care of
the property owner.
A. Suit. Sewer service charges, connection fees or other charges due from
any person or user shall be deemed to be a debt due to the Village from
that person or user. If sewer service charges, connection fees, or other
charges are not paid when due, the Village may commence an action in
a court of competent jurisdiction; and recover from such persons or
user the amount of charges or fees, and damages, if any, sustained by
the Village as a result of such failure to pay, together with attorney's
fees incurred in collecting said sums, court costs and such other costs
and expenses as may be allowed by law.
B. Lien on property. As an alternative to Subsection A hereof, the Village
Board may direct that unpaid sewer service charges, connection fees,
or other charges due from any person or user, shall be collected and
taxed and shall be a lien upon the property served in the manner
provided for in § 66.0821, Wis. Stats., as amended from time to time.
§ 237-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-52
1:361
§ 237-52. Remedies cumulative.
All remedies provided for in this chapter are distinct and cumulative to any
other right or remedy under this chapter or any other ordinance of the
Village or afforded by laws or equity; and may be exercised by the Village
Board concurrently or independently.
§ 237-53. Disposition of revenue.
The amounts received from the collection of sewer service charges
authorized by this chapter shall be credited to the sanitary sewerage
account, which shall show all receipts and expenditures of the sewerage
system. Charges collected for replacement expenses shall be credited to
segregated, non-lapsing replacement account. These funds are to be used
exclusively for replacement. When appropriated by the Village Board, the
credits to the sanitary sewerage account shall be available for the payment
of the requirements for operation, maintenance, repairs, and depreciation
of the sewerage system consistent with 40 CFR 35.929. Any surplus outside
the purview of 40 CFR 35.929, in said account, shall be available for the
payment of principal and interest of obligations issued and outstanding, or
which may be issued to provide funds for said sewerage system, or part
thereof, and all or part of the expenses for additions and improvements and
other necessary disbursements or indebtedness, and the Village Board may
resolve to pledge such surplus or any part thereof for any such purpose.
All present outstanding sewer system obligations, including refunding
obligations, shall be paid from this fund as to both principal and interest,
unless otherwise required by law.
§ 237-54. Excess revenues.
Excess revenues collected from a user class will be applied to operation and
maintenance costs attributable to that class for the next year.
§ 237-52 HOBART CODE § 237-54
1:362
ARTICLE IX
Audit
§ 237-55. Independent audit.
Unless otherwise required by applicable statutes, the Village shall conduct
an independent annual audit, the purpose of which shall be to maintain the
proportionality between users and user classes of the user charge system
and to ensure that adequate revenues are available relative to increasing
operation, maintenance and replacement costs and debt retirement. A
summary of the findings and recommendations of this audit shall be
published from time to time, as determined by the Village Board.
§ 237-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-55
1:363

ARTICLE X
Connection Fees
§ 237-56. GBMSD connection charges.101
For each connection of a building sewer to a public sewer within the
Village, there shall be paid to the Village a connection charge as determined
pursuant to the GBMSD ordinance, as amended from time to time.
§ 237-57. Sewer utility connection charges.
For each connection of a building sewer to a public sewer within the Village,
there shall be paid to the Village a connection charge. Such connection
charge shall be assessed to the person seeking the connection and shall
be paid as a condition precedent to the actual connection. The connection
charge of the Village shall be in such amounts and shall be paid at such time
as determined by resolution of the Village Board.
§ 237-58. Connection charges.
For purposes of this chapter, the connection charges described in §§ 237-56
and 237-57 hereof are collectively referred to as "connection fee(s)." The
failure to pay any connection fee is a violation of this chapter, and the
Village may pursue all rights and remedies provided for herein.
101. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 237-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-58
1:365

ARTICLE XI
Violations, Abatement Procedures and Penalties
§ 237-59. Violations constituting public nuisance.
A violation (other than the failure to pay sewer service charges or other fees
or costs due under this chapter) of any provision of this chapter or any other
rule or order of the Village is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
§ 237-60. Damage to Village property.
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure or equipment which is a part
of the Village's sewerage system. Any person violating this provision shall
be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct and be
required to pay for repairs, fines and all costs incurred, including legal
costs.
§ 237-61. Enforcement.
The Village shall have the right to enforce the provisions of this chapter and
shall make periodic inspections and inspections upon complaint to insure
that such provisions are not violated. No action shall be taken under this
chapter to abate a public nuisance unless the Village Board or its authorized
representative, shall have inspected or caused to be inspected the premises
where the nuisance is alleged to exist and shall have satisfied itself that a
nuisance does in fact exist.
§ 237-62. Summary abatement.
If the Village Board determines that a public nuisance exists within the
Village and that there is a great and immediate danger to the public health,
safety, or welfare, the Village Board may cause the same to be abated
and charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant, or person causing,
permitting, or maintaining the nuisance, as the case may be.
§ 237-63. Abatement after notice.
If the Village Board determines that a public nuisance exists on private
premises but that the nature of such nuisance is not such as to present
great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, the
Village shall serve notice to the person causing or maintaining the nuisance
to remove the same within 10 days. If such nuisance is not removed within
such 10 days, the Village shall cause the nuisances to be removed as
provided in § 237-62.
§ 237-64. Other methods not excluded.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the abatement of
public nuisances by the Village or its officials in accordance with the laws of
the State of Wisconsin.
§ 237-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-65
1:367
§ 237-65. Court order.
Except when necessary under § 237-62, the Village shall not use force
to obtain access to private property to abate a public nuisance but shall
request permission to enter upon private property if said premises are
occupied, and, if such permission is denied, shall apply to any court having
jurisdiction for an order assisting the abatement of public nuisance.
§ 237-66. Cost of abatement.
In addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter for the erection,
contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the
cost of abating a public nuisance by the Village shall be collected as a debt
from the owner, occupant, or person causing, permitting, or maintaining the
nuisance, and such cost shall be assessed against the real estate as a special
charge. For purposes hereof, costs shall include but not be limited to actual
attorneys' fees and court costs.
§ 237-67. Continued violations.102
Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the aforesaid notice
time limit provided, shall be subject to the penalties provided in § 1-3. Each
day in which any violation is continued beyond the aforesaid notice time
limit shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 237-68. Accidental discharge.
Any person found to be responsible for accidentally allowing a deleterious
discharge into the sewerage system which causes damage to the sewerage
system and/or a receiving body of water (e.g,. lake, river, stream, etc.) shall,
in addition to a fine, pay the amount to cover all damages, both of which
amounts will be determined by the Village or other governmental authority
having appropriate jurisdiction.
§ 237-69. Accidental discharge reporting.
Any person responsible for an accidental discharge that may have a
detrimental impact on the sewerage system shall immediately report the
nature and amount of the discharge to the GBMSD.
§ 237-70. Liability to Village for losses.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall become liable to
the Village for any expense, attorney's fees, costs, engineering fees, loss,
or damage occasioned by reason of such violation which the Village may
suffer as a result thereof. Without intent to limit the generality of the
foregoing, the Village shall have the right of recovery from all such persons
any expense incurred by the Village for the repair or replacement of any
102. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 237-65 HOBART CODE § 237-70
1:368
part of the public sewerage system damaged in any manner by any person
by the performance of any work under its control or by any negligent acts.
§ 237-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-70
1:369

ARTICLE XII
Appeals
§ 237-71. Review of administrative determinations.
Any person having a substantial interest which is adversely affected by an
administrative determination of the Village or any agent thereof, may have
such determination reviewed or provided for herein. Only administrative
determinations described in § 68.02, Wis. Stats., as amended from time to
time, are subject to review under this article. Notwithstanding anything to
the contrary contained herein, any determinations involving sewer service
charges (or any component thereof), application fees, connection fees, or
any other fees or costs due under this chapter are not subject to review
hereunder. Further, any determinations involving the levying and
assessment of special assessments or any of the determinations described
in § 68.03, Wis. Stats., are not subject to review hereunder.
§ 237-72. Procedure for review.
A person satisfying the requirements of § 237-71 hereof shall first make
a written request to the Village for a review and administrative
determination, which request shall be submitted to the Village within 15
days following the determination in question. The request shall be in
writing, shall state the name and address of the person seeking the review,
shall describe the circumstances surrounding the determination and shall
state the grounds upon which such person contends that the determination
should be modified or reversed.
§ 237-73. Hearing.
Upon receipt of a request for review under § 237-71, the person seeking
the review shall have a hearing before the Village, provided the provisions
of § 237-74 are satisfied. The hearing shall be held at a time and place
determined by the Village Board within 30 days from the date of receipt of
the request. The Village shall notify such person by mail or personal service
at least 10 days before such hearing of the time and place of the hearing.
Except as otherwise provided for herein, the hearing shall be conducted in
accordance with § 68.11(2), Wis. Stats., as amended from time to time.
§ 237-74. Costs.103
Any request for review to the Village Board under § 237-72 hereof shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable review fee in an amount as set from time
to time by resolution of the Village Board. In the event the person seeking
review desires the hearing proceedings to be taken by a stenographer or by
a recording device, the expense thereof shall be paid by the person seeking
the review.
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 237-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-75
1:371
§ 237-75. Decision and appeal.
Within 30 days of completion of the hearing under § 237-73 hereof and the
filing of briefs, if any, the Village Board shall make its written determination
on the request for review. Such determination shall be mailed or delivered
to such person at the address set forth in the request for review. The
decision of the Village Board may be subject to judicial review under
§ 68.13, Wis. Stats., as amended from time to time, in the manner provided
therein.
§ 237-76. Application of Chapter 68 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
Except as to those specific statute sections expressly incorporated herein,
the Village elects not to be governed by any other provisions of Ch. 68, Wis.
Stats., as amended.
§ 237-77. Costs.
In the event the Village Board does not modify or reverse the administrative
determination in question following the hearing thereon, or in the event
the administrative determination is sustained on appeal under § 68.13, Wis.
Stats., then in either of such events the person who has sought the review
shall reimburse the Village for all hearing and costs incurred, including, but
not limited to, reasonable attorneys' fees.
§ 237-75 HOBART CODE § 237-77
1:372
ARTICLE XIII
Septic Systems
§ 237-78. Septic tanks prohibited.
The maintenance and use of a septic tank or other private sewerage
disposal system by any owner of land located within the Village, where such
land is adjacent to a public sewer main, and which has failed to connect to
the sanitary district's sewerage system, is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and a health hazard. Such nuisance and hazard shall be abated
and damages and costs recovered therefor in accordance with § 823.02,
Wis. Stats.
§ 237-79. Septic systems allowed.
In certain isolated locations within the boundaries of the Village it may be
necessary for the owners of certain properties not served by the Village's
sanitary sewer system to continue the maintenance and use of a septic tank
or other private sewerage disposal system. Such maintenance and use shall
be considered as a temporary wastewater disposal system and is subject to
the review and approval of the Village Board. The review and approval will
be on a case-by-case basis with each case determined upon its particular
facts and circumstances.
§ 237-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-79
1:373

ARTICLE XIV
Miscellaneous
§ 237-80. Amendments.
The Village Board may amend this chapter in part or in whole at any time
whenever it may deem necessary.
§ 237-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-80
1:375
Chapter 240
SHORT-TERM RENTALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 295.
§ 240-1. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that the quality of tourist rooming
houses operating within the Village is adequate for protecting public health,
safety and general welfare, including establishing minimum standards of
space for human occupancy and for an adequate level of maintenance;
determining the responsibilities of owners, operators and property
managers offering these properties for tourists or transient occupants, to
protect the character and stability of all areas, especially residential areas,
within the Village; to provide minimum standards necessary for the health
and safety of persons occupying or using buildings, structures or premises;
and provisions for the administration and enforcement thereof.
§ 240-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BATHROOM — A room containing a group of plumbing fixtures consisting
of, at a minimum, a lavatory, water closet, and shower or tub or tub/shower
combination contained within the same room; a door for privacy, such that
the door is provided with locking hardware capable of being opened from
the outside with manufacturer supplied key or pin; and, that the room as a
whole complies with the state Uniform Dwelling Code.
CLERK — The Village Clerk of the Village of Hobart or designee.
CORPORATE ENTITY — A corporation, partnership, limited liability
company, or sole proprietorship licensed to conduct business in this state.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms with provisions for living, cooking,
sanitary, and sleeping facilities and a bathroom arranged for exclusive use
by one person or one family. Dwelling units include residential, tourist
rooming house, seasonal employee housing and dormitory units.
LICENSE — The short-term rental license issued under this chapter.
OWNER — The owner of a short-term rental.
PERSON — Shall include a corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization and any other group acting as a unit as well as individuals,
including a personal representative, receiver or other representative
appointed according to law. Whenever the word person is used in any
section of this chapter prescribing a penalty or fine, as to partnerships or
§ 237-80 HOBART CODE § 240-2
1:376
associations, the word shall include the partners or members hereof, and as
to corporations, shall include the officers, agents or members thereof who
are responsible for any violation of such section.
PROPERTY MANAGER — Any person that is not the property owner and is
appointed to act as agent and/or provides property management services to
one or more short-term rental.
SHORT TERM RENTAL — A residential dwelling that is offered for rent
for a fee and for fewer than 29 consecutive days, as defined in Wis. Stats.
§ 66.0615(1)(dk).
STATE — The State of Wisconsin Department of Health, or its designee.
TOURIST — A person who travels to a location away from his or her
permanent address for a short period of time for vacation, pleasure,
recreation, culture, business or employment.
VILLAGE — The Village of Hobart, Brown County, Wisconsin.
§ 240-3. Operation of short-term rentals.
A. No person may maintain, manage, or operate a short-term rental more
than 10 nights each year without a short-term rental license. Every
short-term rental shall be operated by a property owner or property
manager.
B. Each short-term rental is required to have the following licenses and
permits:
(1) A State of Wisconsin tourist rooming house license;
(2) A seller's permit issued by the Wisconsin Department of Revenue;
(3) A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
C. Each short-term rental shall comply with all of the following:
(1) The total number of days within any consecutive 365-day period
that the dwelling may be rented shall not exceed 180 days. A sale of
a property being used as a short term rental shall constitute the
commencement of a separate 365-day period.
(2) The property owner or property manager shall notify the Clerk in
writing when the first rental within a 365-day period begins.
(3) No vehicular traffic shall be generated that is greater than
normally expected in the residential neighborhood.
(4) There shall not be excessive noise, fumes, glare, vibrations
generated during the use.
(5) Name plates or other signage shall not exceed one square foot. No
other signage advertising the short-term rental is permitted on site.
Off-site advertising in media channels relating to the availability of
§ 240-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-3
1:377
the rental may take place only after all Village, county and state
permits and licenses have been obtained.
(6) The number of occupants in any unit shall not exceed the limits set
forth in the State of Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code and other
applicable county and village housing regulations based upon the
number of bedrooms in each unit.
(7) No recreational vehicles (RVs), camper, tent, or other temporary
lodging arrangement shall be permitted on site as a means of
providing additional accommodations for paying guests or other
invitees.
(8) Any outdoor event held at the short-term rental shall last no longer
than one day occurring between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m. Any activities shall be in compliance with other noise
regulations of the Village.
(9) Compliance with all applicable state, county, and local codes and
regulations is required.
(10) Annual general building inspection is required prior to issuance or
renewal of the license.
(11) A local property management contact must be on file with the
Village at the time of application. The local property manager must
be within 25 miles of the short-term rental property and must be
available 24 hours a day. The property owner must notify the
Village within 24 hours of a change in management contact
information for the short-term rental.
(12) A short-term rental license will not be issued until the following
contingencies have been met:
(a) License from the county received;
(b) General building and fire code inspection completed by the
Village and no outstanding orders remain.
(13) Short-term rental licenses are issued for one-year period and must
be renewed annually subject to Village approval or denial.
(14) All property managers shall carry casualty and liability insurance
issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in this
state by the Wisconsin Office of the Commissioner of Insurance,
with liability limits of not less than $300,000 per individual and
$1,000,000 aggregate, and provide proof of insurance with the
license application and renewal.
(15) Each short-term rental shall provide a register and require all
guests to register their true names and addresses before beginning
occupancy of the short-term rental. The register shall be kept intact
§ 240-3 HOBART CODE § 240-3
1:378
§ 240-4. Short-term rental license; property manager license.
§ 240-5. Short-term rental license procedure.
and available for inspection by representatives of the Village for at
least one year.
A. The Clerk shall issue a short-term rental license to all applicants
following the approval of an application and the filing of all documents
and records required under this chapter. The application shall also
contain the following information:
(1) Identify the property owner with contact information including
mailing address, physical address, and twenty-four-hour phone
number;
(2) Identify the property manager with contact information including
mailing address, physical address, and twenty-four-hour phone
number;
(3) The maximum days of occupancy for the premises for individual
rentals;
(4) The license term; and
(5) State lodging license number, if any.
A. All applications for a short-term rental license shall be filed with the
Clerk on forms provided. Applications must be filed by the property
owner. No license shall be issued unless the completed application form
is accompanied by payment of the required fee.
B. Each application shall include the following information and
documentation for each short-term rental unit:
(1) A copy of State of Wisconsin License for a tourist rooming house
license issued under Wis. Stats. § 254.64;
(2) A copy of a completed state lodging establishment inspection form
dated within one year of the date of issuance or renewal;
(3) Proof of insurance;
(4) A copy of seller's permit from the department, if any;
(5) Floor plan and requested maximum occupancy;
(6) Site plan including available onsite parking;
(7) Property management agreement (if applicable);
(8) Designation of the property manager;
§ 240-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-5
1:379
§ 240-6. Renewal.
§ 240-7. Property manager.
(9) Certification from the property owner that the property meets the
requirements of this chapter;
(10) An employer identification number issued by the Internal Revenue
Service.
A. Each application for a renewal of a license shall include updated
information for the documentation on file with the Clerk and payment of
the applicable fee. The Clerk shall verify that the information provided
on the renewal application is complete and in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter. The Clerk shall request reports from the
Police Department and the Director of Planning and Code Compliance
regarding any complaints received, calls for service or actions taken
regarding the short-term rental properties. The Clerk shall issue
renewal licenses within 30 days of the filing of the application unless
the information provided is incomplete or otherwise not in compliance
with the requirements of this chapter and/or the reports from the Police
Department and the Director of Planning and Code Compliance indicate
that there are complaints or actions involving the property.
B. If the Clerk finds that the license should not be renewed, the Clerk shall
deny the renewal.
C. No license shall be issued or renewed unless there is filed with the
Clerk a completed fire inspection report by the Village fire inspector
dated within one year of the issue date.
D. No license shall be renewed if the applicant or property has
outstanding fees, taxes or forfeitures owed to the Village, or is under an
order issued by the Director of Planning and Code Compliance, or his
designee, to bring the premises into compliance with Village
ordinances, unless arrangements for payment have been approved by
the Clerk.
A. Property manager license. No person may act as a property manager
for a short-term rental without a property manager license issued in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The property manager
license shall apply to all short-term rentals for which the property
manager has exclusive rights for the rental of the property. The
property manager must certify to the Village that each short-term
rental operating under the short-term rental license complies with the
standards of this chapter.
B. Property manager qualifications. To qualify as a property manager the
applicant must meet the following requirements:
(1) Be a natural person residing in or within 25 miles of the Village or a
corporate entity with offices located within 25 miles of the Village.
§ 240-5 HOBART CODE § 240-7
1:380
§ 240-8. Standards for short-term rentals.
(2) The applicant does not have pending any criminal charge and has
not been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor of any offense
involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, robbery, the use or threatened
use of force or violence upon the person of another.
C. Each property manager shall be authorized by the property owner to
act as the agent for the owner for the receipt of service of notice of
violation of this chapter's provisions and for service of process pursuant
to this chapter and shall be authorized by the owner to allow Village
employees, officers and their designees, to enter the owner's property
for purposes of inspection and enforcement of this chapter and/or the
Village Municipal Code.
A. Each short-term rental shall comply with this chapter's requirements or
any other applicable Village ordinance. Each short-term rental shall
comply with the following minimum requirements:
(1) One internal bathroom for every four occupants;
(2) Not less than 150 square feet of floor space for the first occupant
thereof and at least an additional 100 square feet of floor space for
every additional occupant thereof; the floor space shall be
calculated on the basis of total habitable room area. Floor space is
determined using interior measurements of each room. Floor space
does not include kitchens, bathrooms, closets, garages, or rooms
not meeting Uniform Dwelling Code requirements for occupancy.
The maximum occupancy for any premises without a separate
enclosed bedroom is two people;
(3) Not less than one onsite off-street parking spaces for every four
occupants based upon maximum occupancy;
(4) All components in the required means of egress from the dwelling,
including but not limited to doors and windows, shall be maintained
in proper working order and unobstructed leading to a safe, open
location at grade level;
(5) No door or window shall incorporate the use of more than two
locking mechanisms that are so arranged to be readily accessible
and shall not require the use of a key, or special knowledge, or
effort for operation from the egress side;
(6) Shall have functional smoke detectors and carbon monoxide
detectors that are interconnected so that activation of one detector
will cause activation of all detectors. Houses constructed prior to
1992 may incorporate wireless detectors in accordance with NFPA
fire code Chapter 72 to provide interconnection. Houses
constructed on or after January 1, 1992 shall have detectors
continuously powered by the house electrical system with battery
§ 240-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-8
1:381
§ 240-9. Display of license.
Each license shall be displayed on the inside of the main entrance door of
each short-term rental.
§ 240-10. Appeal and license revocation.
backup, as in accordance with the requirements of Chapter SPS
321 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code;
(7) Fire extinguishers shall be conspicuously located, installed and
maintained in compliance with NFPA fire code Chapter 10,
Standard for Portable Fire Extinguishers.
(8) Shall not have an accessible solid-fuel burning appliance unless the
property owner provides a signed document from the insurance
carrier, or their designee, certifying that the device/unit and
chimney/venting have been inspected and are in compliance with
all applicable codes including National Fire Prevention Association
Fire Code, Chapter 211, Standard for Chimneys, Fireplaces, Vents,
and Solid-Fuel Burning Appliances;
(9) No person shall have a hibachi, gas-fired grill, charcoal grill, or
other similar devices used for cooking or any other purpose on any
balcony, deck or under any overhanging structure or within 10 feet
of any structure;
(10) Shall not have a fire pit or other device/appliance used for heating
or any other purpose on any balcony, deck or under any
overhanging structure or within 15 feet of any structure or
property line, nor larger than four feet in diameter, as in
accordance with § 127-7 of the Village Municipal Code;
(11) All property managers shall carry casualty and liability insurance
issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in this
state by the Wisconsin Office of the Commissioner of Insurance,
with liability limits of not less than $300,000 per individual and
$1,000,000 aggregate;
(12) Certification of compliance. As a condition of issuance of a license
under this chapter, the property manager shall certify that each
managed property is in compliance with the terms and conditions
of the license and this chapter.
A. The denial of any license application or renewal under this chapter may
be appealed by filing a written appeal request with the Clerk within 10
days of the Village's notice of denial. The appeal shall be heard by the
Planning and Zoning Commission, which shall make a recommendation
to the Village Board. The Village Board shall consider the application or
renewal and recommendations and may approve or deny the
application or renewal.
§ 240-8 HOBART CODE § 240-10
1:382
§ 240-11. Penalties.
§ 240-12. Fees.
§ 240-13. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter and its ordinances is held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such a decision
shall not affect the validity of any other provision of this chapter or its
B. A license may be revoked by the Village Board for one or more of the
following reasons:
(1) Failure to make payment on taxes or debt owed to the Village;
(2) Three or more calls for police service, building inspection or the
health department for nuisance activities or other law violations in
a twelve-month period as defined in Chapter 207, Nuisances;
(3) Failure to comply with annual Village building inspection
requirements;
(4) Failure to maintain all required local, county, and state licensing
requirements;
(5) Failure to use the property as a short-term rental within 12 months
of obtaining the Village license;
(6) Failure to comply with any requirements cited within § 240-8 of this
chapter;
(7) Any violation of local, county, or state laws that substantially harm
or adversely impact the predominantly residential uses and nature
of the surrounding neighborhood.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to a penalty and forfeiture as provided in § 1-3 of the Municipal
Code.
B. Penalties set forth in this section shall be in addition to all other
remedies of injunction, abatement or costs whether existing under this
chapter or otherwise.
A. The fees to be applied to the chapter shall be as follows:
(1) Initial and renewal short-term rental application fee: $200.
(2) Each additional units added under a short-term rental license:
$150.
(3) Reinspections: $100.
(4) Property Manager License: $100.
§ 240-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-13
1:383
ordinances. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Village that all
provisions of this chapter and its ordinances therein are separable.
Chapter 248
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 185.
§ 240-13 HOBART CODE § 240-13
1:384
ARTICLE I
Storage, Disposal, Transportation and Treatment of Solid Waste
[Adopted as § 10.0 of the 2000 Code]
§ 248-1. Purpose, applicability, exceptions and definitions for
transportation, disposal, storage and treatment of solid waste.
A. Upon enactment, this article shall regulate, apply to and govern all
persons or locations engaged in or encompassing the transportation,
disposal, storage and treatment of solid waste in the Village of Hobart
(Village), including upon Village roads. Such transportation, disposal,
storage or treatment shall be permitted only under the terms and
conditions set forth by this article.
B. The following shall not be deemed to come within the scope of this
article:
(1) Transportation, disposal, storage or treatment of animal waste
resulting from an agricultural enterprise located within the Village.
(2) Solid or hazardous waste facilities (collectively, "facilities") within
the Village that are or were licensed by the Wisconsin Department
of Natural Resources (DNR) and in operation on the date of
adoption of this article or when this article is specified as not
applicable under Chapter 289, Wis. Stats., or a negotiated
agreement or arbitration award thereunder. However, expansion of
these existing facilities shall be within the scope of this article.
(3) Sanitary privies, seepage beds, septic tanks, wastewater,
wastewater treatment sludge and the disposal and transportation
of human waste products in the Village.
C. The following definitions shall apply to this article unless a different
meaning appears from the context:
ACTIVE FILL AREA — The cells designed and constructed at the facility
that are to be used for disposal of solid waste.
APPLICANT — A person applying for a license under this article to
construct, operate or maintain a facility for the disposal, treatment or
storage of solid waste or for the transportation of solid waste on any
Village road.
CLOSURE or FINAL CLOSURE — The date when no further solid waste
may be accepted at the facility pursuant to any license issued under this
article or any license, plan or operation or plan or order of closure of
the DNR, whichever date is earlier.
DNR — The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources or its
successor agency.
DISPOSE, DISPOSING or DISPOSAL — The discharge, deposit,
injection, dumping, placing, littering, discarding, burying, throwing,
emitting, emptying or abandoning of any solid waste, into or on any
§ 248-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-1
1:385
private or public land or on or into any water or air within the Village.
This term does not include the storage or treatment of solid waste.
EMERGENCY or EMERGENCIES — An unforeseen circumstance that
jeopardizes the public health or safety or the property of the Village or
its residents.
EXPANSION — An increase in licensed capacity for disposal, treatment
or storage of solid waste at an existing facility, at or adjacent to the
existing facility.
GARBAGE — Discarded putrescible animal or vegetable refuse
resulting from the handling, serving, preparing, processing, storing or
consuming of food.
GENERATE, GENERATING, GENERATED — The act or process that
results in the formation of solid waste or by-products.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any solid waste, including petroleum products
or substances, and which meets the definition of hazardous waste in
Chapter 289, Wis. Stats., its successor chapters, the Federal Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA), Toxic Substance
Control Act (TSCA), Clean Air Act (CAA) or identified as hazardous
waste by any regulations established by the DNR or the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA).104
HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITY — A facility for the treatment, storage
or disposal of hazardous waste and includes the land where the facility
is located.
INCINERATING, INCINERATORS or INCINERATION — Any technique
or process of controlled burning of solid waste primarily to achieve
volume reduction and/or to change waste characteristics or capture the
heat content of the burnables but does not include open burning.
LANDSPREADING — The disposal of solid waste in thin layers onto
the land surface and/or the incorporation into the top several feet of
the surface soil for agricultural, silvicultural and/or solid waste disposal
purposes.
LEACHATE — Water or other liquid which has been contaminated by
dissolved or suspended materials due to contact with solid waste or
gases therefrom.
LONG-TERM CARE — The routine care, maintenance and monitoring
of a facility after closure.
MINING SOLID WASTE — All waste soil, rock, mineral, liquid,
vegetation and other material, except merchantable by-products,
directly resulting from or displaced by prospecting or mining or from
the beneficiating, concentrating or refining of minerals and shall
104. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 248-1 HOBART CODE § 248-1
1:386
include all waste materials from other sources deposited on or in a
prospecting or mining site.
OPEN BURNING — Combustion of solid waste where the products of
combustion are emitted directly to the ambient air without passing
through a stack or chimney. "Open burning" does not include the
combustion of solid waste occurring at a properly operated and
licensed air curtain destructor or incinerator.
POLYCHLORINATED BIPHENYLS (PCBS) — The class of organic
compounds generally known as polychlorinated biphenyls and includes
any of several compounds or mixtures of compounds produced by
replacing two or more hydrogen atoms on the biphenyl molecule with
chlorine atoms.
PERSON — Any natural individual, firm, sole proprietorship, trust,
partnership, association, corporation or municipality, and also means
any responsible member, officer, agent, and employee thereof.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — A residential use, the primary residential
building, facility or structure designed for and used for single-family
dwelling or designed and used as apartments, including any building,
facility or structure which is accessory to or incidental to the primary
residential building, facility or structure. At locations containing no
residential use, the principal structure shall be the primary building,
facility or structure designed for and used by the majority of the public
for resort, employment, assemblage, lodging, trade, traffic or
occupancy, including any building, facility or structure which is
accessory to and incidental to the primary building, facility or structure.
PROCESSING — Any technique used to facilitate or further transform,
shape, compact or utilize solid waste, to wit: techniques such as baling,
shredding, pulverizing, composting or separating.
RECOVERABLE SOLID WASTE — Solid waste which through
separation, processing or incineration will be converted into usable
materials, products or energy.
REMEDIAL ACTION — Those actions consistent with a permanent
remedy in the event of a release or threatened release of solid waste
(release) into the environment, to prevent, ameliorate or minimize the
release so that the contaminants do not migrate to cause substantial
danger to present or future public health or welfare or to the
environment. The term includes but is not limited to such actions at the
location of the release, storage or confinement by perimeter protection
using dikes, trenches or ditches, placing of a clay cover, neutralization,
removal of released wastes, recycling or reuse, diversion, destruction,
segregation, dredging or excavation, repair or replacement of leaking
containers, collection of leachate and runoff, on-site treatment or
incineration, the providing of alternative water supplies, and any
monitoring of the groundwater, surface waste or air reasonably
required to assure that such actions protect the public health and
welfare or the environment. The term also includes the permanent
§ 248-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-1
1:387
relocation of residents where the Village determines such relocation
is more cost-effective than, and environmentally preferable to, the
transportation, storage, treatment, destruction or secure disposition
off-site of hazardous wastes.
REMOVAL ACTION — The short-term actions to mitigate, contain or
remove released substances for off-site treatment, storage or disposal
and such other actions as may be necessary in the event of release
to monitor, assess and evaluate the release. The term also includes,
without being limited to, security fencing or other measures to limit
access to a facility or operations related thereto, the providing of
temporary alternative water supplies to residents of the Village,
temporary evacuation and housing of residents of the Village.
SLUDGE — Any solid, semisolid, or liquid waste generated from a
municipal, commercial, or industrial wastewater treatment plant, water
supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility or any other
waste having similar physical characteristics.
SOLID WASTE — Any nonhazardous waste identified as garbage, ash,
litter, rubbish, refuse or putrescible material and other discarded or
salvageable materials, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained
gaseous materials resulting from industrial, commercial, mining and
agricultural operations, and from community activities which are not
hazardous wastes. Solid waste does not include hazardous wastes,
mining solid waste, solids or dissolved material in domestic sewage,
or solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial
discharges which are point sources subject to permits under Chapter
147, Wis. Stats., or its successor chapter or source, special nuclear
radioactive material or by-product material as defined under § 254.31,
Wis. Stats., or its successor provisions.105
SOLID WASTE FACILITY — A facility in the Village for solid waste
treatment, storage or disposal, and includes commercial, industrial,
municipal, state and federal establishments or operations such as,
without limitation because of enumeration, sanitary landfills, dumps,
demotion facilities, land disposal sites, incinerators, transfer stations,
storage facilities, collection and transportation operations and
processing, treatment and recovery facilities. This term includes the
land where the facility is located. This term does not include a
hazardous waste facility. This term does not include: a facility for
the processing of scrap iron, steel or nonferrous metal using large
machines to produce a principal product of scrap metal for sale or use
for remelting purposes; a facility which uses large machines to sort,
grade, compact or bale clean wastepaper, fibers or plastics, not mixed
with other solid waste, for sale or use for recycling purposes; or an auto
junkyard, scrap metal salvage yard or a facility for the processing of
minerals or mining refuse.
105. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 248-1 HOBART CODE § 248-1
1:388
§ 248-2. Disposal regulations for solid waste.
A person (person), who is a resident residing within the Village, or a person
who is occupying a residential, commercial or industrial site located within
the Village, shall remove from the residence or site for storage, disposal or
treatment at a solid waste facility, that solid waste which is generated at the
residence or site at least every month, unless the solid waste is processed at
the residence or site consistent with this article or unless such solid waste
is placed in appropriate solid waste collection containers and accumulated
in such manner as to not create a private or public nuisance. A person
shall remove from the residence or site for storage, disposal or treatment
to a facility all other solid waste which is generated at the residence or
site as follows: at least once per month, if the solid waste is accumulated
inside the principal structure; or once every two weeks if the solid waste is
accumulated outside the principal structure.
§ 248-3. Disposal, treatment and storage of solid waste.
No person shall dispose, store or treat within the Village any solid waste,
except as noted in § 248-2 and as follows:
STORE, STORING or STORAGE — The accumulating or holding of solid
waste for a period exceeding 90 days.
TREAT, TREATING or TREATMENT — Any technique or process which
is designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or
complexion of solid waste. "Treatment" includes incineration.
A. A person may dispose, store or treat solid waste at a facility located
within the Village, only if the facility is validly licensed by the Village for
the disposal, storage or treatment of the type of solid waste being
transported to or generated at the facility.
B. Off-site collection.
(1) A person who is a resident within the Village or a person who is
occupying a residential, commercial or industrial site located
within the Village, may dispose and accumulate solid waste which
has been generated at the residence or at the site in authorized
solid waste collection containers not located at the residence or the
site, but located within the Village, if the Village by ordinance:
(a) Authorizes disposal and storage of solid waste in off-site solid
waste collection containers;
(b) Establishes the type, amount and source of solid waste
authorized for disposal and storage in these off-site containers;
(c) Establishes requirements to regulate and control the disposal,
storage, collection and transportation of solid waste at these
off-site solid waste containers; and
§ 248-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-3
1:389
(d) Approves the site locations for such off-site solid waste
collection containers.
(2) A person who disposes or stores solid waste under this provision
shall fully comply with any applicable licenses, permits, conditions,
regulations or requirements as may be established by the Village
through ordinance or permit condition and any other more
stringent condition established by the owner or operator of the offsite
collection containers.
C. A person who resides within the Village may dispose at the residence or
accumulate in solid waste collection containers at the residence,
garbage and other solid waste generated at the residence when in
compliance with § 248-2, federal and state laws and regulations by this
article and by any other ordinance established by the Village. For the
purposes of this subsection only, "disposal" may consist of open
burning, provided such burning does not create nuisance conditions or
is contrary to county or state laws, ordinances or regulations.
D. A person who is occupying a residential, commercial or industrial site
located within the Village may dispose at the site or accumulate in solid
waste collection containers at the site, garbage and other solid waste
generated at the site, when in compliance with § 248-2.
E. A person who is a resident within the Village or a person who is
occupying a residential, commercial or industrial site located within the
Village may dispose and accumulate authorized recyclable solid waste,
which has been generated at the residence or at the site, at authorized
off-site recycling centers within the Village, if the Village by ordinance:
(1) Authorizes the disposal and accumulation of off-site recyclable
solid waste;
(2) Establishes the type, source and amount of recyclable solid wastes
authorized for disposal and accumulation at the off-site recycling
centers;
(3) Establishes requirements to regulate and control the disposal,
accumulation, storage, collection and transportation of solid waste
at these off-site recycling centers; and
(4) Approves the site locations for such off-site authorized recycling
centers.
F. A person who resides within the Village or a person who is occupying a
residential, commercial or industrial site located within the Village may
dispose and treat solid waste, including by landspreading, incinerating
or processing the solid waste at the residence or at the site if the
landspreading, incinerating or processing does not create a public or
private nuisance and if the quantity of solid waste that is landspread,
incinerated or processed was generated exclusively at the residence or
§ 248-3 HOBART CODE § 248-3
1:390
§ 248-4. Disposal, storage and treatment of hazardous waste.
at the site. Landspreading activities exempt under state law or
regulations shall be exempt from this article.
G. No person shall dispose, store or treat any solid waste within the
Village, except as provided in § 248-2, and except as provided in the
above noted Subsection F, unless the person has received and complies
with a valid license for a facility from the Village Board and the license
specifically authorizes disposal, storage or treatment operations at the
facility. Each license issued pursuant to this article shall contain as a
condition thereof that the license incorporates and the licensee shall
fully comply with all federal and state licenses, permits, conditions
thereof, regulations and laws pertaining to the facility. In the event of a
conflict, the most stringent condition of any federal, state or Village
license, permit, regulation, law or ordinance shall apply.
H. Any person disposing, storing, treating, any solid waste in the Village,
except as authorized by this article, shall notify the Village Clerk-
Treasurer in writing within 24 hours of knowledge of such occurrence
and shall detail in this notification the time, place and possible cause or
causes of such occurrence, and the type, source and amount of solid
waste involved in this occurrence. Upon knowledge of such occurrence,
the person shall immediately take all actions appropriate and necessary
to restore the environment to its prior condition, to minimize any
harmful effects from such occurrences to the Village and its residents
and to comply with any orders or regulations of the DNR, USEPA and
any other state or federal agency having jurisdiction in the matter.
A. No person shall dispose, store or treat any polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs), any chlorinated dibenzo-dioxins and dibenzofurans (dioxins) or
any radioactive material within the Village.
B. No person shall dispose, store or treat any other hazardous waste
within the Village, except as follows:
(1) A person who resides within the Village or a person who is
occupying a residential, commercial or industrial site located
within the Village, may accumulate in aboveground containers or
store in aboveground tanks at the residence or at the site,
hazardous waste, if the hazardous waste has been generated at the
residence or at the site and if:
(a) The person removes the hazardous waste from the residence
or site within 90 days of generation and transports the
hazardous waste for disposal, storage or treatment to a
hazardous waste facility licensed by the DNR or by the USEPA;
(b) The person holds the accumulated hazardous waste in an area
at the residence or at the site that is entirely enclosed or roofed
structure with limited or restricted access; and
§ 248-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-4
1:391
§ 248-5. Constructing, maintaining and operating a solid waste
facility.
No person shall construct, maintain or operate a solid waste facility for
disposal, storage or treatment of solid waste within the Village, unless
the person has received a valid license from the Village Board specifically
authorizing construction, maintenance and operation of a solid waste
facility. Upon issuance of the license, the licensee shall fully comply with
conditions therein.
§ 248-6. Constructing, maintaining and operating a hazardous
waste facility.
No person shall construct, maintain or operate the waste handling portion
of a hazardous waste facility for disposal, storage or treatment of solid
waste within the Village limits, unless the person has received a license
from the Village Board authorizing the construction, maintenance or
operation of the hazardous waste facility. Upon issuance of the license, the
licensee shall fully comply with conditions therein.
§ 248-7. License application/bond/hearing and license issuance for
a solid waste facility or hazardous waste facility.
(c) The person holds the accumulated hazardous waste in an area
that does not exceed 1,500 square feet.
C. No person may dispose, store or treat any hazardous waste within the
Village, except as provided in Subsection B, unless the person has
received and is in compliance with a valid license for a hazardous waste
facility from the Village. The license must specifically authorize the
disposal, storage or treatment of the hazardous waste at the facility.
A. Applications for the licensing of a facility under this article shall be filed
by the applicant with the Village Clerk-Treasurer in writing on a form
provided by the Village Clerk-Treasurer and accompanied by the initial
application fee which shall be in the amount of $5,000, unless waived or
reduced by the Village Board. No application shall be accepted by
Village Clerk-Treasurer until the applicant has submitted and has had
approved by the DNR an initial site report and feasibility report
required pursuant to Chapter 289, Wis. Stats., Solid Waste Facilities, or
its successor chapters. In addition, the Village Board may charge the
applicant an additional application fee to fully or partially reimburse the
Village for appropriate and necessary costs and expenses incurred by
the Village in the processing of the application, including, but not
limited, to costs and reasonable expenses incurred by the Village for
attorneys' fees and experts' fees related to the application process. As a
further condition of a license, including a license for transportation
issued under § 248-30A(1), the Village Board may require the applicant
to show that all claims by owners of property for compensation due to
the diminished value of property located within a one-mile radius of the
§ 248-4 HOBART CODE § 248-7
1:392
facility caused by the presence, operation or closure requirements
placed on the facility have been compromised or will be resolved by
adjudication before the effective date of the license. The total
application fees to the applicant, including the initial application fee,
shall not, however, exceed $20,000 for any application. A license is
not assignable. All information provided in the application shall be
accompanied by a sworn statement, under oath or affirmation, by the
applicant, stating that the information provided within the application
was obtained under this supervision and direction, after diligent
inquiry, and is true and factual to the best of his knowledge and
belief.106
B. No license shall be issued or be effective unless there is on file with the
Village Clerk-Treasurer a cash bond or a bond with a corporate surety,
duly licensed in the State of Wisconsin, in penal amount of $200,000 to
assure that:
(1) The applicant and its representatives, agents and assigns will
comply with all the terms, conditions, provisions, requirements,
commitments, indemnifications and specifications contained in this
article, any license issued thereunder or any sworn statement
signed by the applicant pursuant to this article.
(2) If a corporate bond is offered, it shall be executed by a company
authorized to transact business in the State of Wisconsin. If a cash
bond is offered, it shall be deposited with the Village Clerk-
Treasurer, who shall give an official receipt therefor reciting that
said cash has been deposited in compliance with and subject to
provisions of this article.
(3) Failure by the applicant to maintain the approved bond, during the
period of the license, shall automatically terminate the license.
Upon the failure to maintain the approved bond by the applicant,
the Village Board shall have the right to obtain a court order that
will terminate any future disposal, storage or treatment operations
(collectively "operations") and that will require immediate final
closure of the facility.
Before acceptance of the bond, the bond shall be approved by the
Village Board.
C. Prior to any general public hearing on the application for license, the
Village Board shall examine the application and any other plans or
pertinent information submitted by the applicant. The Village Board
shall then commence investigation of the proposed facility.
(1) The Village Board shall also determine whether or not the granting
of a license in the location described in the application would be a
violation of any zoning regulations of the Village or the county or
106. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 248-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-7
1:393
create a hazard, nuisance or detriment to the public health or
safety to the residents of the Village. The Village Board shall also
determine what, if any, effects or impacts such proposed facility
may have for the future upon the character of the local
neighborhood, traffic conditions, municipal services and costs,
public utility needs, and any other effects and impacts pertinent
to the short-term and long-term health, environmental, financial,
safety and welfare conditions of the Village and its residents.
(2) Prior to issuance or denial of any license and at least 90 days after
the Village Board deems the application for license complete, the
Village approves the financial surety and receives the initial
application fee from the applicant, there shall be a general public
hearing on the application for a license.
(3) The general public hearing shall be conducted under the following
terms:
(a) A notice shall be given as a Class 3 notice as described in
§ 985.07, Wis. Stats., or its successor provision.
(b) The cost of publication of any such notice shall be deposited
and paid by the applicant in advance of publication to the
Village Clerk-Treasurer.
(c) A general public hearing shall be held on the date specified in
the notice or any adjourned date; however, such general public
hearing shall be merely advisory to the Village Board in regard
to any determination which may later be made upon any such
application for license.
(d) The applicant shall have the right to appear at the public
hearing and to describe orally and with written documentation
the proposed facility. The applicant and the Village may be
represented by legal counsel and may present evidence with
any witnesses. The testimony of all witnesses is subject to
examination and cross-examination under oath. The public
hearing may, upon request by the applicant or the Village
Board, be recorded, with any expense for the recording to be
paid by the applicant.
D. The application for license shall be acted upon by the Village Board
within 60 days after the general public hearing, except that if the Board
adopts a siting resolution under § 289.33, Wis. Stats., or its successor
provisions. The sixty-day period for acting upon the application as noted
above shall not be applicable until a negotiated written agreement has
been signed and approved by all necessary parties under § 289.33, Wis.
Stats., or its successor provisions, or until an arbitration aware by the
Wisconsin Waste Facility Siting Board or its successor agency has been
received in writing by the Village Board.107
§ 248-7 HOBART CODE § 248-7
1:394
E. The Village Board shall evaluate the proposed license for the facility
and any conditions to be attached to the license based on information
provided in the application, additional written information requested of
the applicant by the Village Board, the evidence elicited at the general
public hearing and other pertinent information received from the
applicant, any county, state or federal agency or from any other
interested persons. The Village Board shall specifically consider the
following in its determination on licensure and any conditions which
may be attached to the license:
(1) Reports and recommendations received by the Village Board from
other units or agencies of federal or state government and any
agent, counsel or expert employed or retained by the Village.
(2) The potential short-term and long-term effects and impacts of the
proposed facility based on the proposed location, including its
effects or impact on the following:
(a) Existing roads, bridges, traffic flow, traffic patterns, exits,
designated access routes (both primary and secondary);
(b) Surface water quality and drainage;
(c) Groundwater quality and public and private drinking water
quality;
(d) Air quality;
(e) Adjacent wetlands, floodplains, forests, agricultural and
unique lands, and existing topography and vegetation;
(f) Current and future land uses and land values;
(g) Soil erosion;
(h) Village and county zoning and Village and county planning;
(i) Village appropriations and revenues;
(j) Public safety and health of the Village residents;
(k) Existing wildlife habitat and existing domestic animals.
(3) The potential for the applicant, based on the application submitted,
to fully comply with the conditions and regulations enumerated in
this article and with all of the conditions included in the license.
F. Relicensing or transfer.
(1) All licenses and the conditions written thereunder issued to the
applicant shall be effective and issued for the period from July 1 to
June 30 of the next year. The applicant shall reapply to the Village
107. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 248-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-7
1:395
§ 248-8. Revocation of license and appeal on revocation of license.
Clerk-Treasurer for the annual license at least 120 days in advance
of the June 30 deadline. The filing procedure and fees established
for reapplication and reissuance shall be the same as the initial
application process. Upon determination by Village Board that the
reapplication is complete, the Village Board may waive the
requirements for public hearing and waive or reduce the
application fee.
(2) The license shall not be transferable. Any transfer of ownership,
operation, maintenance or possession or control of the facility by
the applicant shall automatically terminate the license. No license
shall be issued or reissued by the Village until sufficient proof has
been provided to the Village Board by the applicant that only the
applicant will operate and maintain the facility during the licensure
period.
(3) The license shall not be deemed reissued until the Village Clerk-
Treasurer receives the relicensing fee, written acknowledgment of
the receipt of the reissued license by the applicant and written
acknowledgement by the applicant of the applicant's intent to
comply with this article, the reissued license and each condition
attached to the reissued license. Failure by the applicant to submit
written acknowledgment or agreement to fully comply within 15
days of receipt shall be deemed as withdrawal of reapplication by
the applicant.
A. Any license issued to an applicant under provisions of this article may
be revoked by the Village Board for any violation of the facility's license
related to operations, mishandling or willful or grossly negligent
release of solid waste or violations of this article. Revocation will only
be effective after a public hearing has been held by the Village Board
upon a published Class 1 Notice as defined in § 985.07, Wis. Stats., or
its successor provisions. No hearing shall be required for termination of
the license due to failure of the applicant to maintain the approved
bond, provide written acknowledgement of intent to comply with the
license or the transfer or assignment by the applicant of ownership,
operation, maintenance, possession or control of the facility. The Village
Board may, if necessary, seek to enforce this article or any license
issued under it through court order enjoining any person or applicant
from continued or future construction, operation, maintenance,
transportation, storage, treatment or disposal of solid waste at the
facility, including where the person or applicant has violated any
condition of the license or this article or has caused or contributed to a
public nuisance at or near the facility.
B. Any proper appeal by a person for revocation by the Village Board of a
license shall be reviewed as provided in Chapter 68, Wis. Stats., or its
successor provisions.
§ 248-7 HOBART CODE § 248-9
1:396
§ 248-9. General regulations regarding solid waste and hazardous
waste facilities.
The following general article provisions shall be applicable to persons
constructing, operating, maintaining, closing or providing long-term care of
a facility in the Village or any person transporting solid waste to and from a
facility through the Village.
A. Transportation requirements.
(1) No person, including any person licensed by the Village (licensee),
shall use any Village roadway as a route of travel for construction,
operation, maintenance, closure, or long-term care of a facility or
the transportation of solid waste to or from a facility or through the
Village, unless that roadway is established and authorized by the
Village Board as a designated roadway for travel for such purposes
and unless the person fully complies with all Village roadway
regulations and orders and obtains a license therefor. The Village
Board may condition the effective date of the license under this
subsection as specified in § 248-28A.
(2) Any person transporting solid waste or materials for the
construction, operation, maintenance, closure and long-term care
of a facility through the Village shall use vehicles that are closed,
constructed, operated and filled in such a manner to prevent any
portion of the solid waste or other materials from discharging,
leaking, spilling, falling or escaping from the vehicle onto any
public or private property in the Village, including but not limited
to any road, street or alley.
(3) Any person transporting solid waste or the materials for
constructing, operating, maintaining, closing or providing longterm
care at a facility on any Village roadways shall only transport
such solid waste or materials during the hours and days established
and authorized by the Village Board.
(4) Every licensee shall prepare a list of authorized transporters who
will be allowed to transport solid waste or other materials to or
from the facility. The list which shall contain at least the names,
addresses and telephone numbers of the authorized transporters
and shall be filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer prior to
commencement of operations. A facility may only accept solid
waste from a person whose name, address and telephone number
appears on the facility's list of transporters.
B. Report requirements.
(1) Each licensee shall file an annual written report by April 1 with the
Village Clerk-Treasurer with an attached sworn statement verifying
the completeness of the enclosed report, detailing the following:
the prior year's disposal in cubic yards and tons; all storage and
treatment activity at the facility; the type or types of solid waste
§ 248-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-9
1:397
disposed, stored or treated during that prior year; the source or
sources of any hazardous waste delivered to, disposed at, stored,
accumulated or treated during that prior year; and the names
and addresses of all responsible parties authorized to manage and
control the daily operations. In addition, the person shall provide
any or all of the following if requested by the Village Board:
(a) Copies received by the licensee during the prior year of any
groundwater, gas, leachate and air quality testing or
monitoring data related to the facility or properties in the
vicinity of the facility;
(b) Copies received by the licensee, during the prior year, of all
correspondence, reports, citizen complaints and inquiries and
any administrative documents and court documents related to
the compliance with federal or state laws or regulations
pertaining to storage, treatment, disposal or handling of solid
waste and which pertain to the facility.
(2) Every licensee shall require all persons transporting solid waste to
or from the facility during operations to complete and sign a form
at the time of entering the facility, noting on the form the following:
(a) The source of the waste;
(b) The type of waste;
(c) The amount of waste;
(d) The date of disposal, storage or treatment;
(e) The name and address of the authorized transporter;
(f) The signature of the authorized transporter or the
transporter's agent.
(3) Copies of these forms shall be kept on the premises at all times
during the operations and shall be available to the Village Board
upon request for review and copying.
(4) Every licensee shall report during construction, operation,
maintenance, closure and long-term care of the facility within 24
hours, in writing to the Village Clerk-Treasurer, any information
received by the licensee, regarding the following occurrences
related to or at the facility:
(a) Any hazardous waste not covered by the terms of the license
which enter or exit the facility whether or not disposed, stored
or treated at the facility;
(b) Any permanent, emergency or temporary conditions which
may or did require closing of the facility, including for fire,
§ 248-9 HOBART CODE § 248-9
1:398
explosion, other public health or safety conditions or repair or
reconstruction of the facility;
(c) Any notice or other document relating to a government
ordered closing of the facility;
(d) Any transfer or assignment of ownership, possession, control
or operation of the facility.
C. Operation requirements.
(1) Notwithstanding licensure under this article, the Village may
commence and maintain an action under statutory or common law
nuisance against any person, including a licensee, who creates or
continues a nuisance at the facility or in the transportation of solid
wastes to or from a facility or through the Village. This remedy
shall be in addition to the revocation procedures available under
§ 248-29 above.
(2) Every licensee shall daily inspect the facility and roadways used to
transport solid waste to or from the facility and when appropriate,
remove any solid waste disposed or discharged on the roadways or
rights-of-way.
(3) Every licensee shall cover or spray all roads and haulways at the
facility with sufficient and necessary materials, including water, to
eliminate blowing dust.
(4) Every licensee shall:
(a) Erect and maintain temporary and permanent fences or take
such other measures as may be appropriate and necessary to
control the blowing of paper and the discharging of other
materials from the facility;
(b) Provide and maintain appropriate and necessary physical and
personnel security protections including fences and lockable
gates;
(c) Lock any unlocked gates at the facility except during
authorized hours of operation or except during emergencies;
(d) Conduct the operations in such a manner that dust, dirt, debris
or other materials will not be carried by wind across the
boundary of the facility onto adjoining properties; and
(e) Provide the sufficient cover materials for the solid waste at the
end of each operational day and at such other times of an
operational day when wind conditions warrant, to prevent
blowing papers and unsightly conditions at the facility.
(5) Every facility shall have an attendant at the facility whenever
operations are occurring. An attendant shall be "on call" to respond
§ 248-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-9
1:399
to emergencies whenever operations are not occurring at facility.
The licensee shall provide to the Village Clerk-Treasurer in writing
the names, addresses and telephone numbers of all attendants who
will be at the facility during operations or who will be "on call."
(6) Every licensee shall provide to the Village Clerk-Treasurer a list of
the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the individual who
(are) responsible to manage, control and administer the facility.
The list shall be provided to the Village Clerk-Treasurer prior to the
commencement of operations and updated at least on an annual
basis.
(7) Any licensee who stores materials at a facility must store such
materials in a building and in such a manner as to prevent
harborage of rats or other vermin and to avoid nuisance conditions
at the facility. The licensee shall place all salvaged material into the
building on a daily basis so that no material is left uncovered or
uncontained during the night or on the weekends. The licensee
shall exterminate insects and rodents and shall destroy all noxious
weeds at the facility as directed by the Village Board.
(8) Each licensee shall maintain sufficient fire fighting equipment and
other appropriate emergency equipment at all times at the facility.
Each licensee shall immediately begin remediation upon receiving
information that failure to remediate presents a danger or a
reasonable threat of danger to the public health, safety or welfare
of any person or property.
(9) No licensee may locate, construct, operate or maintain a facility
where any constituents or by-products of the solid waste would
seep, spill, drain, empty, or escape from the facility and or pollute
the groundwater, surface water or the ambient air.
(10) Each licensee shall construct, operate and maintain all private
access roads and haulways as all-weather roads and shall maintain
the roads and haulways in all types of weather conditions. Each
licensee shall monitor and test air quality at the perimeters of the
facility as necessary and appropriate or as ordered by the Village
Board to prevent dusts, debris or other windblown substances from
creating nuisance conditions on properties bordering the facility.
(11)No person, including a licensee, may operate or maintain a facility
so that it creates a potential for fire, explosion or the potential to
liberate hazardous or poisonous gases from the facility.
(12)No person, including a licensee, may knowingly dispose, store or
treat any hazardous waste at a solid waste facility. A licensee shall
separate or isolate from the general solid waste mass all solid
waste, which in combination with another solid or hazardous
waste, may cause a fire, explosion or liberation of a hazardous or
poisonous gas.
§ 248-9 HOBART CODE § 248-9
1:400
(13)No person may construct, operate or maintain any buildings or any
equipment at a facility other than buildings and equipment
appropriate and necessary for the construction, operation,
maintenance, closure and long-term care of the facility. A facility
may not be used for the storage of unrelated vehicles, equipment or
materials. No person, including a licensee, may construct, operate
or maintain a facility or allow any other person to operate or
maintain any business, occupation, enterprise or operation at the
facility except that the specific use be authorized by the license.
(14) Each licensee shall make all reasonable efforts to cover with clean
earthen fill material all hoses or ponds within the facility to the
existing topography, except for the active fill area and except for
any sedimentation basin designed and constructed to accept
surface drainage from the facility. No licensee may discharge the
water or sediment from a sedimentation basin into any surface
water until that surface water discharge has been approved by the
DNR.
(15) Each licensee shall maintain and not remove or cause to have
removed from the facility, except at the active fill area, any topsoil.
Topsoil removed by the licensee from the active fill area shall not be
removed from the facility.
(16) A licensee shall provide and maintain sufficient landscaping for the
purpose of providing natural noise and natural aesthetic visual
barriers at the facility. In the event the noise and aesthetic visual
barriers are lost or destroyed for any reason, the licensee shall, as
soon as weather conditions permit, replace these natural barriers
with new natural barriers that have been approved by the Village
Board.
(17) A licensee shall plant and replant, as necessary and appropriate, all
berms, if any, at the facility with grass or other appropriate
vegetation to prevent or reduce erosion.
(18) A licensee shall allow the Village Board or its designated
representative(s) access to the site for inspections at any
reasonable time that access is requested. A licensee shall provide
the Village Board or its designated representative access to and the
opportunity to review and copy any analysis of wastes, stored
materials, soils, leachate, groundwater, surface water, or dust
which was made pursuant to a requirement of this article, the
facility's federal, state or Village license or to investigate any
complaint about nuisance conditions and to take samples of the
above noted materials for analysis.
(19)No person, including the licensee, may dispose, store or treat
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), any dioxins or any radioactive
material at a facility or at any other location within the Village. This
prohibition does not prevent the use of PCB containing materials,
§ 248-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-9
1:401
provided such use is in conformance with the Toxic Substances
Control Act and its implementing regulations.
(20) Each licensee shall provide and maintain at least one functional
automatic security light and telephone and electrical services
(ervices), at its expense, within the facility for lighting during nondaylight
hours. The security light and services shall be installed
and operational prior to commencement of any operations.
(21) Every licensee shall, at its expense, install and maintain at or near
the entrance to the facility a sign which shall contain a statement in
large letters of at least 12 inches in height that reads "NO
HAZARDOUS AND OTHER UNAUTHORIZED SOLID WASTE IS
ACCEPTED." The licensee shall keep the sign clean, visible and
readable to those entering the facility. This sign shall be installed
prior to commencement of operations.
(22)No persons, including a licensee, may construct, install or maintain
in the Village any signs that will identify the existence or location of
the facility, except those signs otherwise noted in this article, the
Chapter 295, Zoning, or required by the DNR and approved by the
Village Board.
(23)No licensee may conduct or allow open burning at a facility unless
written approval of the Village Board has been granted.
D. Financial requirements.
(1) Each licensee shall reimburse the Village for all additional
reasonable costs which are not covered by application and renewal
fees and which are incurred by the Village in issuing the license or
monitoring compliance therewith, including but not limited to the
following: the cost of responding to or acting upon any fires,
discharges, explosions, accidents, hazards, or other emergency
needs at the facility; and the costs of investigating complaints
about the operations. The Village, after incurring these costs, shall
determine the reasonable costs to be reimbursed by the licensee.
(2) The Village, during the license period, shall not be obligated, nor
shall it have any duty or responsibility to the licensee to acquire or
supply any additional or specialized machinery or equipment to be
used for occurrences such as fires, accidents, explosions,
discharges or hazards, or to be used for the other emergency needs
at or near the facility.
(3) The Village shall not be obligated, nor shall it have any duty or
responsibility to the licensee to employ or retain any additional or
specialized personnel to be used for discharges or hazards or to be
used for other emergency needs at or near the facility.
§ 248-9 HOBART CODE § 248-10
1:402
§ 248-10. Violations and penalties.108
Any person violating this article upon conviction shall be subject to the
penalties provided in § 1-3. In addition to any other penalty for violating this
article, the cost of abating a public nuisance by the Village shall be assessed
as a special charge against the real estate in the Village of a person
causing such nuisance. In addition to any other legal relief available to the
Village for violation of this article, the Village Board may take appropriate
legal action or proceedings to recover damages, to abate and remove any
nuisance and to enjoin further violations of this article.
§ 248-11. Authority.109
This article is enacted pursuant to §§ 61.34, 66.0415, 66.0119, 66.0407,
Wis. Stats.
108. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 248-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-11
1:403

ARTICLE II
Recycling and Municipal Solid Waste Collection
[Adopted 5-20-2014 by Ord. No. 3-2014]
§ 248-12. Title.
The title of this article shall be "Recycling and Municipal Solid Waste
Collection."
§ 248-13. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the accumulation, separation,
and disposal of solid waste within the Village and to promote recycling,
composting, and resource recovery through the administration of an
effective recycling program, as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 287.09 and 287.11
and Wis. Admin. Code NR Ch. 544.
§ 248-14. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be
held to be the minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other power granted by statute. Where any terms or
requirements of this article may be inconsistent or conflicting, the more
restrictive requirements or interpretation shall apply. Where a provision of
this article is required by statute, or by a standard in Wis. Admin. Code NR
Ch. 544 and where this article provision is unclear, the provision shall be
interpreted in light of the statutes and the Wis. Admin. Code NR Ch. 544
standards in effect on the date of the adoption of this article, or in effect on
the date of the most recent text amendment to this article.
§ 248-15. Statutory authority, applicability and administration.
This article is adopted under Wis. Stats. § 287.09(2). It is intended to apply
to all persons within the Village and its provisions shall be administered by
the Board, and/or other Village officials designated by the Board.
§ 248-16. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
AUTOMOTIVE ENGINE OIL — Has the meaning given in Wis. Stats.
§ 287.15(1)(a).
BIMETAL CONTAINER — A container, including beverages, that is made
primarily of a combination of steel and aluminum.
COLLECTOR — A person, firm or corporation licensed to collect, dispose
of and/or market recyclable and/or nonrecyclable solid waste within the
Village.
§ 248-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-16
1:405
COMPOSTING — Biological degradation and transformation of organic
solid waste under controlled conditions designed to promote aerobic
decompositions and includes vermicomposting.
CONTAINER BOARD — Corrugated paperboard used in the manufacture of
shipping containers and related products.
DRUG WASTE — Any medication (pill, capsule, cream, ointment, liquid,
patch), prescribed or over-the-counter, which is no longer needed or
wanted.
ELECTRONIC WASTE — Any electronic or electrical device(s) that have
reached the end of their useful life, and that contain substantially high
amounts of toxic or harmful substances. This list includes, but is not limited
to: cellular phones, rechargeable batteries, fluorescent lighting and ballast,
computer motherboards, televisions, any device containing mercury, or any
device which has a video display.
FOAM POLYSTYRENE PACKAGING — Packaging made primarily from foam
polystyrene that satisfies one of the following criteria:
FREE LIQUIDS — Liquids which readily separate from the solid portion of
waste under ambient temperature and pressure.
GLASS CONTAINER — A glass bottle, jar or other packaging container used
to contain a product that is the subject of a retail sale and does not include
ceramic cups, dishes, light bulbs, mason jars, ovenware, plate glass, safety
and window glass, heat-resistant glass such as Pyrex®, lead-based glass
such as crystal, or TV tubes.
HDPE — High-density polyethylene. Plastic containers made of HDPE and
regulated under Wis. Admin. Code Ch. ATCP 137 will have a triangular
symbol with number "2."
LDPE — Low-density polyethylene. Plastic containers made of LDPE and
regulated under Wis. Admin. Code Ch. ATCP 137 will have a triangular
symbol with number "4."
MAGAZINES — Magazines and other materials printed on similar paper.
MAJOR APPLIANCE — A residential or commercial air conditioner, clothes
washer, clothes dryer, dishwasher, freezer, microwave oven, oven, stove,
refrigerator, furnace, boiler, dehumidifier or water heater.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A property containing five or more
residential units, including those which are occupied seasonally, and all
residential facilities that do not meet the definition of "residential unit," on
fee simple property.
A. Is designed for serving food or beverages;
Consists of loose particles intended to fill space and cushion the article
in a shipping container;
B.
Consists of rigid materials shaped to hold and cushion the packaged
article in a shipping container.
C.
§ 248-16 HOBART CODE § 248-16
1:406
NEWSPAPER — A newspaper and other materials printed on newsprint.
NONRECYCLABLE POSTCONSUMER WASTE — Solid waste for which
there exists no commercially demonstrated method of resource recovery.
It does not include solid waste generated in the production of goods,
hazardous waste as defined in Wis. Stats. § 291.01(7), waste from
construction and demolition of structures, scrap automobiles, or highvolume
industrial waste as defined in Wis. Stats. § 289.01(17).
NONRESIDENTIAL FACILITIES AND PROPERTIES — Commercial, retail,
industrial, institutional and governmental facilities and properties. It
includes any location at which goods or services are provided or
manufactured, including locations under construction, demolition or
remodeling, or used for special events such as, but not limited to, fairs,
festivals, port venues, conferences and exhibits.
OFFICE PAPER — High-grade printing and writing papers from offices in
nonresidential facilities and properties. Printed white ledger and computer
printout are examples or office paper generally accepted as high grade. This
term does not include industrial process waste.
OIL-ABSORBENT MATERIALS — Materials that are used to absorb waste
oil.
OIL FILTER — A filter for automotive engine oil.
OTHER RESINS or MULTIPLE RESINS — Plastic resins regulated under
Wis. Admin. Code Ch. ATCP 137 and having a triangular symbol with
number "7."
PERSON — Includes any individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association, local governmental unit as defined in Wis. Stats.
§ 66.0131(1)(a), state agency or authority or federal agency.
PETE or PET — Polyethylene terephthalate. Plastic containers made of
PETE and regulated under Wis. Admin. Ch. ATCP 137 will have a triangular
symbol with number "1."
PLASTIC CONTAINER — An individual, separate, rigid plastic bottle, can,
jar or carton, except for a blister pack, that is originally used to contain a
product that is the subject of a retail sale. A plastic container includes those
made of PETE (No. 1), HDPE (No. 2), PVC (No. 3), LDPE (No. 4), PP (No. 5),
PS (No. 6), and other resins or multiple resins (No. 7).
POSTCONSUMER WASTE — Solid waste other than solid waste generated
in the production of goods, hazardous waste as defined in Wis. Stats.
§ 291.01(7), waste from construction and demolition of structures, scrap
automobiles or high-volume industrial waste as defined in Wis. Stats.
§ 289.01(17).
PP — Polypropylene. Plastic containers made of PP and regulated under
Wis. Admin. Code Ch. ATCP 137 will have a triangular symptom with
number "5."
PS — Polystyrene. Plastic containers made of PS and regulated under Wis.
Admin. Code Ch. ATCP 137 will have a triangular symptom with number "6."
§ 248-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-16
1:407
PVC — Polyvinyl chloride. Plastic containers made of PVC and regulated
under Wis. Admin. Code Ch. ATCP 137 will have a triangular symbol with
number "3."
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS or RECYCLABLE SOLID WASTE — Is defined
by Wis. Admin. § NR 544.03(33) and includes items that are banned from
land disposal and incineration pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 287.07. These items
include, but are not limited to: electronic waste, lead acid batteries, major
appliances, waste oil, yard waste, waste tires, aluminum containers,
corrugated paper or other container board, foam polystyrene packaging,
glass containers, magazines, newspaper, office paper, plastic containers,
steel containers, bimetal containers, used oil filters, oil-absorbent materials
with visible signs of free-flowing oil and electronic devices listed in Wis.
Stats. § 287.07(5).
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — Each living unit in the Village of Hobart designed
for permanent living quarters, including every single, two-, three- and fourfamily
dwelling unit(s) on fee simple property.
SOLID WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant,
water supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility and other
discarded or salvageable materials, including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous materials resulting from industrial, commercial, mining
and agricultural operations, and from community activities, but does not
include solids or dissolved material in domestic sewage, or solid or
dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges which
are point sources subject to permits under Wis. Stats. § 283, or source
material as defined in § 254.31(10), special nuclear material as defined in
§ 254.31(11), or by-product material as defined in § 254.31(1).
SOLID WASTE TREATMENT — Any method, technique or process which
is designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or
composition of solid waste.
VILLAGE'S CONTRACTED COLLECTOR — A person, firm or corporation
specifically contracted by the Village to collect, dispose of and/or market
certain recyclable materials and/or postconsumer waste from residential
units.
WASTE OIL — Any petroleum-derived or synthetic oil that has been used or
spilled.
WASTE TIRE — A tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose
because of wear, damage or defect.
YARD WASTE — Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris and brush,
including clean woody vegetative material no greater than six inches in
diameter. This term does not include stumps, roots or shrubs with intact
root balls.
§ 248-17. Storing of solid waste.
Any accumulation of solid waste on any premises in the Village is declared
to be a nuisance and is prohibited. The owner is responsible for the timely
§ 248-16 HOBART CODE § 248-17
1:408
removal and proper disposal of solid waste from the owner's premises. Upon
failure to remove the nuisance after written notice to the owner, the Village
may cause the nuisance to be removed and disposed of at the owner's
expense. The Village shall collect from the owner all costs associated with
removal and disposal of the nuisance. All unpaid charges and fines will be
placed on the tax roll.
§ 248-18. Separation of recyclable materials.
A. All persons who generate or dispose of solid waste within the Village
shall separate the following recyclable materials from nonrecyclable
solid waste:
(1) Aluminum containers;
(2) Bimetal containers;
(3) Corrugated paper or other container board;
(4) Foam polystyrene packaging;
(5) Glass containers;
(6) Magazines (and other materials printed on similar paper);
(7) Newspaper (and other materials printed on similar paper);
(8) Office paper;
(9) Plastic containers;
(10) Steel containers;
(11) Electronic waste, and electronic devices listed in Wis. Stats.
§ 287.07(5);
(12) Lead-acid batteries;
(13) Major appliances;
(14) Yard waste;
(15)Waste tires;
(16) Used oil filters;
(17)Waste oil;
(18) Oil-absorbent materials with visible signs of free-flowing oil.
B. The Village contracts with the Brown County Resource Recovery
Department for ultimate disposal of all Village recyclable and
nonrecyclable waste. Due to varying market conditions and
technological upgrades, the Brown County Resource Recovery
§ 248-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-18
1:409
§ 248-19. Separation requirements exempted.
The separation requirements of § 248-18 do not apply to the following:
§ 248-20. Care of separated recyclable materials.
To the greatest extent practicable, recyclable materials separated in
accordance with § 248-18 shall be clean and kept free from contaminants
such as food or product residue, oil or grease, or other nonrecyclable
materials, including but not limited to: household hazardous waste, medical
waste, and agricultural chemical containers. Recyclable materials shall be
stored in a manner that protects them from wind, rain and other inclement
weather conditions. Recyclable materials, as specified in § 248-18A(1)
through (10), should not be bagged prior to placement in wheeled collection
cart.
§ 248-21. Management of lead-acid batteries, major appliances,
waste oil, used oil filters, oil-absorbent materials with visible freeflowing
oil, electronic waste, drug waste, and yard waste.
Occupants of residential units, multiple-family dwellings and nonresidential
facilities and properties shall arrange for the proper collection and disposal
of lead-acid batteries, major appliances, waste oil, used oil filters, oilabsorbent
materials with visible free-flowing oil and electronics with a
collector at the occupant's request and expense. Yard waste may be
disposed of at the Village of Hobart Yard Waste site (in accordance with
established rules and regulations), removed by a collector at the occupant's
request and expense, or composted pursuant to § 248-30. Electronic waste
can be disposed of at the Brown County Resource Recovery Department, or
at any site which has an official program to recycle electronic waste. Drug
waste, as listed in § 248-22E, shall be deposited at any authorized location
with designated and appropriate facilities for drug waste disposal.
§ 248-22. Responsibilities of residential unit owners and occupants.
Department ultimately dictates what shall be required and/or accepted
and the above list may change from time to time.
A. Persons who send their postconsumer waste to a processing facility
licensed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources that
recovers the materials specified in § 248-18 from solid waste in as pure
a form as is technically feasible.
B. Solid waste burned as a supplemental fuel at a facility if less than 30%
of the heat input to the facility is derived from the solid waste burned as
supplemental fuel.
C. A recyclable material specified in § 248-18 for which a variance has
been granted by the Department of Natural Resources under Wis. Stats.
§ 287.11(2m) or Wis. Admin. Code § NR 544.14.
§ 248-18 HOBART CODE § 248-22
1:410
A. Except as otherwise directed by the Village, owners and occupants of
residential units shall follow the preparation and collection of recycling
materials as required by the Village.
B. All residential units shall be provided a wheeled recycling cart and a
wheeled nonrecyclable postconsumer waste cart by the Village or the
Village's contracted collector. Provided carts are to be maintained by
the residential unit owners and occupants in a good, clean and sanitary
condition and shall not be removed from the premises by the residential
unit owner or occupant. These carts shall be watertight and flyproof at
all times. Covers shall be kept tightly on the carts to prevent materials
from blowing or spilling. All bins/carts should be primary housed inside
a building during non-pickup days. If it is impossible to house in a
building, then the bins/carts must be out of sight of street. The owner
shall take any reasonable steps to make sure animals are not able to
disturb garbage if left outside. During winter months, the property
owner must shovel out an area in which the carts/bins can be easily
accessible to the disposal contractor as in summer months. If this is
exceedingly difficult, the contractor may decide the route and
procedures necessary to pick up carts/bins. Any litter which is strewn
about the area of the bins, when placed by curb, is the responsibility of
the owner or designated agent, and must be removed no later than
sundown of the evening of pickup. No person shall dispose or dump
nonrecyclable material in any container designed to handle or store
recyclable materials. No solid waste or recyclable material shall be
allowed to be disposed of in the Village which originated from outside
the Village. Any item(s) which are placed outside of contractor
approved cart/bin will not be picked up.
C. Properly prepared bimetal containers, container board, foam
polystyrene packaging, glass containers, HDPE, LDPE, magazines,
newspaper, other resins or multiple resins, PETE, plastic containers, PP,
PS, PVC and aluminum cans (per Brown County Resource and Recovery
Department collection discretion) within the recycling cart shall be
collected at curbside according to a schedule set by the Village. In
order to prevent carts from being an obstruction to snowplows and
other traveling public, carts are prohibited from being placed within the
roadway. The Village will not be responsible for carts that are damaged
due to being struck by Village snowplows or "snow wash" resulting from
plowing activity. All carts shall be placed and removed from the
collection point within 24 hours of pickup.
D. Nonrecyclable postconsumer waste contained within a nonrecyclable
cart shall be collected at curbside according to a schedule set by the
Village. In order to prevent carts from being an obstruction to
snowplows and other traveling public, carts are prohibited from being
placed within the roadway. The Village will not be responsible for carts
that are damaged due to being struck by Village snowplows or "snow
wash" resulting from plowing activity. All carts shall be placed and
removed from the collection point within 24 hours of pickup.
§ 248-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-22
1:411
E. No person shall place the following materials at the curbside collection
point for collection by the Village's contracted collector unless the
person has made separate arrangements for the collection at the
person's own expense:
(1) Nonseparated recyclable and nonrecyclable postconsumer waste;
(2) Hazardous waste as defined in Wis. Stats. § 291.01(7);
(3) Paint or stain (latex-based paint cans can go in the trash, as long as
contents in can are dried out);
(4) Flammable liquid;
(5) Explosives;
(6) Chemicals;
(7) Carcasses;
(8) Home generated sharps unless they are deposited in an FDA
approved sharps collection container;
(9) Infectious waste as defined by Wis. Stat. § 287.07(7)(c)1.c, and
other waste that contains or may be mixed with infectious waste;
(10) Automotive parts or accessories;
(11) Metal;
(12) Yard waste;
(13) Tires;
(14) Major appliances;
(15) Lead-acid batteries unless prior arrangements are made with the
Village's collector;
(16) Used oil filters;
(17) Oil-absorbent materials with visible signs of free-flowing oil;
(18)Waste oil unless prior arrangements are made with the Village's
collector;
(19) Electronic waste and devices listed in Wis. Stats. § 287.07(5);
(20) Pesticides, excluding nonagricultural pesticide containers if
properly cleaned, not contaminated, and if approved by the Village
Board for separation and for recyclable material collection;
(21) Asbestos;
(22) Sludge wastes;
§ 248-22 HOBART CODE § 248-22
1:412
§ 248-23. Responsibilities of owners or designated agents of
multiple-family dwellings.
(23)Waste from pollution control equipment;
(24) Residue and debris from cleanup of chemical discharge or chemical
residue and debris from any facility or operation using chemicals in
any commercial, agricultural or industrial processes;
(25) Ash waste;
(26) Hazardous and toxic demolition and construction waste;
(27) Septage (human or otherwise) waste;
(28) Animal fecal waste;
(29)Wood treated with chemical preservatives;
(30) Contaminated recyclable material as determined by the Village
Board or its contractor;
(31) Drug waste (shall be disposed of at any authorized location with
designated and appropriate facilities for drug waste disposal).
A. Responsibilities.
(1) The owner of a multifamily dwelling shall arrange for the removal
of nonrecyclable postconsumer waste and recyclable materials
specified in § 248-18A(1) through (10) from the multifamily
dwelling at the owner's expense. The owner or designated agent of
a multifamily dwelling shall provide adequate separate containers
for the disposal of both nonrecyclable postconsumer waste and
those recyclable materials specified in § 248-18A(1) through (10). A
nonrecyclable postconsumer waste container and recyclable
material container of at least 25 gallons each shall be provided per
dwelling unit, or dumpsters may be provided using this size
equivalency. Nonrecyclable postconsumer waste shall be removed
and disposed of by a collector at the owner's expense at least once
each week. Recyclable materials specified in § 248-18A(1) through
(10) shall be removed by a collector at the owner's expense at least
once every other week. To ensure compliance, the owner of a
multifamily dwelling shall provide the Village with a copy of its
current collection contract within five business days of a written
request from the Village. The Village may at any time require the
owner of a multifamily dwelling to increase container sizes or
dumpster equivalency and/or frequency of collection to avoid
nuisances such as fugitive debris or other aesthetic issues.
(2) All recyclable and nonrecyclable containers shall be placed and
maintained within a three-sided enclosure and enclosed on the
fourth side with a gate to contain garbage, refuse, waste, recycling
and other debris. The enclosure shall be a minimum of 30 feet by 10
§ 248-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-23
1:413
feet, it must be at least 10 feet from any other structure, per NFPA
1 (most recent addition), and it must meet accessory structure
regulations of Chapter 295, Zoning. The screening shall consist of
a solid fence constructed of masonry or commercial-grade wood
fencing, and shall be a minimum of six feet and a maximum of
eight feet tall. This fence shall be constructed in such a manner so
as to prevent paper, debris, and other refuse material from being
blown through the fence. The owner of a multifamily dwelling shall
be responsible for full compliance with the requirements of this
article.
(3) The owner or designated agent may apply for a special exception
from the Village regarding the minimum size of containers and/or
the minimum size of the enclosure. The Village may grant a special
exception if the applicant clearly shows that this article
requirement creates an unnecessary hardship and granting the
variance will not harm the public interest or undermine the
purposes of this article.
B. The owner or designated agent of a multifamily dwelling shall do all of
the following:
(1) Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials
specified in § 248-18A(1) through (10);
(2) Notify tenants in writing at the time of renting or leasing the
dwelling and at least semiannually thereafter about the established
on-premises recycling program, which materials are collected, and
how to prepare the materials in order to meet the processing
requirements and collection methods;
(3) Provide educational materials to tenants with resources on proper
disposal options for recyclable materials described in § 248-22E;
(4) Provide for the collection of the recyclable materials specified in
§ 248-18A(1) through (10), separated from the nonrecyclable
postconsumer waste, and the delivery of the recyclable materials to
a recycling facility; and
(5) Notify tenants of reasons to reduce solid waste and to promote
recycling, which materials are collected, how to prepare the
materials in order to meet the processing requirements, collection
methods, or sites, location and hours of operation, and a contact
person or company, including a name, address and telephone
number.
C. The requirements specified in Subsection A do not apply to the owner
or designated agent of a multifamily dwelling if the postconsumer waste
generated within the dwelling is treated at a processing facility licensed
by the Department of Natural Resources that recovers for recycling the
materials specified in § 248-18 from solid waste in as pure a form as is
technically feasible.
§ 248-23 HOBART CODE § 248-24
1:414
§ 248-24. Responsibilities of owners or designated agents of
nonresidential facilities and properties.
A. Responsibilities.
(1) The owner of nonresidential facilities and properties shall arrange
for the removal of solid waste and collection of separated
recyclable materials specified in § 248-18A(1) through (10) from
their property at their expense. The owner or designated agent of
nonresidential facilities and properties shall provide adequate
separate containers for the disposal of nonrecyclable postconsumer
waste and recyclable materials specified in § 248-18A(1) through
(10), and shall provide resource information on how and where to
dispose materials specified in § 248-22E. Nonrecyclable
postconsumer waste shall be removed and disposed of by a
collector at the owner's expense at least once each week.
Recyclable materials specified in § 248-18A(1) through (10) shall be
removed by a collector at the owner's expense at least once every
other week. To ensure compliance, the owner of nonresidential
facilities and properties shall provide the Village with a copy of its
current collection contract(s) within five business days of a written
request from the Village.
(2) All recyclable and nonrecyclable containers shall be placed and
maintained within a three-sided enclosure and enclosed on the
fourth side with a gate to contain garbage, refuse, waste, recycling
and other debris. The enclosure shall be a minimum of 30 feet by 10
feet, it must be at least 10 feet from any other structure, per NFPA
1 (most recent addition), and it must meet accessory structure
regulations of Chapter 295, Zoning. The screening shall consist of a
solid fence constructed of masonry or commercial grade wood
fencing, and shall be a minimum of six feet and a maximum of eight
feet tall. This fence shall be constructed in such a manner so as to
prevent paper, debris, and other refuse material from being blown
through the fence.
(3) The owner or designated agent may apply for a special exception
from the Village regarding the minimum size of containers and/or
the minimum size of the enclosure. The Village may grant a special
exception if the applicant clearly shows that this article
requirement creates an unnecessary hardship and granting the
variance will not harm the public interest or undermine the
purposes of this article.
B. The owner(s) or designated agent(s) of nonresidential facilities and
properties shall do all of the following:
(1) Provide adequate, separate containers for recyclable materials
specified in § 248-18A(1) through (10);
(2) Notify in writing, at least semiannually, all users, tenants and
occupants of the properties about the established on-site recycling
§ 248-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-24
1:415
§ 248-25. Responsibilities of occupants of multifamily dwellings
and nonresidential facilities and properties.
In addition to the responsibilities set forth in §§ 248-18, 242-20 and 248-22,
occupants of multifamily dwellings and nonresidential facilities and
properties shall, at their expense, arrange for the proper collection and
disposal of their solid waste that is not postconsumer waste, such as
hazardous waste, paint, stain, flammable liquid, explosives, chemicals,
carcasses, home-generated sharps, infectious waste, automotive parts or
accessories, etc. This obligation does not relieve the owner of said premises
from liability under § 248-17 for the accumulation of solid waste on the
owner's premises. The owner is responsible for the timely removal and
proper disposal if the occupant fails to do so. The Village shall collect from
the owner all costs associated with removal and disposal of the nuisance.
All unpaid charges and fines will be placed on the tax roll. The owner's
recourse, if any, will be against the occupant.
§ 248-26. Prohibitions on disposal of recyclable materials separated
for recycling.
No person may dispose of any recyclable materials, as defined in § 248-16,
in a solid waste disposal facility.
§ 248-27. Dumping garbage, refuse and waste.
program, which materials are collected, and how to prepare the
materials in order to meet the processing requirements and
collection methods;
(3) Provide educational materials to all users, tenants and occupants of
the properties with resources on proper disposal options for
recyclable materials described in § 248-22E;
(4) Provide for the collection of the materials specified in § 248-18A(1)
through (10), separated from the solid waste by the users, tenants
and occupants, and the delivery of the materials to a recycling
facility; and
(5) Notify users, tenants and occupants of reasons to reduce and
recycle, which materials are collected, how to prepare the
materials in order to meet the processing requirements, collection
methods, or sites, location and hours of operation, and a contact
person or company, including a name, address and telephone
number.
C. The requirements specified in Subsection A do not apply to the owners
or designated agents of nonresidential facilities and properties if the
postconsumer waste generated within the facility or property is treated
at a processing facility licensed by the Department of Natural
Resources that recovers for recycling materials specified in § 248-18
from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible.
§ 248-24 HOBART CODE § 248-27
1:416
§ 248-28. Disposal of building wastes.
All solid waste resulting from the remodeling, construction or
reconstruction of a building or structure, roadway or sidewalk shall be
disposed of by the owner at the owner's expense.
§ 248-29. Right to reject materials.
The Village's contracted collector may reject any recyclable material or
nonrecyclable postconsumer waste that is not prepared according to this
article or other policies adopted by the Village.
§ 248-30. Residential composting.
A. No person may deposit, throw, discard, place or abandon any solid
waste upon any street, court, lane, alley, business square, public
enclosure, vacant lot, house yard, body of water, or any place, except in
a container intended for that purpose. No person shall disturb the
contents of any recyclable or nonrecyclable waste container. No person
shall remove any item from recyclable or nonrecyclable carts or other
waste containers located on private premises or in the public right-ofway
adjacent without the consent of the occupant of the premises.
B. No person shall deposit or leave any recyclable materials or solid waste
in any garbage container belonging to another person without first
securing permission to use such container for disposal purposes.
C. Recyclable and nonrecyclable containers placed at public waste sites,
public parks and other public areas within the Village are intended to
be used for the disposal of recyclable and nonrecyclable postconsumer
waste generated at, and associated with, the use of the public facility
being served by those containers. No person shall deposit or leave any
recyclable or nonrecyclable postconsumer waste at any public wayside
or park within the Village unless the recyclable or nonrecyclable
postconsumer waste was generated upon the premises being served by
that container and in connection with the use of the public facility.
A. Composting in all residential zoning districts shall be conducted within
an enclosed container not to exceed five feet by five feet by five feet for
lots less than 40,000 square feet and two five-foot-by-five-foot-by-fivefoot
containers for lots 40,000 square feet to 120,000 square feet.
Containers shall be of a durable material including, but not limited to,
rot-resistant wood or a commercially purchased composting unit which
will provide for adequate aeration. Containers shall be constructed and
maintained in a structurally sound manner.
B. The compost container(s) shall be located in the rear yard no closer
than 10 feet to any rear or side property line nor closer than 20 feet to
any habitable building, other than the resident's(s') own home.
§ 248-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-30
1:417
§ 248-31. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
C. Only grass clippings, leaves, weeds that have not gone to seed,
nondiseased plants, trimmings less than 1/4 inch in diameter, straw,
sawdust, wood ashes, fruit or vegetable scraps, coffee grounds, egg
shells, paper, and commercially available compost ingredients may be
placed in the compost container(s). Meat, bones, fat oils, grease, dairy
products, feces, plastics or synthetic fibers shall not be placed in the
compost container(s).
D. Compost materials shall be layered, aerated, moistened, turned,
managed and covered during inclement weather to promote effective
decomposition of the materials in a safe, secure and sanitary manner.
E. All compost containers and/or compost materials not in compliance
with this section shall be declared a public nuisance and are subject to
enforcement and abatement as provided in § 248-31 of this article.
A. For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this
article, any authorized officer, employee or representative of the Village
Department may inspect recyclable materials separated for recycling,
postconsumer waste intended for disposal, recycling collection sites
and facilities, collection vehicles, collection areas of multiple-family
dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties, and any records
relating to recycling activities, which shall be kept confidential when
necessary to protect proprietary information. No person may refuse
access to any authorized officer or employee of the Village who requests
access for purposes of inspection. No person may obstruct, hamper or
interfere with such an inspection. No part of this article shall inhibit the
ability of law enforcement to collect any material that may have
evidentiary value.
B. Any person who violates a provision of this article may be issued a
citation. The issuance of a citation shall not preclude proceeding under
any other ordinance of law relating to the same or any other matter.
Proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the same or
any other matter shall not preclude the issuance of a citation under this
section.
C. Penalties for violating this article may be assessed as follows:
(1) Any person who violates a provision of this article, except § 248-26,
may be required to forfeit not less than $10 nor more than $1,000
for each violation;
(2) Any person who violates § 248-26 may be required to forfeit $50 for
a first violation, $200 for a second violation, and not more than
$2,000 for a third or subsequent violation;
(3) The forfeiture and penalties provided in this section shall not be
construed as prohibiting other methods of enforcing this article,
including, but not limited to, penalties provided for in § 1-3 of the
§ 248-30 HOBART CODE § 248-31
1:418
Village Code, injunctions and other forms of relief available to the
Village.
§ 248-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-31
1:419
Chapter 250
SPECIAL EVENTS, REGULATION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 215.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 221.
Public property — See Ch. 227.
§ 250-1. Title.
The title of this chapter shall be the "Special Event Permit Ordinance."
§ 250-2. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to protect the public interest
and promote the general health, safety, and welfare of the Village by
establishing rules and a permit process in order to hold a special event
on any property within the Village so as to address potential impacts on
the general public of a special event, including without limitation noise,
light, dust, traffic, parking, and other public health safety and welfare
concerns. Further, the purpose and intent of this chapter is to promote the
economic welfare and general prosperity of the community by safeguarding
and preserving property values by addressing potential impacts of a special
event.
§ 250-3. Severability.
Should any portion of this chapter be declared unconstitutional or invalid
by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not
be affected.
§ 250-4. Applicability; administration.
This chapter is intended to apply to all persons within the Village, and its
provisions shall be administered by the Village Board, and/or other Village
officials designated by the Village Board. This chapter does not apply to any
event which is sponsored by the Village, or to any persons who already have
a standing agreement with the Village for frequent use of public property.
§ 250-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Any person applying for a special event permit.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, governmental entity, or organization of any kind.
§ 248-31 HOBART CODE § 250-5
1:420
SPECIAL EVENT — Any temporary event or activity occurring on public or
private property that interferes with or differs from the normal and ordinary
use of the property or adjacent public or private property which, due to
the number of people involved, timing of the event, or other similar factors
deemed reasonably relevant by the Village, would require Village services
beyond those normally provided.
§ 250-6. Permit requirements.
A. No person shall conduct a special event within the Village of Hobart
without first having obtained a rental and/or special event permit. A
special event permit may be issued to any person that the Village
Administrator or his/her designee finds appropriate.
B. Any person may file an application for a special event permit.
Application for a special event permit shall be filed with the Village
Clerk-Treasurer at least 60 days prior to the proposed event date. If an
application is filed less than 60 days prior to the proposed event, the
Village may attempt to process the application but is not obligated to do
so. Payment is required for the application fee (refer to § 250-12) at the
time of submittal, and the application shall contain such information as
the Village Clerk-Treasurer may require. The permit shall set forth the
exact days on which and the exact location where such activities shall
be carried on and shall be valid only during the dates and times and at
the location specified. The applicant for the permit shall provide the
Village with a complete list of sponsors and vendors at the time of
making the application as well as a map for approval showing the
location of booths, tents, port-a-potties, and other special and
temporary facilities on the special event property.
C. Upon receipt of both the application for a permit and the fee, the Village
Clerk-Treasurer shall review the information given on the application
for conformity with the provisions of this section. The Village Clerk-
Treasurer shall distribute the application and accompanying materials
to the Police Department, Fire Department, Public Works, and any other
related department for review and comment. If the applicable
requirements are satisfied, the Village Clerk-Treasurer will then
forward the application to the Village Administrator or his/her
designee.
D. The Village Administrator or his/her designee shall review the
application and either deny the permit, approve the permit, or approve
the permit with conditions. The permit shall be signed by the Village
Administrator or his/her designee and shall be issued to the applicant,
who, in turn, shall issue identification permits to each vendor approved
by the applicant. All vendors shall prominently display these permits
during the event period.
§ 250-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-7
1:421
§ 250-7. Permit conditions.
Any person or applicant for a special event shall satisfy all of the following
permit conditions, if applicable:
A. Liability insurance. The person or applicant and each special event
sponsoring group or vendor shall be required to supply the Village with
a certificate of insurance with coverage in the amount of not less than
$1,000,000 combined single limit per event and naming the Village as
an additionally insured party. Those events that will be required to
provide the aforementioned insurance indemnification include, but are
not limited to: 1) an event that includes alcohol; or 2) an event that is
anticipated to have attendance greater than 50 people per day; or 3) an
event that includes a road closure. Proof of insurance shall be
submitted to the Village a minimum of 30 days before the start of the
event. The applicant shall also be required to notify the Village in the
event there is a modification of any of the terms of the insurance
coverage. Such notification shall be provided not less than two weeks
prior to the effective date of that termination.
B. Indemnification. The person or applicant shall agree to indemnify,
defend, and hold harmless the Village, its employees, and agents
against all demands, claims, liabilities, losses, damages or expenses,
including but not limited to reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the
Village for any damage or injury to person or property caused by or
resulting from in any way the activities for which the permit is granted.
No permit may be issued unless the person or applicant has agreed to
this indemnification in writing and in a manner confirming its
enforceability.
C. Village services. All requests by applicants for Village services must be
made to the Village Administrator or his/her designee. The applicant
shall be responsible for reimbursement to the Village for any Village
personnel, services, equipment, and facilities provided for the special
event in the following circumstances for special events: 1) when
deemed necessary by the Village, or 2) when requested by the applicant
and approved by the Village. For Village personnel, including local
Police Department security services, the reimbursable costs associated
with the event shall include wages, overtime, and fringe benefits. An
invoice shall be sent to the applicant, if applicable, for Village
personnel, services, equipment, and facilities with 15 days following the
event. Payment is due within 30 days of invoice. The Village reserves
the right to require full or partial payment of estimated costs in
advance. The event organizer must cancel at least 48 hours before the
event in order to be refunded for personnel costs.
D. Police Department security services. Where in the Village's reasonable
discretion the circumstances require a security presence due to the
scope and nature of the event, the Hobart/Lawrence Police Department
shall be utilized to provide the required security. Said security presence
will be over and above the normal policing which would be provided;
§ 250-7 HOBART CODE § 250-7
1:422
however, it is subject to emergent needs for policing which may
otherwise exist at the time of the event. The Chief of Police or his/her
designee shall determine the level of coverage necessary to provide
adequate security for an event covered under this chapter. The
applicant shall be required to reimburse the Village of Hobart for
security-related services in accordance with Subsection C above.
E. Cleaning/damage deposit. The applicant shall be required to submit to
the Village a cleaning/damage deposit of $200 per day for each
scheduled day of the event, two weeks prior to the starting date of the
event. The cleaning/damage deposit may be refunded to the applicant,
if, upon inspection, all is in a reasonable condition that existed prior to
the commencement of the event, or a prorated portion thereof as may
be necessary to reimburse the Village for loss or cleaning costs. The
Village reserves the right to retain the entire deposit if cleanup is not
completed satisfactorily in the time frame as specified in the permit.
Unless otherwise stated in the permit, the applicant shall be fully
responsible for all necessary cleanup associated with the permitted
event to be completed within 12 hours after the conclusion of the event.
F. Business license required. All vendors operating a revenue-generating
business as part of a special event permit obtained under this Code
section shall obtain and display any and all required Village permits for
the duration of the event (i.e., alcohol). Only those vendors on the
applicant's list of sponsors and participants shall be allowed to receive
permits subject to permit application requirements. All persons serving
beer and/or alcohol must hold an operator's license in accordance with
Wis. Stats. §§ 125.17(1), 125.32(2), and 125.68(2). Vendors wishing to
serve food items must also obtain any required permit or license from
the Brown County Health Department. The applicant and all vendors
shall comply with any other applicable State of Wisconsin Statutes and
Brown County ordinances and shall be responsible for any additional
required licenses or requirements.
G. Applicant representative. The special event sponsoring applicant shall
have at least one representative on site during the event to coordinate
events and enforce guidelines and standards on behalf of the Village
and the County or State Health Department, and shall also be the
primary Village contact for the event. The applicant shall also provide
sufficient staffing to provide assistance with crowd control, parking,
and sanitation. The determination of what constitutes sufficient staffing
will be made in conjunction with Village officials.
H. Inspections required. All tentage must be installed under the Wisconsin
SPS, Chapter 314, and National Fire Protection Association, Chapter
25. The applicant shall be responsible for reimbursing the Village for
any and all fire inspections required in association with the proposed
event. Wiring shall be installed by a licensed electrician and a
temporary permit issued with appropriate fees. All wiring shall be
inspected by the Village prior to being energized. Failure to obtain
inspections may result in the termination of the event.
§ 250-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-7
1:423
§ 250-8. Denial of permit.
Reasons for denial of a special event permit may include, but are not limited
to:
§ 250-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, applicant, organization, vendor, firm, or corporation violating
any of the requirements of this chapter shall be subject to a forfeiture as
defined in § 1-3 of the Village of Hobart Municipal Code. Each violation shall
be considered a separate offense. In addition, the Village may enforce this
section by way of injunctive relief and all other remedies available at law
and in equity.
I. Termination of event. The Village reserves the right to shut down a
special event that is in progress if it is deemed to be a public safety
hazard by the Police and/or Fire Department and/or there is a violation
of Village ordinances, state statutes or the terms of the applicant's
permit. The Village Administrator or his/her designee may revoke an
approved special event permit if the applicant fails to comply in good
faith with the provisions of the permit prior to the event date.
A. The event will disrupt traffic within the Village beyond a reasonably
practical solution.
B. The event will create a likelihood of endangering the public.
C. The event will interfere with access to emergency services.
D. The length, location, or time of the special event will cause undue
hardship or excessive noise levels to adjacent businesses or residents.
E. The event will require the diversion of Village resources that would
unreasonably affect the maintenance of regular Village service levels.
F. The application contains incomplete or false information.
G. The applicant fails to provide proof of insurance.
H. The applicant fails to agree to the indemnification requirements in this
chapter.
I. Any vendor fails to obtain the proper permits required by the Village.
J. Inadequate provision for garbage or debris removal.
K. Inadequate provision of temporary restroom facilities.
L. Inadequate provisions for parking.
M. The event conflicts with another event in the area.
§ 250-7 HOBART CODE § 250-10
1:424
§ 250-10. Notification to property owners or tenants.
The Village may condition any special event permit on a requirement that
the person or applicant give written advance notice of the event and its
probable impact to any property owners or tenants who will be impacted by
the event.
§ 250-11. Appeal.
Any person or applicant that is denied a special event permit may appeal
to the Village Board by requesting such appeal in writing to the Village
Administrator. Pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 68.16, the Village Board elects that
Chapter 68 shall not apply to any such appeal.
§ 250-12. Permit application fee structure.
A. Event classification. There are three classes of events: Class I, Class II,
and Class III. Each class has its own characteristics. An event does not
have to have all the characteristics listed to be in the classification. The
Village reserves the right to make a final determination of an event's
classification.
(1) Class I ($100):
(a) Event will have a large number of participants and/or
spectators of approximately 200 or more people.
(b) Event is open and may attract interest from the general
population of the community and surrounding areas.
(c) Usually involves the closing of a street.
(d) May involve multiple events.
(2) Class II ($75):
(a) Event is open to the public, but is only of interest to a certain
segment of the community (i.e., runners, walkers, supporters
of certain causes, bicyclists, etc.) and may involve
approximately 50 to 200 people.
(b) Most athletic events (i.e., tournaments).
(c) May involve the closing of a street.
(3) Class III ($50):
(a) Event is closed to the public or will only appeal to the members
of a particular group and their guests.
(b) Event may be of general interest and open to the public, but
will only involve a small number of people of approximately 50
people.
§ 250-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-12
1:425
Chapter 255
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5.
Public property — See Ch. 227.
Zoning — See Ch. 295.
§ 255-1. Purpose, intent and applicability.
§ 255-2. Disclaimer of liability.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to impose any liability
upon the Village, its officers or employees, nor to relieve the owner of
any private property from the duty to keep any tree, shrub, or plant upon
(c) Does not include the closing of a street.
B. The permit application fee is for the application only, is nonrefundable
and based upon staff time to adequately process the application, and
does not substitute or remove charges/fees outlined in the rest of this
chapter.
A. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Village of Hobart to regulate
trees in the Village in order to promote the public health, safety and
welfare, prevent the spread of fire, prevent the spread of tree diseases,
protect property values, enhance aesthetics and scenic viewsheds,
balance the need for road safety while preserving the Village's rustic
roads and maintaining trees planted close to the road, reduce the
potential for trees becoming public nuisances and hazards, protect
trees from loss during construction, encourage use of trees to conserve
energy, encourage and maintain an optimal level of age and species
diversity, provide specifications for planting, maintaining and removal
of trees and provide that all such work (including utility maintenance)
in any right-of-way be under permit and to provide a forum for conflict
resolution.
B. Trees are a valuable resource which enhance the aesthetics of the
property, prevent soil erosion, filter airborne pollutants, reduce
atmospheric carbon dioxide, produce oxygen and ameliorate harsh
climates, thereby reducing energy consumption. In addition, trees
contribute significantly to property values and provide many other
benefits from a local to a global aspect. This is to be balanced with the
need for open space and farm fields which are important aspects in
Hobart's landscape and provide habitat for wildlife.
C. This chapter applies to all public land located on and within the
boundaries of the Village of Hobart.
§ 250-12 HOBART CODE § 255-2
1:426
any road tree area abutting their property or under their control in such
condition as to prevent it from constituting a hazard or an impediment to
travel or vision upon any road, park, boulevard, alley, or public place within
the Village.
§ 255-3. Definitions.
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this chapter, they shall
be construed to have the following meanings:
COMMITTEE — The Hobart Parks and Urban Forestry Committee as
constituted pursuant to § 255-5 in this Code.[Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord.
No. 01-2015; 4-8-2015 by Ord. No. 03-2015]
FORESTER — Person(s) or Village employee(s) designated by the Village
Board as authorized to carry out provisions of this chapter.
PARK TREES — Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation in
public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the Village, or
to which the public has free access as a park.
PERSON — Any person, firm, association or corporation.
PRIVATE TREES — Any trees located or to be planted in or upon private
premises.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Any tree or shrub or part thereof growing upon
private or public property which is interfering with the use of any public
area; does not have adequate clearance over roads (14 feet) and walks
(eight feet), is infected with a plant disease; or which is infested with
injurious insects or pests which threaten public or private property; is dead;
or which endangers the public health, safety and welfare.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — That part of every street between the lot line and
the road.
PUBLIC TREES — Any trees located or to be planted in or upon any public
property.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any public, private or cooperatively owned line, facility,
or system for producing, transmitting or distributing communications,
power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil products, water, waste or stormwater,
which directly or indirectly serves the public or any part thereof within the
corporate limits of the Village.
ROAD TREES — Road trees are herein defined as trees, shrubs, bushes, and
all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either
side of all roads, avenues, or ways within the Village.
TREE TOPPING — Generally, the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs
larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a
degree as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. This creates
hazard trees.
VILLAGE — The Village of Hobart, Wisconsin.
§ 255-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-3
1:427
VISION CORNER — As defined in Chapter 295, Zoning.[Amended
1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
§ 255-4. Village Forester established.
§ 255-5. Parks and Urban Forestry Committee established.
[Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015; 4-8-2015 by Ord. No.
03-2015]
There is hereby established a Parks and Urban Forestry Committee for the
Village of Hobart, which shall consist of five members, two of whom may
hold another public office, including elected, appointed, and employees of
the Village. Appointments shall be for three-year terms; except that initial
appointments shall be for one three-year term, three two-year terms, and
one one-year term.
A. The Village Forester shall have the authority to promulgate the rules
and regulations of the arboricultural specifications and standards of
practice governing the planting, maintenance, removal, fertilization,
pruning and bracing of trees on the roads or other public sites in the
municipality, and shall direct, regulate, and control the planting,
maintenance, and removal of all trees growing now or hereafter in any
public area of the Village of Hobart, to insure safety or preserve the
aesthetics of such public sites.
B. The Village Forester shall cause the provision of this chapter to be
enforced and shall have the authority to issue citations as provided for
in the Code of the Village of Hobart. In his or her absence, these duties
shall be the responsibility of a qualified alternate designated by the
Village.
C. The Village Forester shall have the authority to affix reasonable
conditions to the granting of a permit in accordance with the terms of
this chapter.
A. Duties of the Village Forestry Committee.
(1) It shall be the responsibility of the Committee to study, investigate,
counsel, develop, update, and administer a written plan for the
care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal and
disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along roads, and in other
public places. Such plan will be presented to the Village Board and
upon their acceptance and approval shall constitute the official
Comprehensive Forestry Plan for the Village of Hobart.
(2) The Committee, when requested by the Village Board, shall
consider, investigate, make finding, report, and recommend upon
any special matter or question coming with the scope of its work.
(3) The Parks and Urban Forestry Committee shall develop and
maintain a desirable tree species list for the planting along roads.
§ 255-3 HOBART CODE § 255-5
1:428
§ 255-6. Forestry maintenance permit.
Lists of trees not suitable for planting will also be created by the
Parks and Urban Forestry Committee.
A. Maintenance permit requirement and cost. No person shall plant,
replace, prune, alter, do surgery on a tree, or disturb the land within the
dripline of any tree on public property or cause such work to be done by
others, without first obtaining prior approval for such work from the
Village Forester as herein provided. The permit holder shall be
responsible for paying for the cost of all work performed, unless acting
under contract with the Village or its subunits.
B. Maintenance permit exemptions. No person shall be required to obtain
a permit to fertilize or water trees in the right-of-way abutting their
property.
C. Maintenance permit application. Any person who applies for a permit
shall make said application in writing on Village forms detailing work to
be done including plans showing all plantings, removals and trees to be
worked on.
D. Maintenance permit issuance, fee and term. When the Village Forester
determines that any proposed work described in an application for a
permit is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, taking into
account the public health, safety and welfare, public sidewalks,
driveways, streetlights and signs, the general character of the area in
which the tree is located or proposed to be located, the type of soil, the
characteristics and physiological need of the genus, species and variety
of the tree, then a permit may be issued or denied as appropriate under
the circumstances, with conditions or limitations, without a fee
therefor. It is the person's responsibility to contact Diggers Hotline for
location of buried utilities.
E. Maintenance permit and duration. Every permit issued by the Village
Forester shall include a description of the work to be done and shall
specify, in the case of plantings, the genus, species and variety, size,
nursery grade and location of trees to be planted. Any work done under
such permit issued under this section shall expire nine months after the
date of issuance.
F. Maintenance permit violation. It shall be a violation of this chapter for
any person to perform work under a permit contrary to the permit
terms and provisions of this chapter. A permit violator shall be
responsible for the repair and replacement of any tree damaged or
destroyed due to defective work or noncompliance with this chapter for
two full growing seasons following performance of work.
G. Compliance with vision clearance. No application shall be validated or
permit issued unless the provisions of the Code of the Village of Hobart
§ 255-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-6
1:429
§ 255-7. Maintenance permit revocation.
Any permit granted under authority of this chapter may be revoked by the
Village Forester for cause upon written demand and notice. The revocation
of any permit may be appealed to the Village Board within 10 days of receipt
of written notice of revocation.
§ 255-8. Public nuisances on private premises.
requiring vision clearance (or vision corners) on corner lots shall have
been complied with.
H. Tree topping. It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person,
firm, or Village department to top any road tree or other tree on public
property. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain
trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning
practices are impractical may be exempted from this chapter at the
determination of the Village Forester.
I. Annual public utility and contractor permits. Public utilities and
contractors may apply for and obtain, in accordance with this chapter,
an annual forestry permit subject to the following additional conditions,
unless waived by the Village Forester.
(1) Provide Village Forester with three working days' advance written
notice of work to be performed and locations of work.
(2) Perform work in conformance with this chapter and written
guidelines and directives of the Village Forester.
A. Notice to abate public nuisances.
(1) Whenever the Village Forester shall find that any tree or part
thereof growing or located upon private property is a public
nuisance, he/she shall notify the owner thereof, in writing, that the
nuisance must be abated as directed in the notice within the time
specified, which time shall not be less than 30 days, unless the
Village Forester shall determine that immediate action is necessary
to preserve the public health, safety and welfare, in which event a
lesser period of time for abatement shall be provided.
(2) Notice shall be served on the owner of record of said lot identifying
those conditions which constitute a public nuisance and demanding
abatement by a time certain in the manner and to the extent
prescribed by said notice. Service shall be in the manner provided
for service of a summons in the Circuit Court or by certified mailreturn
receipt. If the owner cannot be served or if there is no
certified mail-return receipt, the order may be served by posting it
on the main entrance of the building or structure, if any, or where
no building or structure is present, by posting a sign on each of said
lot, and by publishing as a Class 1 notice, under Chapter 985, Wis.
Stats.
§ 255-6 HOBART CODE § 255-8
1:430
B. Transport of materials. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or
transport into the Village any trees, logs, or branches known to be
affected by any communicable disease or insect which may affect trees.
Any such material brought into the Village shall be disposed of by the
parties responsible for bringing the diseased or infected trees, logs, or
branches into the Village in the manner and in a location designated by
the Director of Public Works or Village Forester.
C. Failure to abate. If said owner fails to remedy or improve the condition
complained of in accordance with the written notice furnished by the
Village Forester, then said Village Forester shall, after the expiration of
the period specified in the written notice, cause said nuisance to be
abated.
D. Abatement by Village. The abatement may be by Village personnel or by
a contractual agreement with others entered into by the Village.
E. Hearing. The owner, upon written request to the Village Clerk-
Treasurer, served and postmarked during the notice period, shall be
granted a hearing before the Village Board. Where possible, said
hearing should be within 10 days following the request therefor. Said
hearing shall give the owner the opportunity to contest the existence of
facts sufficient to form the basis for the finding of a public nuisance as
herein described. Following the hearing, a written statement of the
findings of the Village Board shall be sent by regular mail to the owner
at the address given by the owner at said hearing. The Village Forester
may, for good cause, extend the period of time for abatement of the
nuisance.
F. Appeal. The written order of the Village Forester, where a hearing has
been held, may be appealed to the Village Board upon written request
to the Village Clerk-Treasurer, served or postmarked within 10 days of
the date of said written order. Where possible, said appeal should be
heard at the next scheduled meeting of said Village Board, provided
that the request for review is received by the Village Clerk-Treasurer at
least seven days prior to the next scheduled meeting of the Village
Board.
G. Special assessment. Following abatement of said public nuisance, the
Village Forester shall bill the owner for the cost of abatement. If such
bill is not paid within 30 days, said bill shall be processed as a special
assessment against said property.
H. Emergency procedure. The above-specified notice procedure does not
apply when circumstances arise which require immediate action to
protect the public from imminent harm, such as sickness, disease or
personal injury. In determining imminent harm, there must be a balance
of the rights of the landowner to notice and appeal procedures with the
right of the public to be protected from a risk of harm which could be
avoided by prompt action. However, where possible, the landowner
should be given a minimum of 24 hours' written or oral notice prior to
§ 255-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-8
1:431
§ 255-9. Injury to trees prohibited.
No person, upon public property, shall:
§ 255-10. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Village Forester and designees
thereof. Any Village department which observes a violation of this chapter
shall bring said violations to the attention of the Village Forester.
§ 255-11. Interference with Village.
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay, or interfere with the
Village, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting,
cultivating, mulching, pruning, or removing of any road trees, park trees, or
trees on private grounds, as authorized by this chapter.
§ 255-12. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the administration or interpretation of any of the
terms or provisions of this chapter may appeal to the Village Board which,
after a hearing with notice to the appellant, may reverse, affirm or modify,
in whole or in part, the order, requirement, decision or determination of the
Village Forester, and to that end shall have all the powers of the Village
Forester.
Village abatement action. The above ordinance shall otherwise apply,
except for the notice and appeal procedure, which shall be as herein
stated.
A. Injure, destroy, damage, mutilate, deface or commit any act which will
prevent the growth or cause the death of any tree.
B. Secure, attach, fasten, nail or run through any rope, cable, wire, sign or
fixture to, around or through any tree.
C. Deposit, place or permit the deposit of any toxic or hazardous substance
on or about any tree.
D. Excavate or disturb the ground within the dripline of any tree without a
permit.
E. Perform any work within the dripline of any tree without taking
measures as directed by the Village Forester to protect the tree from
injury and damage, up to and including tunneling.
F. Remove any guard, stake or other protective device or close or obstruct
any open space about the base of a tree designed to permit access of air,
water or fertilizer.
G. Perform any other act contrary to this chapter.
§ 255-8 HOBART CODE § 255-13
1:432
§ 255-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No.
01-2015]
Any person who by himself/herself or by his/her agent or employee, shall
violate any of the provisions of this chapter, shall, upon conviction, be
subject to the penalties provided in § 1-3. A separate offense shall be
deemed to have been committed on every day on which a violation occurs
or continues.
§ 255-14. Fees. [Amended 4-8-2015 by Ord. No. 03-2015]
Any fees concerning this chapter set by the Village of Hobart Board shall be
reviewed every two years by the Parks and Urban Forestry Committee. The
Parks and Urban Forestry Committee shall recommend any changes in fees
to the Village Board.
Chapter 264
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 114.
§ 255-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-14
1:433

ARTICLE I
Speed Zones
[Adopted as § 7.1 of the 2000 Code]
§ 264-1. Maximum permissible speeds on area roads. [Amended
7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 05-007; 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015;
10-3-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-06]
The maximum permissible speed at which vehicles may be operated on
Village roads located in the Village of Hobart, Brown County, which speed
is herewith established as reasonable and safe pursuant to § 349.11,
Wisconsin Statutes, shall be designated as 25 miles per hour, unless
designated below, subject to approval of the Department of Transportation,
when required, and upon the erection of standard signs giving notices
thereof:
A. Village roads.
(1) Thirty-five miles per hour for all vehicles on the following specified
Village roads:
Birch Drive
Birch Lane
Centennial Centre Boulevard
Centerline Drive
East Adam Drive
Edgar Drive
Florist Drive
Forest Road
Haven Place
Hidden Trail
Hill Drive
North Overland Road from Trout Creek Road to CTY Road VV
North Pine Tree Road
Scheuring Road
Shady Drive
Sunlite Drive
West Adam Drive (east of South Pine Tree Road)
(2) Forty-five miles per hour for all vehicles on the following specified
Village roads:
Cyrus Drive
Fernando Drive (west of South Pine Tree Road)
§ 264-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 264-1
1:435
§ 264-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this article may be fined not less than
$5 nor more than $500.
Luther Drive
North Overland Road from Highway 54 to Trout Creek Road
Nathan Drive
Noah Road
South Overland Road
South Pine Tree Road
Trout Creek Road
West Adam Drive (west of South Pine Tree Road)
B. County roads, Village of Hobart, Brown County.
(1) Forty-five miles per hour for all vehicles on the following specified
highway:
County Trunk Highway EB from the intersection of County Trunk
Highway G to the intersection at County Truck Highway EE
§ 264-1 HOBART CODE § 264-2
1:436
ARTICLE II
Parking and Other Traffic Provisions
[Adopted as § 7.2 of the 2000 Code]
§ 264-3. Parking restrictions.
A. All-night parking prohibited. No person shall park a vehicle on any
street or road within the Village between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. from
November 1 through March 31 of each year.
B. Street storage prohibited. No person shall park a vehicle on any street
or road within the Village at any time for more than 48 continuous
hours without movement. "Movement" is defined as leaving the parking
area completely.
C. "No parking" posted areas. No person shall, without the permission of
the owner or lessee of any public or private property, leave or park any
vehicles thereon contrary to a posted sign thereon, if there is, in plain
view on such property, a "no parking" sign or a sign indicating limited or
restricted parking.
D. Discretion of owner or lessee. Owners or lessees of such property may
prohibit parking, may restrict or limit parking, and may permit parking
by certain persons and prohibit it or limit it as to other persons.
E. Semitrailers. The parking of semitrailers or trailers that are not
attached to a tow vehicle is prohibited on all streets in the Village.
Motor homes and recreation vehicles may not be parked on any street
in the Village.
F. Parking for repairs. No repair to motor vehicles of any nature or of
trailers capable of being attached to motor vehicles shall be conducted
on the streets of the Village except for emergency repairs.
G. Truck parking in residential areas and truck parking on non-heavy
traffic routes and any areas posted (no truck parking) prohibited. No
person shall stop, leave standing or store any of the following vehicles
in a platted residential district, on non-heavy traffic routes and any
areas posted "No Truck Parking," except temporarily when actually
engaged in unloading, loading, rendering a service or in the case of an
emergency. Loading or unloading shall not include picking up or
dropping off personal property or performing personal errands.
(1) Prohibited vehicles.
(a) Motor vehicle requiring a license which exceeds 10,000
pounds, except as defined in § 264-5A.
(b) Motor vehicle equipped or used for auto salvage, commonly
referred to as a "wrecker."
§ 264-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 264-3
1:437
§ 264-4. Reduction of load limits.
The Village Administrator or Police Department may reduce the load limit
on any of the roads on the Village when it is determined the condition or
construction of the road warrants such reduction. The Village Administrator
or Police Department shall erect signs and give notice thereof of any such
limitation. This section shall not apply to vehicles owned by federal or state
governments or political subdivisions thereof, when actually engaged in
governmental functions. The restrictions herein contained shall not prohibit
heavy traffic from using a Village road for the purpose of obtaining, moving
or delivering supplies, commodities or equipment to any place of business
or residence fronting on such road.
§ 264-5. Trailer parking.
(c) Trailers requiring a license to be operated on the highways,
streets or roadways in the state, except as defined in § 264-5A.
(d) Vehicles commonly referred to as a "semitrailer."
(e) Vehicles commonly referred to as a "semi-tractor."
(f) Vehicles requiring an apportioned license.
(2) The following streets are posted "No Truck Parking":110
Name of Street Location
Haven Place From the east Village boundary to West
Mason Street (State Highway 54)
H. Parking in parks or parking lots. No person shall park in Village parks
or in Village parking lots without permission from the Village Police
Department. No person shall park so as to interfere with snowplowing.
I. Obstructing mail deliveries. No person shall park so near a mailbox as
to interfere with the delivery of mail, Monday through Saturday from
9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
A. No person shall park a trailer on any street, alley, highway or Village
road, or any other public place. A trailer is defined as any coach, cabin,
mobile home, recreational vehicle or other vehicle or structure
intended for or capable of human dwelling or sleeping purposes,
mounted upon wheels or supports or capable of being moved by its own
power or transported by another vehicle. The fact that any such vehicle
or structure is rendered immobile by the removal of its wheels, the
erection of a foundation thereunder, or any other similar alteration,
shall not operate to exclude it from this definition.
110. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 264-3 HOBART CODE § 264-5
1:438
§ 264-6. Snowmobile, minibike and similar vehicle regulations.
B. Emergency or temporary stopping or parking. Emergency or temporary
stopping or parking is permitted on any street, alley, highway or Village
road for not longer than 24 hours subject to any other regulations
imposed by the traffic and parking regulations or ordinances for that
street, alley, highway or Village road.
C. Parking or storing on private property. The owner of a trailer may park
or store such trailer on his own property if such trailer is not used for
dwelling or sleeping purposes or in conjunction with a business
involving the sale of trailers.
D. Trailers used for dwelling purposes. The owner of real property may
use a trailer on his property for dwelling purposes during bona fide
construction of a building on such property; provided, however, such
trailer use shall not extend for longer than 90 days.
A. Definitions. The provisions of § 350.01, Wis. Stats., relating to
definitions regarding snowmobiles, including the reference to other
sections of the Wis. Stats., are hereby adopted and made a part of this
section by reference as if fully set forth herein. A "minibike," for the
purpose of enforcement of this section, shall be any motor-driven cycle
not equipped pursuant to §§ 347.485 through 347.487, Wis. Stats., and
not registered pursuant to Chapter 341, Wis. Stats.
B. Operation of snowmobiles, minibikes and go-carts prohibited. No
person shall operate a snowmobile, minibike, or go-cart within the
Village without permission of the Village Board on any of the following
property:
(1) Any public street or alleyway, excepting the driving directly across
such street or alleyway at an angle as close to 90° thereto as
possible, and then only after stopping and yielding the right-of-way
to all vehicles approaching on such street or alleyway. Snowmobiles
are permitted to travel along Village highways outside of the
roadway.
(2) Any public sidewalk.
(3) Any public park.
(4) Any public parking lot or mall.
(5) Any public property.
C. Operation on private premises restricted. No person shall operate a
snowmobile or minibike on any private property within the Village not
owned or controlled by such operator without the express consent and
permission of the owner of such property.
D. Operator age regulations.
§ 264-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 264-6
1:439
(1) No person 12 years of age or younger shall operate a snowmobile
within the Village unless accompanied on the vehicle by a person
18 years of age or older.
(2) No person under the age of 16 years shall drive a snowmobile or
minibike across any street or alleyway within the Village unless
accompanied by a person 18 years of age or older.
(3) No person under the age of 17 years shall operate a snowmobile or
minibike within the Village between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m.
E. Equipment during darkness. No person shall operate a snowmobile or
minibike during the hours of darkness if such vehicle is not equipped
with a continuously lighted headlight and taillight.
F. Miscellaneous prohibitions. No person shall operate a snowmobile or
minibike in the following manner:
(1) At a rate of speed that is unreasonable or improper under the
circumstances.
(2) In any careless way so as to endanger the operator, any other
person, or any property of another.
(3) While under the influence of intoxicating liquor, fermented malt
beverages, narcotics or other drugs.
(4) In such a way that the exhaust of the motor makes excessive smoke
or excessive and unusual noise.
(5) Without a functioning or sufficient muffler.
(6) On the private property of another without the consent of the
owner or lessee; failure to post private property does not imply
consent for snowmobile use. Any other motor-driven craft or
vehicle principally manufactured for off-highway use shall at all
times have the consent of the owner before operation of such craft
or vehicle on private lands.
(7) Between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. when within 150
feet of a dwelling at a rate of speed exceeding 10 miles per hour.
(8) In any forest nursery, planting area or on public lands posted or
reasonably identified as an area of forest or plant reproduction
when growing stock may be damaged.
(9) On the frozen surface of public waters within 100 feet of a person
not in or upon a vehicle or within 100 feet of a fishing shanty unless
operated at a speed of 10 miles per hour or less.
(10)On a slide, ski, or skating area except for the purpose of serving the
area, crossing at places where marked, or after stopping and
yielding the right-of-way.
§ 264-6 HOBART CODE § 264-6
1:440
§ 264-7. Abandonment of vehicles.
(11)On or across a cemetery, burial ground, school, or church property
without the consent of the owner.
G. Owner responsibility. No owner or other person having charge or
control of a snowmobile or minibike shall knowingly authorize or permit
any person to operate or use a snowmobile or minibike in violation of
this section or authorize or permit any person to operate or use such a
vehicle when such person is reasonably likely to endanger the person or
property of another because of his incapacity by reason of any physical
or mental disability or impairment.
H. Wisconsin statutes incorporated by reference. Any provision of
§§ 350.02 through 350.19, Wis. Stats., not previously specifically set
forth herein, describing and defining regulations with respect to
snowmobiles and their operation for which the penalty is a forfeiture,
including penalties to be imposed and procedure for prosecution, is
hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any acts required to be performed or prohibited by any
statute incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by
this chapter.
A. No person shall abandon any vehicle within the Village and no person
shall leave any vehicle at any place within the Village for such time and
under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to
appear to have been abandoned.
B. Leaving of wrecked, nonoperating vehicle on street. No person shall
leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked
vehicle on any street or highway within the Village.
C. Disposition of wrecked or discarded vehicles. No person in charge or
control of any property within the Village, whether as owner, tenant,
occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled,
nonoperating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle or vehicle which is
not licensed, has an invalid license or does not possess a current
license, to remain on such property, except this subsection shall not
apply with regard to a vehicle in an enclosed building, a vehicle on the
premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and
manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise or
a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a
lawful place and manner by the Village.111
D. Impounding. The Chief of Police, Village Administrator or their
designee may remove or have removed any vehicle left at any place
within the Village which reasonably appears to be in violation of this
section or lost, stolen or unclaimed. Such vehicles shall be impounded
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 264-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 264-7
1:441
§ 264-8. Official traffic signs and signals.
§ 264-9. Disorderly conduct with a motor vehicle.
§ 264-10. Operation of motor vehicles in parking lots by unlicensed
operators prohibited.
No person who does not hold a valid driver's license shall operate a motor
vehicle in any public or private parking lot held out for use for parking for
the general public.112
until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with § 66.0139, Wis.
Stats.
A. The Chief of Police, Village Administrator or their designee shall
procure, erect and maintain appropriate standard traffic signs, signals
and markings conforming to the rules of the State Department of
Transportation giving notice of the provisions of this chapter as
required by state law. Signs shall be erected in such locations and in
such manner as the Village Board determines will best effect the
purposes of this chapter and give adequate warning to users of the
streets and highways.
B. Removal of unofficial signs and signals. The Chief of Police, Village
Administrator or their designee shall have the authority granted by
§ 349.09, Wis. Stats., and shall order the removal of a sign, signal,
marking or device placed, maintained or displayed in violation of this
chapter or § 346.41, Wis. Stats. Any charge imposed on any premises
for removal of an illegal sign, signal or device shall be reported to the
Village Board at its next regular meeting for review and certification.
C. Avoiding intersection or traffic control device. No person shall drive
across or upon a sidewalk, driveway, parking lot or private property or
otherwise drive off a roadway in order to avoid an intersection or traffic
control device.
A. Prohibited. No person shall cause or provoke disorderly conduct with a
motor vehicle or cause a disturbance or annoy one or more persons
within the Village by use of any motor vehicle including, but not limited
to, an automobile, truck, motorcycle, minibike or snowmobile.
B. Definition. Disorderly conduct with a motor vehicle means engaging in
violent, abusive, unreasonably loud or otherwise disorderly conduct,
including, but not limited to, unnecessary, deliberate or intentional
spinning of wheels, squealing of tires, revving of engine, blowing the
horn, causing the engine to backfire or the vehicle, while commencing
to move or in motion, to raise one or more wheels off the ground.
112. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 7.209, Violations and penalties, which immediately followed
this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 264-7 HOBART CODE § 264-11
1:442
§ 264-11. Enforcement.
A. Enforcement procedure. This chapter shall be enforced according to
§§ 23.33, 66.0114, 345.11 to 345.61 and Ch. 800, Wis. Stats.113
B. Deposit.
(1) Any person arrested for a violation of this chapter may make a
deposit of money as directed by the arresting officer at the police
station or at the office of the Clerk of the Municipal Court or by
mailing the deposit to such places. The arresting officer or the
person receiving the deposit shall notify the arrested person, orally
or in writing, that:114
(a) If the person makes a deposit for a violation of a traffic
regulation, the person need not appear in court at the time
fixed in the citation and the person will be deemed to have
tendered plea of no contest and submitted to a forfeiture and
penalty assessment, a jail assessment if required by
§ 302.46(1), Wis. Stats., plus any applicable fees prescribed in
Ch. 814, Wis. Stats., not to exceed the amount of the deposit
that the court may accept as provided in § 345.37, Wis. Stats.
(b) If the person fails to make a deposit for a violation of a traffic
regulation or appear in court at the time fixed in the citation,
the court may enter a default judgment finding the person
guilty of the offense or issue a warrant for his arrest.
(2) The amount of the deposit shall be determined in accordance with
the deposit schedule established by the Wisconsin Judicial
Conference and shall include the penalty assessment, a jail
assessment if required by § 302.46(1), Wis. Stats., and court costs.
If a deposit schedule has not been established, the arresting officer
shall require the alleged offender to deposit the forfeiture
established by the Chief of Police, which shall include the penalty
assessment. Deposits for nonmoving violations shall not include the
penalty assessment.115
(3) The arresting officer or the person receiving the deposit shall issue
the arrested person a receipt therefor as required by
§ 345.26(3)(b), Wis. Stats.
C. Petition to reopen judgment. Whenever a person has been convicted in
this state on the basis of a forfeiture of deposit or a plea of guilty or no
contest and the person was not informed as required under § 345.27(1)
and (2), Wis. Stats., the person may, within 60 days after being notified
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 264-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 264-11
1:443
§ 264-12. Court costs.
Pursuant to § 814.65(1), Wis. Stats., the Municipal Judge shall collect a fee
for court costs in Municipal Court actions.
§ 264-12.1. Snow and parking emergency. [Added 3-5-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-02]
of the revocation or suspension of the operating privilege, petition the
court to reopen the judgment and grant him an opportunity to defend
on merits. If the court finds that the petitioner was not informed as
required under § 345.27(1) and (2), the court shall order the judgment
reopened. The court order reopening the judgment automatically
reinstates the revoked or suspended operating privilege.
D. Nonmoving violation and registration program. Pursuant to the
provisions of § 345.28(4), Wis. Stats., the Village elects to participate in
the nonmoving traffic violation and registration program of the
Wisconsin Department of Transportation and pay the costs established
by the Department under § 85.13, Wis. Stats.; such costs shall, in turn,
be assessed against persons charged with nonmoving traffic violations.
The Village Attorney shall be responsible for complying with the
requirements set forth in § 345.28(4), Wis. Stats.
A. Snow emergency parking by regulations. Upon the declaration of a
snow emergency by the Village Administrator, in consultation and
conjunction with the Director of Public Works and the Chief of Police,
regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of this section
shall be made.
(1) When it becomes necessary to effectuate the effective movement of
vehicles and to plow snow or ice from streets which, because of the
accumulation of snow or ice thereon, causes such a hindrance to
traffic as constitutes an emergency unless the snow or ice is
promptly removed, the Village Administrator or a designated
subordinate, after consultation with the Director of Public Works,
Fire Chief and Chief of Police, shall, by appropriate public media,
declare the beginning of an emergency and the application of
emergency snow parking regulations, which regulations shall
remain in force and effect until lifted by the Village Administrator
or a designated subordinate. For the purpose of this section, the
accumulation of snow or ice on any streets or area sufficient for the
application of emergency regulations herein shall be such
accumulation of snow and ice that hinders the safe movement of
traffic hereon or that impedes the ability of emergency vehicles and
public transportation vehicles to travel safely and expeditiously
over such streets or areas.
(2) When necessary for the clearing, repairing, removal and plowing of
snow or ice from any street or for other emergency or special
conditions as declared, the Director of Public Works and Chief of
§ 264-11 HOBART CODE § 264-12.1
1:444
Police or designated subordinates are hereby authorized to make
and carry out regulations and procedures sufficient to effectively
cope with such emergency or special conditions to include:
(a) Making temporary regulations directing traffic and regulating
parking;
(b) Restrictions prohibiting parking on any street during the hours
of the snow emergency, or any part thereof;
(c) Such other and further regulations and restrictions as to traffic
and parking as may be designated as necessary.
(3) Whenever a snow emergency exists as declared herein and any
motor vehicle or object shall remain on the street or public parking
lot in violation of this section, it may be removed by or under the
direction of the police or Public Works Department after one of
such departments has attempted to notify the owner to remove
such vehicle and it has not been removed. Any costs related to the
removal of said vehicle shall be borne by the owner of the motor
vehicle.
B. Parking emergency. Upon the declaration of a parking emergency by
the Village Administrator, in consultation and conjunction with the
Director of Public Works and the Chief of Police, regulations necessary
to make effective the provisions of this section shall be made.
(1) When it becomes necessary to effectuate the effective movement of
vehicles and relocation of residents, due to a natural or man-made
event, which, causes such a hindrance to traffic as constitutes an
emergency, the Village Administrator or a designated subordinate,
after consultation with the Director of Public Works, Fire Chief and
Chief of Police, shall, by appropriate public media, declare the
beginning of an emergency and the application of emergency
parking regulations, which regulations shall remain in force and
effect until lifted by the Village Administrator or a designated
subordinate. For the purpose of this section, the presence of motor
vehicles on any streets or area sufficient for the application of
emergency regulations herein shall be such accumulation of motor
vehicles that hinders the safe movement of traffic hereon or that
impedes the ability of emergency vehicles and public
transportation vehicles to travel safely and expeditiously over such
streets or areas.
(2) When necessary for the declaration of a parking emergency, the
Director of Public Works and Chief of Police or designated
subordinates are hereby authorized to make and carry out
regulations and procedures sufficient to effectively cope with such
emergency or special conditions to include:
(a) Making temporary regulations directing traffic and regulating
parking;
§ 264-12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 264-12.1
1:445
(b) Restrictions prohibiting parking on any street during the hours
of the snow emergency, or any part thereof;
(c) Such other and further regulations and restrictions as to traffic
and parking as may be designated as necessary.
(3) Whenever a parking emergency exists as declared herein and any
motor vehicle or object shall remain on the street or public parking
lot in violation of this section, it may be removed by or under the
direction of the police or Public Works Department after one of
such departments has attempted to notify the owner to remove
such vehicle and it has not been removed. Any costs related to the
removal of said vehicle shall be borne by the owner of the motor
vehicle.
C. This section shall supersede all other parking regulations in force or
posted on any street. Enforcement of this section shall not require
posting on affected streets.
§ 264-12.1 HOBART CODE § 264-12.1
1:446
ARTICLE III
State Traffic Laws Adopted
[Adopted as § 7.3 of the 2000 Code]
§ 264-13. State traffic law sections adopted.116
A. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the statutory
provisions or rules of the Department of Transportation in Chs. 340 to
348, Wis. Stats., describing and defining regulations with respect to
vehicles and traffic, exclusive of any provisions therein for which the
statutory penalty is a fine or term of imprisonment, are hereby adopted
and by reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute or rules
of the Department of Transportation incorporated herein by reference
is required or prohibited by this chapter. Any future amendments,
revisions or modifications of the statutes or rules of the Department of
Transportation incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this
chapter in order to secure uniform statewide regulations of traffic on
the highways, streets and alleys of Wisconsin.
B. State forfeiture statutes. Any forfeiture for violation of §§ 340.01 to
941.03 shall conform to the forfeiture permitted to be imposed for
violation of the statutes adopted by reference, including any variations
or increases for subsequent offenses.
§§ 340.01, 341.01,
342.01, 343.01,
344.01, 346.01,
347.01 and 348.01
Words and phrases defined
§ 341.04 vehicle Penalty for operating unregistered or improperly
registered vehicle
§ 341.045 Use of registered farm trucks regulated
§ 341.05 When vehicles exempt from registration
§ 341.07 Certain vehicles to be registered by resident
lessee
§ 341.08 Application for registration
§ 341.11(4) Display of registration certificates
§ 341.15 Display of registration plates
§ 341.16(2) Surrender of illegible plates
§ 341.51 When department to register dealer, distributor,
manufacturer or transporter; application
§ 341.55 Penalty for misuse of plates
§ 341.61 Improper use of evidence of registration
116. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 264-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 264-13
1:447
§ 341.62 False evidence of registration
§ 341.63(3) Surrender of plates upon suspension
§ 342.05 When certificate of title required
§ 342.06 Application for certificate of title
§ 342.15 Transfer of interest in a vehicle
§ 342.16 Transfer to or from dealer
§ 342.30(2) and (3) Assignment and stamping of new identification
numbers
§ 342.31(2) Report of stolen or abandoned motor vehicles
§ 342.33 Sale of vehicle used as taxicab
§ 342.§ 34 Department to be notified of destruction or
junking of vehicle
§ 343.10 Occupational licenses
§ 343.12 School bus operators to obtain special
authorization
§ 343.18 License to be carried; verification of signature
§ 343.19 Duplicate licenses or identification cards
§ 343.22 Notice of change of address or name
§ 343.305 Tests for intoxication; administrative suspension
and court-order revocation
§ 343.35 Surrender of licenses upon cancellation,
revocation or suspension
§ 343.45 Permitting unauthorized person to drive
§ 343.46 Duty of persons renting vehicles to another
§ 344.45 Surrender of license and registration upon
suspension
§ 344.46 Transfer of vehicle ownership to defeat financial
responsibility
§§ 344.51 and
344.52
Financial responsibility for rented vehicles
§ 345.55 Traffic officers not to profit from arrests
§ 346.02 Applicability of Ch. 346
§ 346.03 Applicability of rules of the road to authorized
emergency vehicles
§ 346.04(1) and (2) Obedience to traffic officers, signs and signals
§ 346.05 Vehicles to be driven on right side of roadway;
exceptions
§ 346.06 Meeting of vehicles
§ 346.07 Overtaking and passing on the left
§ 264-13 HOBART CODE § 264-13
1:448
§ 346.075 Overtaking and passing bicycles, electric
personal assistive mobility devices, and motor
buses
§ 346.08 When overtaking and passing on the right
permitted
§ 346.09 Limitations on overtaking on left or driving on
left side of roadway
§ 346.10 When passing at a railroad crossing, intersection,
bridge, viaduct or tunnel prohibited
§ 346.11 Passing or meeting frightened animal
§ 346.12 Driving through safety zones prohibited
§ 346.13 Driving on roadways laned for traffic
§ 346.14 Distance between vehicles
§ 346.15 Driving on divided highway
§ 346.16 Use of controlled-access highways, expressways
and freeways
§ 346.18 General rules of right-of-way
§ 346.19 What to do on approach of emergency vehicle
§ 346.20 Right-of-way of funeral processions and military
convoys
§ 346.21 Right-of-way of livestock
§ 346.23 Crossing controlled intersection or crosswalk
§ 346.24 Crossing at uncontrolled intersection or
crosswalk
§ 346.25 Crossing at place other than crosswalk
§ 346.26 Blind pedestrian on highway
§ 346.27 Persons working on highway
§ 346.28 Pedestrians to walk on left side of highway;
pedestrians, bicyclists, and riders of electric
personal assistive mobility devices on sidewalks
§ 346.29 When standing or loitering in roadway or
highway prohibited
§ 346.31 Required position and method of turning at
intersections
§ 346.32 Required position for turning into private road or
driveway
§ 346.33 Where turns prohibited, exception
§ 346.34 Turning movements and required signals on
turning and stopping
§ 346.35 Method of giving signals on turning and stopping
§ 264-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 264-13
1:449
§ 346.37 Traffic-control signal legend
§ 346.38 Pedestrian control signals
§ 346.39 Flashing signals
§ 346.40 Whistle signals
§ 346.41 Display of unauthorized signs and signals
prohibited
§ 346.42 Interference with signs and signals prohibited
§ 346.44 All vehicles to stop at signal indicating approach
of train
§ 346.45 Certain vehicles to stop at railroad crossings
§ 346.46 Vehicles to stop at stop signs and school
crossings
§ 346.47 When vehicles using alley or nonhighway access
to stop
§ 346.48 Vehicles to stop for school buses displaying
flashing lights
§ 346.50 Exceptions to stopping and parking restrictions
§ 346.505 Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in
parking spaces reserved for vehicles displaying
special registration plates or special
identification cards
§ 346.51 Stopping, standing or parking outside of business
or residence districts
§ 346.52 Stopping prohibited in certain specified places
§ 346.53 Parking prohibited in certain specified places
§ 346.54 How to park and stop on streets
§ 346.55 Other restrictions on parking and stopping
§ 346.57(2) Reasonable and prudent limit
§ 346.57(3) Conditions requiring reduced speed
§ 346.57(4)(a)-(c) Fixed speed limits in school or safety zones
§ 346.57(4)(d)-(h) Fixed speed limits
§ 346.57(4)(i) Speeding in park or recreation area
§ 346.57(5) Zoned and posted speed limits
§ 346.58 Special speed restrictions for certain vehicles
§ 346.59 Minimum speed regulation
§ 346.595 Motorcycles and mopeds
§ 346.61 Applicability of sections relating to reckless and
drunken driving
§ 346.62 Reckless driving
§ 264-13 HOBART CODE § 264-13
1:450
§ 346.63(1) Operating under influence of intoxicant or other
drug
§ 346.63(2m) Person under age of 19 operating motor vehicle
with any blood alcohol concentration in system
§ 346.66 Applicability of sections relating to accidents and
accident reporting
§ 346.68 Duty upon striking unattended vehicle
§ 346.69 Duty upon striking property on or adjacent to
highway
§ 346.70 Duty to report accident
§ 346.71 Corners or medical examiners to report; require
blood specimen
§ 346.72 Garages to keep record of repairs of accident
damage
§ 346.73 Accident reports not to be used in trial
§ 346.77 Responsibility of parent or guardian for violation
of bicycle and play vehicle regulations
§ 346.78 Play vehicles not to be used on roadway
§ 346.79 Special rules applicable to bicycles
§ 346.80 Riding bicycle or electric personal assistive
mobility device on roadway
§ 346.803 Riding bicycle or electric personal assistive
mobility device on bicycle way
§ 346.804 Riding bicycle on sidewalk
§ 346.87 Limitations on backing
§ 346.88 Obstruction of operator's view or driving
mechanism
§ 346.89 Inattentive driving
§ 346.90 Following emergency vehicle
§ 346.91 Crossing fire hose
§ 346.92 Illegal riding
§ 346.93 Intoxicants in vehicle; underage persons
§ 346.935 Intoxicants in motor vehicles
§ 346.94 Miscellaneous prohibited acts
§ 346.945 Vehicle owner's liability for radios or other
electric sound amplification devices
§ 347.02 Applicability of Ch. 347
§ 347.03 Sale of prohibited equipment unlawful
§ 347.04 Owner responsible for improperly equipped
vehicle
§ 264-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 264-13
1:451
§ 347.06 When lighted lamps required
§ 347.07 Special restrictions on lamps and the use thereof
§ 347.08 Determining the visibility distance and mounted
height of lamps
§ 347.09 Headlamps on motor vehicles
§ 347.10 Headlamps specifications for motor vehicles
other than mopeds and motor bicycles
§ 347.11 Headlamp specifications for mopeds and motor
bicycles
§ 347.12 Use of multiple-beam headlamps
§ 347.13 Tail lamps and registration plate lamps
§ 347.14 Stop lamps
§ 347.15 Direction signal lamps or devices
§ 347.16 Clearance lamps and reflectors
§ 347.17 Color of clearance and marker lamps and
reflectors
§ 347.18 Mounting of clearance lamps and reflectors
§ 347.19 Visibility of clearance lamps and reflectors
§ 347.20 Lamp or flag on projecting load or fixture
§ 347.21 Lamps and flags on trains of agricultural vehicles
§ 347.22 Lamps on farm tractors and self-propelled farm
implements
§ 347.23 Lamps on highway maintenance equipment
§ 347.24 Lamps and reflectors on nonmotor vehicles and
equipment
§ 347.245 Identification emblem on certain slow-moving
vehicles
§ 347.25 Special warning lamps on vehicles
§ 347.26 Restrictions on certain optional lighting
equipment
§ 347.27 When lighted lamps required on parked vehicles
§ 347.28 Certain vehicles to carry flares or other warning
devices
§ 347.29 Display of warning devices for certain vehicles
when standing on highway
§ 347.35 Brakes
§ 347.36 Performance ability of brakes
§ 347.38 Horns and warning devices
§ 347.39 Mufflers
§ 264-13 HOBART CODE § 264-13
1:452
§ 347.40 Mirrors
§ 347.41 Speed indicators
§ 347.415 Odometer tampering
§ 347.42 Windshield wipers
§ 347.43 Safety glass
§ 347.44 Painting requirements for school buses;
restrictions as to painting of other vehicles
§ 347.45 Tire equipment
§ 347.46 Fenders and mudguards
§ 347.47 Drawbars, trailer hitches and mobile home
couplings
§ 347.48 Seat belts and child safety restraint systems
§ 347.485 Protective headgear for use on Type 1
motorcycles
§ 347.486 General requirements (motorcyclists)
§ 347.487 Seating requirements (Type 1 motorcycle)
§ 347.488 Moped equipment
§ 347.489 Lamps and other equipment on bicycles, motor
bicycles, and electric personal assistive mobility
devices
§ 347.49 Equipment of vehicles transporting flammable
liquids
§ 348.02 Applicability of Ch. 348
§ 348.05 Width of vehicles
§ 348.06 Height of vehicles
§ 348.07 Length of vehicles
§ 348.08 Vehicle trains
§ 348.09 Projecting loads on side of vehicle
§ 348.10 Special limitations on load
§ 348.15 Weight limitations on class "A" highways
§ 348.16 Weight limitations on class "B" highways
§ 348.17 Special or seasonal weight limitations
§ 348.175 Seasonal operation of vehicles hauling peeled or
unpeeled forest products cut crosswise or
abrasives or salt for highway winter maintenance
§ 348.18 Weight limitations apply to publicly owned
vehicles; exceptions
§ 348.185 Empty weight to be indicated on side of certain
vehicles; rules
§ 264-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 264-13
1:453
§ 348.19 Traffic officers may weigh vehicles and require
removal of excess load
§ 348.20 Policy in prosecuting weight violations
§ 348.25 General provisions relating to permits for
vehicles and loads of excessive size and weight
§ 348.26 Single trip permits
§ 348.27 Annual, consecutive month or multiple trip
permits
§ 348.28 Permits to be carried
§§ 350.01 to 350.19 Snowmobiles
§ 941.01 Negligent operation of vehicle
§ 264-13 HOBART CODE § 264-13
1:454
Chapter 273
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer use — See Ch. 237. Wells — See Ch. 280.
§ 264-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 264-13
1:455

ARTICLE I
Cross-Connection Control
[Adopted as § 11.0 of the 2000 Code]
§ 273-1. Definition.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
CROSS-CONNECTION — Any physical connection or arrangement between
two otherwise separate systems, one of which contains potable water from
the Village of Hobart/Hobart Utility District water system and the other
water from a private source, water of unknown or questionable safety, or
steam, gases, or chemicals, whereby there may be flow from one system
to the other, the direction of flow depending on the pressure differential
between the two systems.
§ 273-2. Prohibitions.117
No person, firm, or corporation shall establish or permit to be established
or maintain or permit to be maintained any cross-connection. No
interconnection shall be established whereby potable water from a private,
auxiliary, or emergency water supply other than the regular public water
supply of the Village of Hobart/Hobart Utility District may enter the supply
or distribution system of said municipality, unless such private, auxiliary,
or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of such
supply shall have been approved by the Village of Hobart/Hobart Utility
District or its agent and by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
in accordance with Ch. NR 822, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
§ 273-3. Inspections.
It shall be the duty of the Village of Hobart/Hobart Utility District or its
agent to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the
public water system where cross-connections with the public water system
is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based
on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the Village of
Hobart/Hobart Utility District or its agent and as approved by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources.
§ 273-4. Right of entry; special inspection warrants.
Upon presentation of credentials, the representative of the Village of
Hobart/Hobart Utility District or its agent shall have the right to request
entry at any reasonable time to examine any property serviced by a
connection to the public water system of the Village of Hobart/Hobart
Utility District for cross-connections. If entry is refused, such representative
shall obtain a special inspection warrant under § 66.0119, Wisconsin
Statutes.
117. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 273-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 273-5
1:457
§ 273-5. Discontinuance of water service; notices.
The Village of Hobart/Hobart Utility District or its agent is hereby
authorized and directed to discontinue water service to any property
wherein any connection in violation of this article exists, and to take such
other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger
of contamination of the public water system. Water service shall be
discontinued only after reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing under
Chapter 68, Wisconsin Statutes, except as provided in § 273-6. Water
service to such property shall not be restored until the cross-connection(s)
has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this article.
§ 273-6. Emergency discontinuance.
If it is determined by the Village of Hobart/Hobart Utility District or its
agent that a cross-connection or an emergency endanger public health,
safety, or welfare, and requires immediate action, and a written finding
to that effect is filed with the Clerk-Treasurer of the Village of Hobart,
and delivered to the customer's premises, service may be immediately
discontinued. The customer shall have an opportunity for hearing under
Chapter 68, Wisconsin Statutes, within 10 days of such emergency
discontinuance.
§ 273-7. State Plumbing Code adopted by reference.
The Village of Hobart/Hobart Utility District adopts by reference the State
Plumbing Code of Wisconsin, being Chapter SPS 381 to 387, Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
§ 273-8. Supplementary to State Plumbing Code.
This article does not supersede the State Plumbing Code, but is
supplementary to it.
§ 273-9. Electrical bonding for gas and water.
A. The electrical service equipment must be bonded to all metal ducting,
piping and steel-framing members in all residential and commercial
construction, new or remodeled, where the electrical service
equipment is being updated, or when the repair/remodeling exceeds
50% of the assessed value of the structure.
B. Bonding conductor must be sized in accordance with NEC (National
Electrical Code). At no time can the bonding jumper be smaller than a
No. 6 copper conductor.
(1) All metal parts connected to all Village of Hobart water meters
must be jumpered with a minimum size No. 6 copper conductor.
§ 273-5 HOBART CODE § 273-10
1:458
§ 273-10. Violations and penalties.118
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be subject to the penalties provided in § 1-3. Each day of violation is a
separate offense. The Village of Hobart/Hobart Utility District may impose a
penalty and cause the cross-connection to be corrected and the expense to
be assessed as a special tax against the property.
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 273-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 273-10
1:459

ARTICLE II
Mandatory Connection
[Adopted as § 11.5 of the 2000 Code]
§ 273-11. Connections required; notices; hardship exceptions.
§ 273-12. Connection required with sewerage system connection;
exception.
Any building or structure usable for human habitation which is required to
connect to the public sewerage system shall also be required to connect to
the public water system. This requirement shall not apply if the Wisconsin
A. In order to assure preservation of public health, comfort and safety, the
owner of each parcel of land adjacent to a water main on which there
exists a building usable for human habitation, or in a block through
which such a system is extended, shall connect all existing interior
potable water plumbing to such water main on or before 90 days from
the date the Village gives written notice to the property owner
requiring connection. The Village shall give written notice requiring
connection within 14 days of completion of final construction. If any
person fails to connect within the ninety-day period specified above, the
Village may provide written notice of noncompliance, and if the owner
fails to bring the system into compliance within 10 days, the Village of
Hobart may issue a separate citation for each day of noncompliance or
may cause connection to be made, and the expense thereof shall be
assessed as a special tax against the property. Notwithstanding the
requirements set forth above, a property owner shall not be required to
connect if the property is located along a major water transmission
main route and the Village does not provide local water distribution
mains for service to properties along the transmission main. Further,
the requirements to connect to public water may be delayed during the
frost season if the Village Board, in its sole discretion, decides to delay
the effective date of the notice to connect until after the frost season
has passed. Finally, the requirement to connect to public water will be
voluntary as long as a residence is more than 400 feet from the property
line where a water main is installed and running past such residence.
B. If the Village of Hobart causes a connection to be made as provided
above, the affected property owner may, within 30 days after the receipt
of written notice from the Village that work has been completed, file a
written notice with the Clerk-Treasurer of the Village requesting a
hardship exception based upon an inability to pay the assessment in one
lump sum, and further requesting that the assessment be levied in two,
three, four and five annual installments. If the Village Board grants this
hardship exception, interest shall accrue on the deferred balance of the
assessment in the amount not to exceed 15% per annum, as determined
by the Village Board and, in addition, the deferred balance of the
assessment shall be a special tax lien on the subject property.
§ 273-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 273-12
1:461
Department of Natural Resources orders the extension of public sanitary
sewage service to the parcel of property.
§ 273-13. Violations and penalties.
In lieu of causing connection to be made, the Village of Hobart, at its option,
may:
§ 273-14. Preservation of public health.
This article ordains that the failure to connect to the water system is
contrary to the minimum health standards of the Village of Hobart and fails
to assure preservation of public health, comfort and safety of the Village of
Hobart residents.
A. Impose a penalty for the period that the violation continues, after 10
days' written notice to the owner failing to make a connection to the
water system, of $5 per day, payable quarterly for the period in which
failure to connect continues, and upon failure to make such payment,
said charge shall be assessed as a special tax lien against the property,
all pursuant to § 281.45, Wis. Stats.
B. Commence court action to require connection to the Village of Hobart
water system, and impose such other penalty as this article provides.
§ 273-12 HOBART CODE § 273-14
1:462
ARTICLE III
Water Utility Rules and Regulations
[Adopted as § 11.6 of the 2000 Code]
§ 273-15. Rate file adopted by reference.
The rate file of the Public Service Commission of Wisconsin, as amended
from time to time, including Schedules No. F-1, Upf-1, Mg-1, Mg-2, Mpa-1,
Ug-1, Mgt-1, Mz-1, BW-1, R-1, Cz-1, X-1, X-2, and X-3, hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference. Together with all rules and regulations of
the Water Utility as approved by the Village Board, all of which will be kept
on file with the Village Clerk-Treasurer.
§ 273-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No.
01-2015]
The penalty for violation of any of the rules and regulations set forth in
§ 273-15 shall be as set from time to time by the Village Board, and in the
event there is no other penalty set by the Village Board the penalty shall be
in accordance with § 1-3 of the Code.
§ 273-17. Regulations on outdoor use of water. [Amended 8-7-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-08]
A. The Village Board, or the Public Works Director, with the concurrence
of the Village Administrator and Village President, is authorized to
create, implement and maintain regulations on the outdoor use of water
provided by the Village of Hobart as may be necessary to conserve the
capacity and pressure of the water supply for the protection of the
public health, safety and welfare.
B. These regulations may apply to, but are not limited to, the sprinkling of
lawns, gardens, shrubs, and trees; car washing; filling of swimming
pools; bulk water purchases; installation of new lawns; designation of
the days and/or hours when they may or may not be allowed;
prohibition of such uses completely in periods of emergency; irrigation
of crops; and commercial car washes that recycle water. These
regulations shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer.
C. The following are examples of restrictions contemplated by this article:
(1) Direct a ban between specific dates or between specific hours of a
day.
(2) Direct an alternating ban based on odd/even days of the month and/
or property addresses.
(3) Direct a ban of all outdoor use of water other than livestock
watering.
(4) Direct a ban composed of combinations of the foregoing
restrictions.
§ 273-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 273-17
1:463
D. A ban on usage may or may not affect all water service areas. Specific
bans may be placed upon individual service areas.
E. Penalties. Penalties shall be as set forth in § 1-3.
F. Separate violations. Each act of violation, and every day upon which a
violation occurs or continues, constitutes a separate offense.
§ 273-17 HOBART CODE § 273-17
1:464
Chapter 280
WELLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water — See Ch. 273. Zoning — See Ch. 295.
§ 273-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 273-17
1:465

ARTICLE I
Private Well Abandonment
[Adopted as § 11.1 of the 2000 Code]
§ 280-1. Purpose.
This article is intended to prevent unused, unsafe, and/or improperly
constructed wells from serving as a passage for contaminated water on or
near surface waters or other materials to reach the usable groundwater.
These wells must be properly filled and sealed.
§ 280-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARSENIC — A natural forming contaminant which shall not exceed 10 parts
per billion within a potable water system as stated within the Wisconsin
Administrative Code for safe drinking water.
MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM — Community water system owned by a city,
village, county, town, town sanitary district, utility district, public inland
lake and rehabilitation district, municipal water district or a federal, state,
county, or municipally owned institution for congregate care or correction,
or a privately owned water utility serving the foregoing.
NONCOMPLYING — Well or pump installation which does not comply with
§ NR 812.42, Wisconsin Administrative Code, in Subchapter IV, Standards
for Existing Installations, and which has not been granted a variance
pursuant to § NR 812.43, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
PUMP INSTALLATION — The pump and related equipment used for
withdrawing water from a well, including the discharge piping, the
underground connections, pitless adapters, pressure tanks, pits, sampling
faucets and well seals or caps.
UNSAFE WELL OR PUMP INSTALLATION — One which produces water
which is bacteriologically contaminated or contaminated with substances
which exceeds the drinking water standards of Chapter NR 809, Wisconsin
Administrative Code, or for which a health advisory has been issued by the
Department of Natural Resources.
UNUSED WELL OR PUMP INSTALLATION — One which is not used or does
not have a functional pumping system.
WELL — A drill hole or other excavation or opening deeper than it is wide
that extends more than 10 feet below the ground surface constructed for
the purpose of obtaining groundwater.
WELL ABANDONMENT — The proper filling and sealing of a well according
to the provisions of § NR 812.26, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
§ 280-3. Abandonment required.
§ 280-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-3
1:467
§ 280-4. Well operation permit. [Amended 7-5-2011]
Owners of wells on premises served by the municipal water system wishing
to retain their wells or construct a well for any use shall make applications
for a well operation permit for each well at the same time an inside
plumbing permit is applied for or prior to the construction of any well. The
Village of Hobart/Hobart Utility District or its agent shall grant a permit
to a well owner to operate a well for a period not to exceed the maximum
license duration provided in State of Wisconsin Administrative Code § NR
810.16(2) in all areas serviced by the municipal water system, providing
all conditions of this section are met. A well operation permit may be
renewed by submitting an application verifying that the conditions of this
section are met. The Village of Hobart/Hobart Utility District or its agent
may conduct inspections and water quality tests or require inspections and
water quality tests to be conducted at the applicant's expense to obtain
or verify information necessary for consideration of permit application or
renewal. Permit applications and renewals shall be made on forms provided
by the Village of Hobart/Hobart Utility District or its agent. All initial and
renewal applications must be accompanied by a fee for the well operation
permit and a one-time fee for an inside plumbing permit. These fees will be
as established by resolution of the Village Board. The following conditions
must be met for issuance or renewal of a well operation permit:
A. All wells on premises served by the municipal water system shall be
properly abandoned in accordance with § 280-5 of this article not later
than 90 days from the date of connection to the municipal water system,
unless a valid well operation permit has been issued to the well owner
by Village of Hobart/Hobart Utility District or its agent under terms of
§ 280-4 of this article.
B. No well shall be constructed on premises served by the municipal water
system unless a well operation permit has been issued under the terms
of § 280-4 of this article.
A. The well and pump installation shall meet the standards for existing
installations described in § NR 812.42, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
B. The well and pump shall have a history of producing safe water and
shall meet the requirements of Section 810.16 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code, and any amendments thereto. In the areas served
by the municipal water system south of Highway 54, along with the first
test and all subsequent tests, the water shall be tested for arsenic. In
areas where the Department of Natural Resources has determined that
groundwater aquifers are contaminated with substances other than the
above mentioned, additional chemical tests may be required to
document the safety of the water. All well water samples shall be
analyzed by a state-certified lab using the appropriate Safe Drinking
Water Act (SDWA) method. Any new well constructed after the effective
date of this article must be shown by the owner to be in compliance
with this article within six months of construction of the well. In the
event that any well is not in compliance, it shall be brought into
§ 280-3 HOBART CODE § 280-4
1:468
§ 280-5. Abandonment procedures.
§ 280-6. Violations and penalties.
compliance or abandoned. [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No.
01-2015; 3-17-2015 by Ord. No. 02-2015]
C. There shall be no cross-connections between the well's pump
installation or distribution piping and the municipal water system.
D. The water from the private well shall not discharge into a drain leading
directly to a public sanitary sewer unless properly metered and
authorized by the sewer utility.
E. The private well shall have a functional pumping system.
F. The proposed use of the private well shall be justified as reasonable
(i.e., lawn watering, gardening, livestock) in addition to water provided
by the municipal water system.
A. All wells abandoned under the jurisdiction of this article shall be done
according to the procedures and methods of § NR 812.26, Wisconsin
Administrative Code. All debris, pumps, piping, unsealed lines and any
other obstructions which may interfere with sealing operations shall be
removed prior to abandonment.
B. The owner of the well or the owner's agent shall be required to obtain a
well abandonment permit prior to any well abandonment and shall
notify the Village of Hobart/Hobart Utility District or its agent at least
48 hours in advance of any well abandonment activities. The
abandonment of the well may be observed or verified by personnel of
the municipal water system.
C. An abandonment report form, supplied by the Department of Natural
Resources, shall be submitted by the well owner to the Village of
Hobart/Hobart Utility District or its agent and the Department of
Natural Resources within 30 days of the completion of the well
abandonment.
D. All wells shall be abandoned by a DNR licensed well driller or pump
installer contractor. The Village of Hobart shall approve and/or specify
the well contractor.
A. Any well owner violating any provision of this article shall be subject to
the penalties provided in § 1-3. [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No.
01-2015; 3-17-2015 by Ord. No. 02-2015]
B. If any person fails to comply with this article for more than 30 days after
receiving written notice of the violation, the Village of Hobart/Hobart
Utility District may impose a penalty and cause the well abandonment
to be performed and the expense to be assessed as a special tax against
the property.
§ 280-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-6
1:469

ARTICLE II
Wellhead Protection
[Adopted as § 11.2 of the 2000 Code]
§ 280-7. Title.
This article shall be known, cited and referred to as the "Wellhead
Protection Ordinance" (WHPO).
§ 280-8. Purpose.
§ 280-9. Applicability.
§ 280-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AQUIFER — A saturated, permeable, geologic formation that contains and
will yield significant quantities of water.
CONE OF DEPRESSION — The cone-shaped area around a well, in which
the water level is lowered by pumping of the well. The cone of depression
for Well No. 1 of the Village of Hobart/Hobart Utility District's water supply
system has been estimated.
FIVE-YEAR TIME OF TRAVEL (FIVE-YEAR TOT) — The "five-year TOT"
is the outer boundary of the recharge area, of which it is determined or
estimated that groundwater and potential contaminants will take five years
to reach a pumping well(s).
A. The users of the Village of Hobart/Hobart Utility District's water supply
system depend exclusively on groundwater for a safe drinking water
supply. Certain land use practices and activities can threaten or
degrade groundwater quality. The purpose of the WHPO is to institute
land use regulations and restrictions to protect the Village of Hobart/
Hobart Utility District's municipal water supply, and to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the Village
of Hobart/Hobart Utility District and the Village of Hobart.
B. These regulations are established pursuant to the authority granted the
Village by the Wisconsin Statutes, including but not limited to §§ 61.34
and 61.35 Wis. Stats., which provide for groundwater protection in
municipal planning and zoning.
A. The regulations specified in the WHPO shall apply within the corporate
limits of the Village of Hobart.
B. No new use or change in use of any structure, or land shall be located,
extended, converted or structurally altered and no development shall
commence without full compliance with the terms of this article and
other applicable regulations.
§ 280-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-10
1:471
GROUNDWATER DIVIDE — Ridge in the water table or potentiometric
surface from which groundwater moves away at right angles in both
directions. Line of highest hydraulic head in the water table or
potentiometric surface.
GROUNDWATER PROTECTION AREA — That area contained on the map
attached as Exhibit A and incorporated herein.119
NONCONFORMING USE — An existing lawful use of land, structure,
building or accessory use which is not in conformity with the provisions of
this article.
RECHARGE AREA — Area in which water reaches the zone of saturation
by surface infiltration and encompasses all area or features that supply
groundwater recharge to a well.
WELL FIELD — A piece of land used primarily for the purpose of supplying
a location for construction of wells to supply a municipal water system.
§ 280-11. Groundwater protection area.
The groundwater protection area are the lands immediately surrounding
the well. See Exhibit A.120 Limitations which are placed on this area are
those identified in the Wisconsin Administrative Code and those prohibited
uses in Subsection D below. The area is an area within a one-thousand-twohundred-
foot radius of the well. The setbacks to contamination sources as
set forth in Ch. NR 811, Wis. Adm. Code, shall be part of this article and
enforceable under this article.
A. Administrative Code separation distances.
(1) Intent. The area to be protected are the lands immediately
surrounding Hobart Well No. 1. These lands are subject to the most
stringent land use and development restrictions because of their
close proximity to the well field and the corresponding high threat
of contamination.
B. Separation distances from the municipal well.
(1) Fifty feet between a well and a storm sewer main.
(2) Two hundred feet between a well and any sanitary sewer main, lift
station or single-family residential fuel oil tank. A lesser separation
distance may be allowed for sanitary sewer mains where the
sanitary sewer main is constructed of water main materials and
joints are pressure tested in place to meet current AWWA 600
specifications. In no case may the separation distance between a
well and a sanitary sewer main be less than 50 feet.
119. Editor's Note: Exhibit A, the map of the groundwater protection area, is on file in the
Village Clerk-Treasurer's office.
120. Editor's Note: Exhibit A, the map of the groundwater protection area, is on file in the
Village Clerk-Treasurer's office.
§ 280-10 HOBART CODE § 280-11
1:472
(3) Four hundred feet between a well and a septic tank receiving less
than 8,000 gallons per day, a cemetery or a stormwater drainage
pond.
(4) Six hundred feet between a well and any gasoline or fuel oil storage
tank installation that has received written approval from the
Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection or its
designated agent under § ATCP 93.110, Wis. Adm. Code.
(5) One thousand feet between a well and land application of
municipal, commercial or industrial waste; industrial, commercial
or municipal wastewater lagoons or storage structures; manure
stacks or storage structures; and septic tanks or soil absorption
units receiving 8,000 gallons per day or more.
(6) One thousand two hundred feet between a well and any solid waste
storage, transportation, transfer, incineration, air curtain destruct
or, processing, wood burning, one time disposal or small demolition
facility; sanitary landfill; coal storage area; salt or deicing material
storage area; gasoline or fuel oil storage tanks that have not
received written approval from the Department of Agriculture,
Trade and Consumer Protection or its designated agent under
§ ATCP 93.110, Wis. Adm. Code; bulk fuel storage facilities; and
pesticide or fertilizer handling or storage facilities.121
(7) Refer to Table 1 attached as Exhibit B.122
C. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted within the area:
(1) All uses listed as permitted uses in this section.
(2) Maximum aboveground storage tanks (660 gallons) and
containment facility.
(3) Basement storage tanks.
(4) Commercial and/or industrial uses, except those listed as
prohibited.
D. Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited uses within Area A:
(1) Pesticide and/or fertilizer storage and use.
(2) Septage and/or sludge spreading.
(3) Animal waste land spreading.
(4) Animal waste facilities.
(5) Animal confinement facilities.
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
122. Editor's Note: Exhibit B, Table 1, is on file in the Village Clerk-Treasurer's office.
§ 280-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-11
1:473
§ 280-12. Other permitted uses.
(6) Gas stations.
(7) Vehicle repair establishments, including auto body repair.
(8) Printing and duplicating.
(9) Bus or truck terminals.
(10) Repair shops.
(11)Wastewater treatment facilities.
(12) Spray wastewater facilities.
(13) Junkyards or auto salvage yards.
(14) Bulk fertilizer and pesticide facilities.
(15) Asphalt products manufacturing.
(16) Dry cleaning facilities.
(17) Salt storage.
(18) Electroplating.
(19) Exterminating shops.
(20) Paint and coating manufacturing.
(21) Hazardous and toxic materials storage and use.
(22) Hazardous and toxic waste facilities.
(23)Radioactive waste facilities.
(24) Tire and battery services.
(25) Garage and vehicular towing.
(26) Public and municipal maintenance garages.
A. Individuals and/or facilities may request the Village of Hobart to permit
other land uses in the groundwater protection Area A.
B. All requests shall be in writing to the Village of Hobart and shall include
an Environmental Assessment Report prepared by a licensed
professional engineer.
C. A copy of the Environmental Assessment Report shall be forwarded to
the Village Administrator or designee for recommendation to the
Village Board.123
123. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 280-11 HOBART CODE § 280-12
1:474
§ 280-13. Nonconforming uses.
Insofar as the standards in this section are not inconsistent with the
provisions of § 62.23(7)(h), Wis. Stats., they shall apply to all nonconforming
uses. The existing lawful use of a structure or building or its accessory
use which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article may be
continued, subject to the following conditions:
§ 280-14. Requirements for existing facilities.
D. Any permitted uses shall be conditional and may include required
environmental and safety monitoring consistent with local, state and
federal requirements, and/or bonds and/or sureties satisfactory to the
Village.
A. No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use shall be
permitted unless they are made in conformity with the provisions of this
section. For the purposes of this section, the words "modification" and
"addition" shall include, but not be limited to, any alteration, addition,
modification, rebuilding or replacement of any such existing structure
or accessory use. Ordinary maintenance repairs are not considered
structural repairs, modifications or additions; such ordinary
maintenance repairs include internal and external painting, decorating,
paneling and the replacement of doors, windows and other
nonstructural components.
B. If a nonconforming use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any
future use of the land, structure or building shall conform with the
appropriate provisions of this article.
A. Facilities shall provide copies of all federal, state and local facility
operation approvals or certificate and ongoing environmental
monitoring results to the Village of Hobart.
B. Facilities shall provide additional environmental or safety structures/
monitoring as deemed necessary by the Village of Hobart, which may
include but are not limited to stormwater runoff management and
monitoring.
C. Facilities shall replace equipment or expand in a manner that improves
the existing environmental and safety technologies already in
existence.
D. Facilities shall have the responsibility of devising and filing with the
Village of Hobart a contingency plan satisfactory to the Village of
Hobart for the immediate notification of Village of Hobart officials in
the event of an emergency.
E. In the event the individual and/or facility causes the release of any
contaminants which endanger the Village of Hobart, the activity
causing said release shall immediately cease and a cleanup satisfactory
to the Village shall occur.
§ 280-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-15
1:475
§ 280-15. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Violations. It shall be unlawful to construct or use any structure, land or
water in violation of any of the provisions of this article. In case of any
violation, the Village Board may institute appropriate action or
proceedings to enjoin a violation of this article.
B. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the
penalties provided in § 1-3. Each day a violation exists or continues
shall constitute a separate offense.124
C. The individual/facility shall be responsible for all costs of cleanup,
Village consultant fees at the invoice amount, plus administrative costs
for oversight, review and documentation.
124. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 280-15 HOBART CODE § 280-15
1:476
Part III: Land Use Legislation
Chapter 288
AGRICULTURAL SHORELAND MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 121.
Floodplain zoning — See Ch. 290.
Shoreland zoning — See Ch. 293.
Zoning — See Ch. 295.
§ 288-1. Introduction.
A. Authority. This chapter is adopted under the authority granted by
§ 92.17, Wisconsin Statutes.
B. Findings and declaration of policy. The Hobart Village Board finds that
landowner activities conducted in close proximity to surface water can
pollute the Village of Hobart's water resources, and may result in actual
or potential harm to the health of residents and transients; to livestock,
aquatic life and other animals and plants; and to the property tax base
of the Village of Hobart.
C. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to complement Chapter 121,
Building Construction, and Chapter 295, Zoning, and to regulate
landowner activities within the approximately 90.52 miles of
agricultural shoreland management area within the Village to prevent
surface water pollution and thereby protect the health of Village of
Hobart residents and transients; prevent the spread of disease; and
promote the prosperity and general welfare of the citizens of the Village
of Hobart.
D. Applicability.
(1) This chapter applies to all lands and surface water in the Village of
Hobart that are in the agricultural shoreland management area, as
defined in § 288-2B of this chapter. The Village of Hobart shall use
United States Geological Survey (USGS) quadrangle maps, with a
scale of 1:24,000, to identify rivers, perennial streams, intermittent
streams, lakes and ponds included under the jurisdiction of this
chapter.
(2) This chapter does not apply to lands and surface waters within the
boundaries of a drainage district operated under Chapter 88 of the
Wisconsin Statutes.
E. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be
liberally construed in favor of the Village of Hobart and shall not be
§ 280-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-1
1:477
§ 288-2. Definitions.
deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by the
Wisconsin Statutes.
F. Conflicts with Brown County's Shoreland Zoning Ordinance. Any
conflict or inconsistency between this chapter and Brown County's
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance will be governed by the more restrictive
provision.
G. Effective date. This chapter shall become effective upon adoption and
publication by the Village of Hobart and upon approval by the
Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection.
A. For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply. Words
used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular number
includes the plural number, and the plural number includes the singular
number. The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL LANDS — Lands in agricultural use. Agricultural use
has the meaning provided under § 91.01(2), Wisconsin Statutes. Uses
under this definition include beekeeping; commercial feedlots;
dairying; egg and/or poultry production; floriculture; fish or fur
farming; forest and game management; grazing; livestock raising;
orchards; greenhouses and nurseries; grain, grass, mint and seed
crops; raising fruits, nuts and berries; sod farming; land idled under
federal payment-in-kind programs or the Conservation Reserve
Program; participation in the dairy-herd buyout program; and
vegetable raising.
AGRICULTURAL SHORELAND CORRIDOR — Land extending 20 feet
from the top of the bank on each side of a perennial stream or river,
the center line of an intermittent stream, or the ordinary high-water
mark of any lake or pond shown on a United States Geological Survey
quadrangle map with a scale of 1:24,000.
AGRICULTURAL SHORELAND MANAGEMENT AREA — All land that is
within 300 feet of the following features as designated on United States
Geological Survey quadrangle maps with a scale of 1:24,000:
BARNYARD — A feedlot, dry lot or any area, other than a pasture,
where animals have been or will be fed, confined, maintained or stabled
for a total of 45 days or more in any twelve-month period.
(1) The top of the bank of perennial streams or rivers.
The ordinary high-water mark for ponds and lakes that are
designated by name.
(2)
(3) The center line of an intermittent stream.
§ 288-1 HOBART CODE § 288-2
1:478
§ 288-3. Activities subject to regulation.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE — A practice included in the
technical guide or an alternative best management practice that the
Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection determines
to be the most effective, practicable means of preventing or reducing
soil erosion or pollution from agricultural nonpoint sources to a level
compatible with soil and water resource objectives.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A channel in which water does not flow
continuously and that is identified as an intermittent stream on the
United States Geological Survey quadrangle map with a scale of
1:24,000.
NOTICE OF AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS — A first class letter, return
receipt requested, mailed by the Village of Hobart to the owner of the
lands not meeting chapter standards, informing them of the availability
of cost-share funds under § 92.14, Wisconsin Statutes.
NOTICE OF PROBLEM — A first class letter, return receipt requested,
mailed by the Village of Hobart to the owner of the lands not meeting
the chapter standards, informing the owner of the nature of the
problem and the necessary process to correct it.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — The point on the bank or shore to
which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to
leave a distinctive mark. This may be erosion, absence of land plants,
predominance of aquatic plants, or other recognized characteristics.
PASTURE — Land with a permanent, uniform cover of grasses or
legumes used as forage for livestock. Pastures do not include areas
where supplemental forage feeding is provided on a regular basis.
PERENNIAL STREAM — A channel where water flows continuously and
that is identified as a perennial or permanent stream on the United
States Geological Survey quadrangle map with a scale of 1:24,000.
TECHNICAL GUIDE — The United States Department of Agriculture
Natural Resources Conservation Service Field Office Technical Guide
that is currently in effect.
VEGETATIVE BUFFER — An area within the agricultural shoreland
corridor that is maintained at a minimum level of 70% ground cover.
A. General requirement. Any person who conducts landowner activities
within the agricultural shoreland management area or who employs
another person to do the same, on land subject to this chapter, shall be
subject to the provisions of this chapter. All activities on land within
agricultural shoreland management areas must be conducted in ways
that prevent soil erosion and minimize the movement of suspended
solids into surface water.
B. Compliance with ordinance requirements. Persons are in compliance
with this chapter if they install or follow best management practices on
§ 288-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-3
1:479
§ 288-4. Standards.
§ 288-5. Administration.
their land affected by the chapter and meet the intent of the standards
in § 288-4 of this chapter.
A. Agricultural activities in the agricultural shoreland corridor.
(1) Vegetative buffer. Landowners or operators shall establish and
maintain an adequate vegetative buffer or equally effective erosion
control practice, in the agricultural shoreland corridor. When a
vegetative buffer is established, the plant variety or seed mixture
shall be one of those listed in Technical Guide Standard 342,
Critical Area Planting. If any activity disturbs a vegetative buffer in
the agricultural shoreland corridor, the landowner must replant or
restore the disturbed area to an effective vegetative buffer as soon
as practicable. Row cropping and tillage practices are prohibited in
the agricultural shoreland corridor, except that tillage practices are
allowed to establish or reestablish a seed bed.
(2) Barnyards. Livestock holding areas, other than pastures as defined
in § 288-2B of this chapter, are prohibited within the agricultural
shoreland corridor unless a barnyard runoff control system is
installed that meets Technical Guide Standard 312.
B. Agricultural activities in the agricultural shoreland management area.
(1) Cropland areas with annually tilled crops. Erosion on cropland
within the agricultural shoreland management area must not
exceed the tolerable rate (T) for the predominant soil in the field.
(2) Pastures. Pastures within the agricultural shoreland management
area must comply with Technical Guide Standard 510 for pasture
and hayland management. Rotational grazing must comply with the
UW-Extension publication "Pastures for Profit" (February 1993
edition).
(3) Agricultural lands receiving manure and other nutrients.
Agricultural lands within the agricultural shoreland management
area must meet Technical Guide Standard 590 if they receive
manure and other nutrients through the application of sludge,
commercial fertilizer, and other added nutrients.
A. Delegation of authority. The Village of Hobart hereby designates the
Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector, overseen by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, to administer and enforce the provisions of this
chapter.125
125. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 288-3 HOBART CODE § 288-5
1:480
B. Administrative duties. In the administration and enforcement of this
chapter, the Village of Hobart Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector
shall:
(1) Inform all landowners or operators subject to this chapter of the
potential agencies which may be available to provide technical or
financial assistance.
(2) Establish a procedure for landowners or operators to contact the
Village of Hobart Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector about
conditions on their land that are not in compliance with the chapter
and establish a procedure for landowners or operators to apply for
funding.
(3) Send notices of problem to landowners or operators that are not in
compliance with the chapter.
(4) Send notices of availability of funds to landowners or operators that
are not in compliance with the chapter.
(5) Provide accomplishment reports to the Department of Agriculture,
Trade and Consumer Protection on the activities related to the
chapter and its effectiveness.
(6) Investigate complaints relating to compliance with the chapter.
(7) Perform other duties as specified in the chapter.
C. Inspection authority. The Village of Hobart Zoning Administrator/
Building Inspector, or its designee, is authorized to enter upon any
lands affected by this chapter to inspect the land to determine
compliance with this chapter. If permission cannot be received from the
landowner or operator, entry by the Village of Hobart Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector, or its designee, shall be according to
§ 66.0119, Wisconsin Statutes.
D. Enforcement procedure.
(1) A notice of problem must be mailed to the landowner or operator
stating that the standards of this chapter have not been met. The
Village of Hobart Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector, or its
designee, shall prepare a conservation plan with the landowner or
operator including a schedule of implementation. The Village of
Hobart Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector, or its designee,
must provide a notice of availability of funds to the landowner or
operator when funds are available to implement or install the
necessary practices. A minimum of one year must elapse after the
landowner's plan and schedule have been developed before
beginning any enforcement action. The one-year deadline for
enforcement action may be extended upon agreement between the
landowner or operator and the Village of Hobart Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector.
§ 288-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-5
1:481
§ 288-6. Violations and penalties.
§ 288-7. Variances.
(2) The Village of Hobart Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector, or
its designee, must provide, along with the notice of problem: a list
of pertinent best management practices and associated average
costs per unit as provided by the Village of Hobart Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector, or its designee; a written
statement informing the landowner of the right to appeal the
decision; and the appeals procedure.
A. Penalties. Any person who violates, neglects, or refuses to comply with
or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be subject to the penalties provided in § 1-3. Each day of violation shall
constitute a separate offense. A violation includes failure to comply with
any standard of this chapter or with any condition or qualification
attached to the conservation plan.126
B. Enforcement by injunction. As a substitute for or in addition to
forfeiture actions, the Village of Hobart Zoning Administrator/Building
Inspector may seek to enforce any part of the chapter by seeking
injunctions or restraining orders.
A. Application; standards.127
(1) Application.
(a) An application for a variance shall be filed with the Village
Clerk-Treasurer. The application shall contain such information
as the Board of Appeals by rule may require. Due notice of the
hearing shall be given to parties of interest, as well as owners
of property located within 100 feet of the property in appeal.
The Board shall reach a decision within 60 days from the filing
of the request for variance.
(b) Notice of the time and place of such public hearing shall be
published as provided in the state law on planning and zoning
and applicable to the Village of Hobart.
(2) Standards for variances. Variances may be granted by the Board of
Appeals only when:
(a) Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographical condition of the specific property involved a
particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished
from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the
regulations were to be carried out.
126. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
127. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 288-5 HOBART CODE § 288-7
1:482
§ 288-8. Appeals.
(b) Conditions upon which a petition for a variance is based are
unique to the property for which the variance is sought, and
are not applicable, generally, to other property within the same
zoning classification.
(c) Alleged difficulty or hardship is caused by this chapter and has
not been created by any person presently having an interest in
the property.
(d) Granting of the variance shall not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood in which the property is located.
(e) Proposed variance shall not impair an adequate supply of light
and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the
congestion of the public streets, or increase the danger of fire,
or endanger public health and safety, or substantially diminish
or impair property values within the neighborhood.
(3) Authorized variances. Variances shall be granted by the Board of
Appeals in accordance with the standards established in
Subsection B.
B. Procedure. Variances from the requirements of this chapter may be
granted by the Village of Hobart Board of Appeals based on any of the
following findings:
(1) Staff are not available due to excessive workload to develop
conservation plans or schedules of implementation.
(2) Cost-share funds have not been made available to the landowner or
operator as required under § 92.17(2m), Wisconsin Statutes.
(3) Severe weather or other catastrophic events beyond the control of
the landowner or operator which make implementation
impractical.
(4) The installation or implementation of all components of the
conservation plan will not or does not result in complete
compliance with the chapter. A variance under this provision can
only be granted if all the components of the plan are installed or
implemented.
A. Authority. Pursuant to Wis. Stats., Chapter 68, the Board of Appeals is
hereby authorized to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that
there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination by
the Village of Hobart Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector in
administering the chapter.128
128. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 288-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-8
1:483
Chapter 290
FLOODPLAIN ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Agricultural shoreland management — See
Ch. 288.
Shoreland zoning — See Ch. 293.
Zoning — See Ch. 295.
§ 290-1. Statutory authorization; finding of fact; purpose; title and
general provisions.
B. Who may appeal. Appeals may be made by any person having a
substantial interest which is adversely affected by the order, decision,
or determination made by the Village of Hobart Zoning Administrator/
Building Inspector.
C. Scope and findings of appeals shall be as provided in § 295-341.129
A. Statutory authorization. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the
authorization in §§ 61.35 and 62.23, for villages and cities; and the
requirements in § 87.30, Wis. Stats.130
B. Finding of fact. Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains
and rivers of this municipality would impair the public health, safety,
convenience, general welfare and tax base.
C. Statement of purpose. This chapter is intended to regulate floodplain
development to:
(1) Protect life, health and property;
(2) Minimize expenditures of public funds for flood control projects;
(3) Minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the
taxpayers;
(4) Minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain;
(6) Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the
floodplain;
(7) Discourage the victimization of unwary land and home buyers;
129. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
130. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 288-8 HOBART CODE § 290-1
1:484
(8) Prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage
and result in conflicts between property owners; and
(9) Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable
alternative to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the
floodplain.
D. Title. This chapter shall be known as the "Floodplain Zoning Ordinance
for the Village of Hobart, Brown County, Wisconsin."
E. General provisions.
(1) Areas to be regulated. This chapter regulates all areas that would
be covered by the regional flood or base flood as shown on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or other maps approved by DNR.
Base flood elevations are derived from the flood profiles in the
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and are shown as AE, A1-30, and AH
Zones on the FIRM. Other regulatory zones are displayed as A and
AO zones. Regional Flood Elevations (RFE) may be derived from
other studies. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the
most restrictive information shall apply.
(2) Official Maps and revisions. The boundaries of all floodplain
districts are designated as A, AE, AH, AO or A1-30 on the maps
based on the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) listed below. Any change
to the base flood elevations (BFE) or any changes to the boundaries
of the floodplain or floodway in the FIS or on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) must be reviewed and approved by the DNR and
FEMA through the Letter of Map Change process (see § 290-8,
Amendments) before it is effective. No changes to RFEs on non-
FEMA maps shall be effective until approved by the DNR. These
maps and revisions are on file in the office of the Village of Hobart
Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector. If more than one map or
revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply.
(a) Official Maps: Based on the FIS: Flood Insurance Rate Maps
(FIRM), panel numbers 55009C0135G, 55009C0141G,
55009C0142G, 55009C0143G, 55009C0144G, dated March 17,
2014 and panel numbers 55009C0130F, 55009C0140F,
55009C0227F, 55009C0229F, 55009C0231F, 55009C0232F,
55009C0233F, 55009C0234F, 55009C0237F, 55009C0239F,
55009C0241F, 55009C0242F, 55009C0243F, 55009C0251F,
55009C0253F, 55009C0161F, and 55009C0163F dated August
18, 2009; with corresponding profiles that are based on the
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated March 17, 2014, Volume
numbers 55009VB001B, 55009VB002B, and 55009VB003B.
Approved by: The DNR and FEMA.
(b) Official Maps: Based on other studies. (None)
(3) Establishment of floodplain zoning districts. The regional floodplain
areas are divided into three districts as follows:
§ 290-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-1
1:485
(a) The Floodway District (FW), is the channel of a river or stream
and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel
required to carry the regional floodwaters and are contained
within AE Zones as shown on the FIRM.
(b) The Flood-Fringe District (FF) is that portion between the
regional flood limits and the floodway and displayed as AE
Zones on the FIRM.
(c) The General Floodplain District (GFP) is those areas that may
be covered by floodwater during the regional flood and does
not have a BFE or floodway boundary determined, including A,
AH and AO zones on the FIRM.
(4) Locating floodplain boundaries. Discrepancies between boundaries
on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map and actual field conditions
shall be resolved using the criteria in Subsection E(4)(a) or (b)
below. If a significant difference exists, the map shall be amended
according to § 290-8, Amendments. The Zoning Administrator/
Building Inspector can rely on a boundary derived from a profile
elevation to grant or deny a land use permit, whether or not a map
amendment is required. The Zoning Administrator/Building
Inspector shall be responsible for documenting actual
predevelopment field conditions and the basis upon which the
district boundary was determined and for initiating any map
amendments required under this section. Disputes between the
Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector and an applicant over the
district boundary line shall be settled according to § 290-7C(3) and
the criteria in Subsection E(4)(a) and (b) below. Where the flood
profiles are based on established base flood elevations from a
FIRM, FEMA must approve any map amendment or revision
pursuant to § 290-8, Amendments.
(a) If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile elevations
shall determine the district boundary. The regional or base
flood elevations shall govern if there are any discrepancies.
(b) Where flood profiles do not exist for projects, the location of
the boundary shall be determined by the map scale.
(5) Removal of lands from floodplain. Compliance with the provisions
of this chapter shall not be grounds for removing land from the
floodplain unless it is filled at least two feet above the regional or
base flood elevation, the fill is contiguous to land outside the
floodplain, and the map is amended pursuant to § 290-8,
Amendments.
(6) Compliance. Any development or use within the areas regulated by
this chapter shall be in compliance with the terms of this chapter,
and other applicable local, state, and federal regulations.
§ 290-1 HOBART CODE § 290-1
1:486
(7) Municipalities and state agencies regulated. Unless specifically
exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are
required to comply with this chapter and obtain all necessary
permits. State agencies are required to comply if § 13.48(13), Wis.
Stats., applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and
repair of state highways and bridges by the Wisconsin Department
of Transportation is exempt when § 30.2022, Wis. Stats., applies.
(8) Abrogation and greater restrictions.
(a) This chapter supersedes all the provisions of any municipal
zoning ordinance enacted under § 62.23 for cities; § 61.35 for
villages; or § 87.30, Wis. Stats., which relate to floodplains. A
more restrictive ordinance shall continue in full force and
effect to the extent of the greater restrictions, but not
otherwise.131
(b) This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. If this
chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this
chapter shall prevail.
(9) Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this chapter are the minimum requirements liberally
construed in favor of the governing body and are not a limitation on
or repeal of any other powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. If
a provision of this chapter, required by Ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm.
Code, is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the
standards in effect on the date of the adoption of this chapter or in
effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this
chapter.
(10)Warning and disclaimer of liability. The flood protection standards
in this chapter are based on engineering experience and research.
Larger floods may occur or the flood height may be increased by
man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply or
guarantee that non-floodplain areas or permitted floodplain uses
will be free from flooding and flood damages. This chapter does not
create liability on the part of, or a cause of action against, the
municipality or any officer or employee thereof for any flood
damage that may result from reliance on this chapter.
(11) Annexed areas for cities and villages. The Brown County floodplain
zoning provisions in effect on the date of annexation shall remain in
effect and shall be enforced by the municipality for all annexed
areas until the municipality adopts and enforces an ordinance
which meets the requirements of Ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code, and
44 CFR 59-72, National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). These
annexed lands are described on the municipality's Official Zoning
131. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 290-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-1
1:487
§ 290-2. General standards applicable to all floodplain districts.
The community shall review all permit applications to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed
building site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall be designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads; be constructed with flood-resistant materials; be
constructed to minimize flood damages and to ensure that utility and
mechanical equipment is designed and/or located so as to prevent water
from entering or accumulating within the equipment during conditions of
flooding. Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the above
standards. All subdivision proposals (including manufactured home parks)
shall include regional flood elevation and floodway data for any
development that meets the subdivision definition of this chapter and all
other requirements in § 290-7A(2). Adequate drainage shall be provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards and all public utilities and facilities, such
as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damages.
Map. County floodplain zoning provisions are incorporated by
reference for the purpose of administering this section and are on
file in the office of the Municipal Zoning Administrator/Building
Inspector. All plats or maps of annexation shall show the regional
flood elevation and the floodway location.
A. Hydraulic and hydrologic analyses.
(1) No floodplain development shall:
(a) Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the
conveyance of floodwaters by itself or with other development,
causing any increase in the regional flood height; or
(b) Cause any increase in the regional flood height due to
floodplain storage area lost.
(2) The Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector shall deny permits if
it is determined the proposed development will obstruct flow or
cause any increase in the regional flood height, based on the
officially adopted FIRM or other adopted map, unless the
provisions of § 290-8, Amendments, are met.
B. Watercourse alterations.
(1) No land use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped
floodplain shall be issued until the local official has notified in
writing all adjacent municipalities, the Department and FEMA
regional offices, and required the applicant to secure all necessary
state and federal permits. The standards of Subsection A must be
met and the flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated
watercourse shall be maintained.
§ 290-1 HOBART CODE § 290-2
1:488
(2) As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the
date of the watercourse alteration or relocation and pursuant to
§ 290-8, Amendments, the community shall apply for a Letter of
Map Revision (LOMR) from FEMA. Any such alterations must be
reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR through the LOMC
process.
C. Chapters 30, 31, Wis. Stats., development. Development which requires
a permit from the Department, under Chs. 30 and 31, Wis. Stats., such
as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, dams and navigational aids,
may be allowed if the necessary permits are obtained and amendments
to the floodplain zoning ordinance are made according to § 290-8,
Amendments.
D. Public or private campgrounds. Public or private campgrounds shall
have a low flood damage potential and shall meet the following
provisions:
(1) The campground is approved by the Department of Health
Services;
(2) A land use permit for the campground is issued by the Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector;
(3) The character of the river system and the campground elevation
are such that a seventy-two-hour warning of an impending flood
can be given to all campground occupants;
(4) There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground
that offers the minimum notice required under this section to all
persons in the campground. This procedure shall include a written
agreement between the campground owner, the municipal
emergency government coordinator and the chief law enforcement
official which specifies the flood elevation at which evacuation shall
occur, personnel responsible for monitoring flood elevations, types
of warning systems to be used and the procedures for notifying atrisk
parties, and the methods and personnel responsible for
conducting the evacuation;
(5) This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at
which time the agreement shall be reviewed and updated by the
officials identified in Subsection D(4) to remain in compliance with
all applicable regulations, including those of the state Department
of Health Services and all other applicable regulations;
(6) Only camping units that are fully licensed, if required, and ready
for highway use are allowed;
(7) The camping units shall not occupy any site in the campground for
more than 180 consecutive days, at which time the camping unit
must be removed from the floodplain for a minimum of 24 hours;
§ 290-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-2
1:489
§ 290-3. Floodway District (FW).
(8) All camping units that remain on site for more than 30 days shall be
issued a limited authorization by the campground operator, a
written copy of which is kept on file at the campground. Such
authorization shall allow placement of a camping unit for a period
not to exceed 180 days and shall ensure compliance with all the
provisions of this section;
(9) The municipality shall monitor the limited authorizations issued by
the campground operator to assure compliance with the terms of
this section;
(10) All camping units that remain in place for more than 180
consecutive days must meet the applicable requirements in either
§ 290-3, 290-4 or 290-5 for the floodplain district in which the
structure is located;
(11) The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all entrances
warning of the flood hazard and the procedures for evacuation
when a flood warning is issued; and
(12) All service facilities, including but not limited to refuse collection,
electrical service, gas lines, propane tanks, sewage systems and
wells shall be properly anchored and placed at or floodproofed to
the flood protection elevation.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all floodway areas on the
Floodplain Zoning Maps and those identified pursuant to § 290-5D.
B. Permitted uses. The following open space uses are allowed in the
Floodway District and the floodway areas of the General Floodplain
District, if: they are not prohibited by any other ordinance; they meet
the standards in § 290-3C and D; and all permits or certificates have
been issued according to § 290-7A.
(1) Agricultural uses, such as: farming, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, viticulture and wild crop harvesting.
(2) Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading
areas, parking areas and airport landing strips.
(3) Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis
courts, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat ramps, swimming
areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish
hatcheries, shooting, trap and skeet activities, hunting and fishing
areas and hiking and horseback riding trails, subject to the fill
limitations of § 290-3C(4).
(4) Uses or structures accessory to open space uses, or classified as
historic structures that comply with § 290-3C and D.
§ 290-2 HOBART CODE § 290-3
1:490
(5) Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials that comply with
§ 290-3C(4).
(6) Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or
wharves, dams, flowage areas, culverts, navigational aids and river
crossings of transmission lines, and pipelines that comply with Chs.
30 and 31, Wis. Stats.
(7) Public utilities, streets and bridges that comply with § 290-3C(3).
C. Standards for developments in the floodway.
(1) General.
(a) Any development in the floodway shall comply with § 290-2 and
have a low flood damage potential.
(b) Applicants shall provide the following data to determine the
effects of the proposal according to § 290-2A:
[1] A cross-section elevation view of the proposal,
perpendicular to the watercourse, showing if the proposed
development will obstruct flow; or
[2] An analysis calculating the effects of this proposal on
regional flood height.
(c) The Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector shall deny the
permit application if the project will cause any increase in the
flood elevations upstream or downstream, based on the data
submitted for Subsection C(1)(b) above.
(2) Structures. Structures accessory to permanent open space uses or
functionally dependent on a waterfront location may be allowed by
permit if the structures comply with the following criteria:
(a) Not designed for human habitation, does not have a high flood
damage potential and is constructed to minimize flood damage;
(b) Shall have a minimum of two openings on different walls
having a total net area not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area, and the bottom of all such
openings being no higher than one foot above grade. The
openings shall be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters;
(c) Must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement;
(d) Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or
floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and
§ 290-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-3
1:491
(e) It must not obstruct flow of floodwaters or cause any increase
in flood levels during the occurrence of the regional flood.
(3) Public utilities, streets and bridges. Public utilities, streets and
bridges may be allowed by permit, if:
(a) Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood
protection elevation; and
(b) Construction meets the development standards of § 290-2A.
(4) Fills or deposition of materials. Fills or deposition of materials may
be allowed by permit, if:
(a) The requirements of § 290-2A are met;
(b) No material is deposited in navigable waters unless a permit is
issued by the Department pursuant to Ch. 30, Wis. Stats., and a
permit pursuant to § 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344 has been issued, if
applicable, and all other requirements have been met;
(c) The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by
riprap, vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulkheading; and
(d) The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material.
D. Prohibited uses. All uses not listed as permitted uses in § 290-3B are
prohibited, including the following uses:
(1) Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential,
or those not associated with permanent open-space uses;
(2) Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, injurious
to property, water quality, or human, animal, plant, fish or other
aquatic life;
(3) Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the
adjoining districts;
(4) Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that
are removed prior to flooding and systems associated with
recreational areas and Department-approved campgrounds that
meet the applicable provisions of local ordinances and Ch. SPS 383,
Wis. Adm. Code;
(5) Any public or private wells which are used to obtain potable water,
except those for recreational areas that meet the requirements of
local ordinances and Chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code;
(6) Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites;
(7) Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those
permitted under § NR 110.15(3)(b), Wis. Adm. Code; and
§ 290-3 HOBART CODE § 290-3
1:492
§ 290-4. Flood-Fringe District (FF).
(8) Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service
existing or proposed development located outside the floodway
which complies with the regulations for the floodplain area
occupied.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all flood-fringe areas shown on the
Floodplain Zoning Maps and those identified pursuant to § 290-5D.
B. Permitted uses. Any structure, land use, or development is allowed in
the Flood-Fringe District if the standards in Subsection C are met, the
use is not prohibited by this or any other ordinance or regulation and all
permits or certificates specified in § 290-7A have been issued.
C. Standards for development in the flood-fringe. Section 290-2A shall
apply in addition to the following requirements according to the use
requested. Any existing structure in the flood-fringe must meet the
requirements of § 290-6, Nonconforming uses;
(1) Residential uses. Any structure, including a manufactured home,
which is to be newly constructed or moved into the flood-fringe,
shall meet or exceed the following standards. Any existing
structure in the flood-fringe must meet the requirements of
§ 290-6, Nonconforming uses;
(a) The elevation of the lowest floor shall be at or above the flood
protection elevation on fill unless the requirements of
Subsection C(1)(b) can be met. The fill shall be one foot or
more above the regional flood elevation extending at least 15
feet beyond the limits of the structure.
(b) The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional
flood elevation if it is dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation. No basement or crawlway floor is allowed below the
regional flood elevation.
(c) Contiguous dryland access shall be provided from a structure
to land outside of the floodplain, except as provided in
Subsection C(1)(d).
(d) In developments where existing street or sewer line elevations
make compliance with Subsection C(1)(c) impractical, the
municipality may permit new development and substantial
improvements where roads are below the regional flood
elevation, if:
[1] The municipality has written assurance from police, fire
and emergency services that rescue and relief will be
provided to the structure(s) by wheeled vehicles during a
regional flood event; or
§ 290-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-4
1:493
[2] The municipality has a DNR-approved emergency
evacuation plan.
(2) Accessory structures or uses. Accessory structures shall be
constructed on fill with the lowest floor at or above the regional
flood elevation.
(3) Commercial uses. Any commercial structure which is erected,
altered or moved into the flood-fringe shall meet the requirements
of Subsection C(1). Subject to the requirements of Subsection C(5),
storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be
placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to
protect life and property.
(4) Manufacturing and industrial uses. Any manufacturing or
industrial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the
flood-fringe shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the
flood protection elevation or meet the floodproofing standards in
§ 290-7E. Subject to the requirements of Subsection C(5), storage
yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at
lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect
life and property.
(5) Storage of materials. Materials that are buoyant, flammable,
explosive, or injurious to property, water quality or human, animal,
plant, fish or aquatic life shall be stored at or above the flood
protection elevation or floodproofed in compliance with § 290-7E.
Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that such materials
will not enter the water body during flooding.
(6) Public utilities, streets and bridges. All utilities, streets and bridges
shall be designed to be compatible with comprehensive floodplain
development plans; and
(a) When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges would
endanger public health or safety, or where such facilities are
deemed essential, construction or repair of such facilities shall
only be permitted if they are designed to comply with § 290-7E.
(b) Minor roads or nonessential utilities may be constructed at
lower elevations if they are designed to withstand flood forces
to the regional flood elevation.
(7) Sewage systems. All sewage disposal systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwater into the system,
pursuant to § 290-7E(3), to the flood protection elevation and meet
the provisions of all local ordinances and Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm.
Code.
(8) Wells. All wells shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system, pursuant to § 290-7E(3),
§ 290-4 HOBART CODE § 290-4
1:494
§ 290-5. General Floodplain District (GFP).
to the flood protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of
Chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
(9) Solid waste disposal sites. Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is
prohibited in flood-fringe areas.
(10) Deposition of materials. Any deposited material must meet all the
provisions of this chapter.
(11) Manufactured homes.
(a) Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall provide adequate surface drainage to
minimize flood damage, and prepare, secure approval and file
an evacuation plan, indicating vehicular access and escape
routes, with local emergency management authorities.
(b) In existing manufactured home parks, all new homes,
replacement homes on existing pads, and substantially
improved homes shall:
[1] Have the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection
elevation; and
[2] Be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move laterally
during a flood.
(c) Outside of existing manufactured home parks, including new
manufactured home parks and all single units outside of
existing parks, all new, replacement and substantially
improved manufactured homes shall meet the residential
development standards for the flood-fringe in Subsection C(1).
(12) Mobile recreational vehicles. All mobile recreational vehicles that
are on site for 180 consecutive days or more or are not fully
licensed and ready for highway use shall meet the elevation and
anchoring requirements in Subsection C(11)(b) and (c). A mobile
recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect
utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
A. Applicability. The provisions for this district shall apply to all floodplains
mapped as A, AO or AH zones.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Pursuant to § 290-5D, it shall be determined whether the proposed
use is located within the floodway or flood-fringe.
§ 290-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-5
1:495
§ 290-6. Nonconforming uses.
(2) Those uses permitted in the Floodway (§ 290-3B) and Flood-Fringe
(§ 290-4B) Districts are allowed within the General Floodplain
District, according to the standards of Subsection C, provided that
all permits or certificates required under § 290-7A have been
issued.
C. Standards for development in the General Floodplain District. Section
290-3 applies to floodway areas; § 290-4 applies to flood-fringe areas.
The rest of this chapter applies to either district.
(1) In AO/AH Zones, the structure's lowest floor must meet one of the
conditions listed below, whichever is higher:
(a) At or above the flood protection elevation;
(b) Two feet above the highest adjacent grade around the
structure; or
(c) The depth as shown on the FIRM.
(2) In AO/AH zones, provide plans showing adequate drainage paths to
guide floodwaters around structures.
D. Determining floodway and flood-fringe limits. Upon receiving an
application for development within the General Floodplain District, the
Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector shall:
(1) Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph
or a plan which shows the proposed development with respect to
the general floodplain district limits, stream channel, and existing
floodplain developments, along with a legal description of the
property, fill limits and elevations, building floor elevations and
floodproofing measures; and the flood zone as shown on the FIRM.
(2) Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information
deemed necessary by the Department to evaluate the effects of the
proposal upon flood height and flood flows, regional flood elevation
and to determine floodway boundaries.
(a) A hydrologic and hydraulic study as specified in § 290-7A(2)(c).
(b) Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the
ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size,
location and layout of all proposed and existing structures on
the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply, and
sanitary facilities; soil types and other pertinent information;
(c) Specifications for building construction and materials,
floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement, storage,
water supply and sanitary facilities.
§ 290-5 HOBART CODE § 290-6
1:496
A. General.
(1) Applicability. If these standards conform with § 62.23(7)(h), Wis.
Stats., for cities and villages, they shall apply to all modifications or
additions to any nonconforming use or structure and to the use of
any structure or premises which was lawful before the passage of
this chapter or any amendment thereto.132
(2) The existing lawful use of a structure or its accessory use which is
not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter may continue,
subject to the following conditions:
(a) No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or
structure shall be permitted unless they comply with this
chapter. The words "modification" and "addition" include, but
are not limited to: any alteration, addition, modification,
structural repair, rebuilding or replacement of any such
existing use, structure or accessory structure or use.
Maintenance is not considered a modification; this includes
painting, decorating, paneling and other nonstructural
components and the maintenance, repair or replacement of
existing private sewage or water supply systems or
connections to public utilities. Any costs associated with the
repair of a damaged structure are not considered maintenance.
The construction of a deck that does not exceed 200 square
feet and that is adjacent to the exterior wall of a principal
structure is not an extension, modification or addition. The roof
of the structure may extend over a portion of the deck in order
to provide safe ingress and egress to the principal structure;
(b) If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure
is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, it is no longer
permitted and any future use of the property, and any structure
or building thereon shall conform to the applicable
requirements of this chapter;
(c) The municipality shall keep a record which lists all
nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures, their
present equalized assessed value, the cost of all modifications
or additions which have been permitted, and the percentage of
the structure's total current value those modifications
represent;
(d) No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or
any structure with a nonconforming use, which over the life of
the structure would equal or exceed 50% of its present
equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire
structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure
with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable
132. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 290-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-6
1:497
requirements of this chapter. Contiguous dry land access must
be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance
with § 290-4C(1). The costs of elevating the lowest floor of a
nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming
use to the flood protection elevation are excluded from the 50%
provisions of this subsection;
(e) No maintenance to any nonconforming structure or any
structure with a nonconforming use, the cost of which would
equal or exceed 50% of its present equalized assessed value,
shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently
changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in
compliance with the applicable requirements of this chapter.
Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential
and commercial uses in compliance with § 290-4C(1);
(f) If on a per-event basis the total value of the work being done
under Subsection A(2)(d) and (e) equals or exceeds 50% of the
present equalized assessed value, the work shall not be
permitted unless the entire structure is permanently changed
to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance
with the applicable requirements of this chapter. Contiguous
dry land access must be provided for residential and
commercial uses in compliance with § 290-4C(1);
(g) Except as provided in Subsection A(2)(h), if any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use is
destroyed or is substantially damaged, it cannot be replaced,
reconstructed or rebuilt unless the use and the structure meet
the current ordinance requirements. A structure is considered
substantially damaged if the total cost to restore the structure
to its predamaged condition equals or exceeds 50% of the
structure's present equalized assessed value;
(h) For nonconforming buildings that are substantially damaged or
destroyed by a non-flood disaster, the repair or reconstruction
of any such nonconforming building shall be permitted in order
to restore it to the size and use in effect prior to the damage
event, provided that the minimum federal code requirements
below are met and all required permits have been granted
prior to the start of construction.
[1] Residential structures.
[a] Shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the base flood elevation using fill,
pilings, columns, posts or perimeter walls. Perimeter
walls must meet the requirements of § 290-7E(2).
[b] Shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
§ 290-6 HOBART CODE § 290-6
1:498
effects of buoyancy and shall be constructed with
methods and materials resistant to flood damage.
[c] Shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or
elevated so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
[d] In A Zones, obtain, review and utilize any flood data
available from a federal, state or other source.
[e] In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have
the lowest floor, including basement, meet the
standards in § 290-5C(1).
[f] In AO Zones, shall have adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters
around and away from the structure.
[2] Nonresidential structures.
[a] Shall meet the requirements of Subsection
A(2)(h)[1][a] through [b] and [e] through [g].
[b] Shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the regional flood elevation; or,
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities,
shall meet the standards in § 290-7E(1) or (2).
[c] In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have
the lowest floor, including basement, meet the
standards in § 290-5C(1).
(3) A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration
will not preclude the structures continued designation as a historic
structure, the alteration will comply with § 290-3C(1), floodresistant
materials are used, and construction practices and
floodproofing methods that comply with § 290-7E are used. Repair
or rehabilitation of historic structures shall be exempt from the
development standards of § 290-6A(2)(h)[1] if it is determined that
the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure and is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
B. Floodway District.
(1) No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use in the
Floodway District, unless such modification or addition:
§ 290-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-6
1:499
(a) Has been granted a permit or variance which meets all chapter
requirements;
(b) Meets the requirements of Subsection A;
(c) Shall not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional
flood height;
(d) Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed,
pursuant to § 290-7E, by means other than the use of fill, to the
flood protection elevation; and
(e) If any part of the foundation below the flood protection
elevation is enclosed, the following standards shall apply:
[1] The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered
architect or engineer to allow for the efficient entry and
exit of floodwaters without human intervention. A
minimum of two openings must be provided with a
minimum net area of at least one square inch for every one
square foot of the enclosed area. The lowest part of the
opening can be no more than 12 inches above the adjacent
grade;
[2] The parts of the foundation located below the flood
protection elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant
materials;
[3] Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or
floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation;
and
[4] The use must be limited to parking, building access or
limited storage.
(2) No new on-site sewage disposal system, or addition to an existing
on-site sewage disposal system, except where an addition has been
ordered by a government agency to correct a hazard to public
health, shall be allowed in the Floodway District. Any replacement,
repair or maintenance of an existing on-site sewage disposal
system in a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements
of all municipal ordinances, § 290-7E(3) and Ch. SPS 383, Wis.
Adm. Code.
(3) No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain
potable water shall be allowed in the Floodway District. Any
replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing well in the
Floodway District shall meet the applicable requirements of all
municipal ordinances, § 290-7E(3) and Chs. NR 811 and NR 812,
Wis. Adm. Code.
C. Flood-Fringe District.
§ 290-6 HOBART CODE § 290-6
1:500
§ 290-7. Administration.
Where a Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector, planning agency or a
board of adjustment/appeals has already been appointed to administer a
zoning ordinance adopted under § 59.69, 59.692 or 62.23(7), Wis. Stats.,
these officials shall also administer this chapter.
(1) No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use unless such
modification or addition has been granted a permit or variance by
the municipality, and meets the requirements of § 290-4C, except
where Subsection C(2) is applicable.
(2) Where compliance with the provisions of Subsection C(1) would
result in unnecessary hardship and only where the structure will
not be used for human habitation or be associated with a high flood
damage potential, the Board of Appeals, using the procedures
established in § 290-7C, may grant a variance from those provisions
of Subsection C(1) for modifications or additions using the criteria
listed below. Modifications or additions which are protected to
elevations lower than the flood protection elevation may be
permitted if:
(a) No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for
residential or commercial structures;
(b) Human lives are not endangered;
(c) Public facilities, such as water or sewer, shall not be installed;
(d) Flood depths shall not exceed two feet;
(e) Flood velocities shall not exceed two feet per second; and
(f) The structure shall not be used for storage of materials as
described in § 290-4C(5).
(3) All new private sewage disposal systems, or addition to,
replacement, repair or maintenance of a private sewage disposal
system shall meet all the applicable provisions of all local
ordinances, § 290-7E(3) and Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code.
(4) All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of
a well shall meet the applicable provisions of this chapter,
§ 290-7E(3) and Chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
A. Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector.
(1) Duties and powers. The Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector is
authorized to administer this chapter and shall have the following
duties and powers:
§ 290-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-7
1:501
(a) Advise applicants of the ordinance provisions, assist in
preparing permit applications and appeals, and assure that the
regional flood elevation for the proposed development is shown
on all permit applications.
(b) Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with
provisions of this chapter and issue certificates of compliance
where appropriate.
(c) Inspect and assess all damaged floodplain structures to
determine if substantial damage to the structures has
occurred.
(d) Keep records of all official actions such as:
[1] All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved;
[2] Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood
elevations;
[3] Floodproofing certificates.
[4] Water surface profiles, Floodplain Zoning Maps and
ordinances, nonconforming uses and structures including
changes, appeals, variances and amendments.
[5] All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain
structures.
[6] List of nonconforming structures and uses.
(e) Submit copies of the following items to the Department
Regional office:
[1] Within 10 days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on
variances, appeals for map or text interpretations, and
map or text amendments;
[2] Copies of case-by-case analyses and other required
information including an annual summary of floodplain
zoning actions taken;
[3] Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and
all related correspondence concerning the assessments.
(f) Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this
chapter to the municipal zoning agency and attorney for
prosecution. Copies of the reports shall also be sent to the
Department Regional office.
(g) Submit copies of amendments and biennial reports to the
FEMA Regional office.
§ 290-7 HOBART CODE § 290-7
1:502
(2) Land use permit. A land use permit shall be obtained before any
new development; repair, modification or addition to an existing
structure; or change in the use of a building or structure, including
sewer and water facilities, may be initiated. Application to the
Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector shall include:
(a) General information.
[1] Name and address of the applicant, property owner and
contractor;
[2] Legal description, proposed use, and whether it is new
construction or a modification.
(b) Site development plan: A site plan drawn to scale shall be
submitted with the permit application form and shall contain:
[1] Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot;
[2] Location of the ordinary high-water mark of any abutting
navigable waterways;
[3] Location of any structures with distances measured from
the lot lines and street center lines;
[4] Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage
systems or private water supply systems;
[5] Location and elevation of existing or future access roads;
[6] Location of floodplain and floodway limits as determined
from the official Floodplain Zoning Maps;
[7] The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and
any fill using the vertical datum from the adopted study,
either National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD);
[8] Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in
NGVD or NAVD at the location of the development and to
determine whether or not the requirements of § 290-3 or
290-4 are met; and
[9] Data to determine if the proposed development will cause
an obstruction to flow or an increase in regional flood
height or discharge according to § 290-2A. This may
include any of the information noted in § 290-3C(1).
(c) Hydraulic and hydrologic studies to analyze development. All
hydraulic and hydrologic studies shall be completed under the
direct supervision of a professional engineer registered in the
state. The study contractor shall be responsible for the
technical adequacy of the study. All studies shall be reviewed
and approved by the Department.
§ 290-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-7
1:503
[1] Zone A floodplains:
[a] Hydrology.
[i] The appropriate method shall be based on the
standards in § NR 116.07(3), Wis. Admin. Code,
Hydrologic Analysis: Determination of Regional
Flood Discharge.
[b] Hydraulic modeling. The regional flood elevation shall
be based on the standards in § NR 116.07(4), Wis.
Admin. Code, Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of
Regional Flood Elevation, and the following:
[i] Determination of the required limits of the
hydraulic model shall be based on detailed study
information for downstream structures (dam,
bridge, culvert) to determine adequate starting
WSEL for the study.
[ii] Channel sections must be surveyed.
[iii] Minimum four-foot contour data in the overbanks
shall be used for the development of cross-section
overbank and floodplain mapping.
[iv] A maximum distance of 500 feet between cross
sections is allowed in developed areas with
additional intermediate cross sections required at
transitions in channel bottom slope including a
survey of the channel at each location.
[v] The most current version of HEC-RAS shall be
used.
[vi] A survey of bridge and culvert openings and the
top of road is required at each structure.
[vii] Additional cross sections are required at the
downstream and upstream limits of the proposed
development and any necessary intermediate
locations based on the length of the reach if
greater than 500 feet.
[viii] Standard accepted engineering practices shall be
used when assigning parameters for the base
model such as flow, Manning's N values,
expansion and contraction coefficients or effective
flow limits. The base model shall be calibrated to
past flooding data such as high water marks to
determine the reasonableness of the model
results. If no historical data is available, adequate
§ 290-7 HOBART CODE § 290-7
1:504
justification shall be provided for any parameters
outside standard accepted engineering practices.
[ix] The model must extend past the upstream limit of
the difference in the existing and proposed flood
profiles in order to provide a tie-in to existing
studies. The height difference between the
proposed flood profile and the existing study
profiles shall be no more than 0.00 feet.
[c] Mapping. A work map of the reach studied shall be
provided, showing all cross section locations,
floodway/floodplain limits based on best available
topographic data, geographic limits of the proposed
development and whether the proposed development
is located in the floodway.
[i] If the proposed development is located outside of
the floodway, then it is determined to have no
impact on the regional flood elevation.
[ii] If any part of the proposed development is in the
floodway, it must be added to the base model to
show the difference between existing and
proposed conditions. The study must ensure that
all coefficients remain the same as in the existing
model, unless adequate justification based on
standard accepted engineering practices is
provided.
[2] Zone AE floodplains.
[a] Hydrology. If the proposed hydrology will change the
existing study, the appropriate method to be used shall
be based on § NR 116.07(3), Wis. Admin. Code,
Hydrologic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood
Discharge.
[b] Hydraulic model. The regional flood elevation shall be
based on the standards in § NR 116.07(4), Wis. Admin.
Code, Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of Regional
Flood Elevation and the following:
[i] Duplicate effective model. The effective model
shall be reproduced to ensure correct
transference of the model data and to allow
integration of the revised data to provide a
continuous FIS model upstream and downstream
of the revised reach. If data from the effective
model is available, models shall be generated that
duplicate the FIS profiles and the elevations
§ 290-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-7
1:505
shown in the Floodway Data Table in the FIS
report to within 0.1 foot.
[ii] Corrected effective model. The corrected effective
model shall not include any man-made physical
changes since the effective model date, but shall
import the model into the most current version of
HEC-RAS for Department review.
[iii] Existing (pre-project conditions) model. The
existing model shall be required to support
conclusions about the actual impacts of the
project associated with the revised (post-project)
model or to establish more up-to-date models on
which to base the revised (post-project) model.
[iv] Revised (post-project conditions) model. The
revised (post-project conditions) model shall
incorporate the existing model and any proposed
changes to the topography caused by the
proposed development. This model shall reflect
proposed conditions.
[v] All changes to the duplicate effective model and
subsequent models must be supported by
certified topographic information, bridge plans,
construction plans and survey notes.
[vi] Changes to the hydraulic models shall be limited
to the stream reach for which the revision is being
requested. Cross sections upstream and
downstream of the revised reach shall be identical
to those in the effective model and result in water
surface elevations and top widths computed by
the revised models matching those in the effective
models upstream and downstream of the revised
reach as required. The effective model shall not
be truncated.
[c] Mapping. Maps and associated engineering data shall
be submitted to the Department for review which
meet the following conditions:
[i] Consistency between the revised hydraulic
models, the revised floodplain and floodway
delineations, the revised flood profiles,
topographic work map, annotated FIRMs and/or
Flood Boundary Floodway Maps (FBFMs),
construction plans, bridge plans.
[ii] Certified topographic map of suitable scale,
contour interval, and a planimetric map showing
§ 290-7 HOBART CODE § 290-7
1:506
the applicable items. If a digital version of the
map is available, it may be submitted in order that
the FIRM may be more easily revised.
[iii] Annotated FIRM panel showing the revised 1%
and 0.2% annual-chance floodplains and floodway
boundaries.
[iv] If an annotated FIRM and/or FBFM and digital
mapping data (GIS or CADD) are used, then all
supporting documentation or metadata must be
included with the data submission along with the
Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) projection
and State Plane Coordinate System in accordance
with FEMA mapping specifications.
[v] The revised floodplain boundaries shall tie into
the effective floodplain boundaries.
[vi] All cross sections from the effective model shall
be labeled in accordance with the effective map
and a cross section lookup table shall be included
to relate to the model input numbering scheme.
[vii] Both the current and proposed floodways shall be
shown on the map.
[viii] The stream center line or profile baseline used to
measure stream distances in the model shall be
visible on the map.
(d) Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this
chapter shall expire no more than 180 days after issuance. The
permit may be extended for a maximum of 180 days for good
and sufficient cause.
(3) Certificate of compliance. No land shall be occupied or used, and
no building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to,
modified, repaired, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied until a
certificate of compliance is issued by the Zoning Administrator/
Building Inspector, except where no permit is required, subject to
the following provisions:
(a) The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or
premises or part thereof, and the proposed use, conform to the
provisions of this chapter;
(b) Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the
application for a permit;
(c) If all ordinance provisions are met, the certificate of
compliance shall be issued within 10 days after written
notification that the permitted work is completed;
§ 290-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-7
1:507
(d) The applicant shall submit a certification signed by a
registered professional engineer, architect or land surveyor
that the fill, lowest floor and floodproofing elevations are in
compliance with the permit issued. Floodproofing measures
also require certification by a registered professional engineer
or architect that the requirements of § 290-7E are met.
(4) Other permits. Prior to obtaining a floodplain development permit
the applicant must secure all necessary permits from federal, state,
and local agencies, including but not limited to those required by
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under § 404 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344.
B. Zoning agency.
(1) The Village of Hobart Planning and Zoning Commission shall:
(a) Oversee the functions of the office of the Zoning Administrator/
Building Inspector; and
(b) Review and advise the governing body on all proposed
amendments to this chapter, maps and text.
(2) The Village of Hobart Planning and Zoning Commission shall not:
(a) Grant variances to the terms of the ordinance in place of action
by the Board of Appeals; or
(b) Amend the text or Zoning Maps in place of official action by the
governing body.
C. Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals, created under § 62.23(7)(e),
Wis. Stats., for cities or villages, is hereby authorized or shall be
appointed to act for the purposes of this chapter. The Board shall
exercise the powers conferred by Wisconsin Statutes and adopt rules
for the conduct of business. The Zoning Administrator/Building
Inspector shall not be the secretary of the Board.133
(1) Powers and duties. The Board of Appeals shall:
(a) Appeals. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is
an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination
made by an administrative official in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter;
(b) Boundary disputes. Hear and decide disputes concerning the
district boundaries shown on the official floodplain Zoning
Map; and
(c) Variances. Hear and decide, upon appeal, variances from the
chapter standards.
133. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 290-7 HOBART CODE § 290-7
1:508
(2) Appeals to the Board.
(a) Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved, or
by any officer or department of the municipality affected by
any decision of the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector or
other administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within
30 days unless otherwise provided by the rules of the Board, by
filing with the official whose decision is in question, and with
the Board, a notice of appeal specifying the reasons for the
appeal. The official whose decision is in question shall transmit
to the Board all records regarding the matter appealed.
(b) Notice and hearing for appeals, including variances.
[1] Notice. The Board shall:
[a] Fix a reasonable time for the hearing;
[b] Publish adequate notice pursuant to Wisconsin
Statutes, specifying the date, time, place and subject
of the hearing; and
[c] Assure that notice shall be mailed to the parties in
interest and the Department Regional office at least
10 days in advance of the hearing.
[2] Hearing. Any party may appear in person or by agent. The
Board shall:
[a] Resolve boundary disputes according to § 290-7C(3);
[b] Decide variance applications according to
§ 290-7C(4); and
[c] Decide appeals of permit denials according to
§ 290-7D.
(c) Decision. The final decision regarding the appeal or variance
application shall:
[1] Be made within a reasonable time;
[2] Be sent to the Department Regional office within 10 days
of the decision;
[3] Be a written determination signed by the Chairperson or
secretary of the Board;
[4] State the specific facts which are the basis for the Board's
decision;
[5] Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed, in whole
§ 290-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-7
1:509
or in part, dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or
grant or deny the variance application; and
[6] Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the
hardship demonstrated by the applicant in the case of a
variance, clearly stated in the recorded minutes of the
Board proceedings.
(3) Boundary disputes. The following procedure shall be used by the
Board in hearing disputes concerning floodplain district
boundaries:
(a) If a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate
or detailed floodplain studies, the flood elevations or profiles
shall prevail in locating the boundary. If none exist, other
evidence may be examined;
(b) The person contesting the boundary location shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to present arguments and technical
evidence to the Board; and
(c) If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the Board should inform
the zoning committee or the person contesting the boundary
location to petition the governing body for a map amendment
according to § 290-8, Amendments.
(4) Variance.
(a) The Board may, upon appeal, grant a variance from the
standards of this chapter if an applicant convincingly
demonstrates that:
[1] Literal enforcement of the chapter will cause unnecessary
hardship;
[2] The hardship is due to adoption of the this chapter and
unique property conditions, not common to adjacent lots
or premises. In such case, the chapter or map must be
amended;
[3] The variance is not contrary to the public interest; and
[4] The variance is consistent with the purpose of this chapter
in § 290-1C.
(b) In addition to the criteria in Subsection C(4)(a), to qualify for a
variance under FEMA regulations, the following criteria must
be met:
[1] The variance shall not cause any increase in the regional
flood elevation;
§ 290-7 HOBART CODE § 290-7
1:510
[2] Variances can only be granted for lots that are less than 1/
2 acre and are contiguous to existing structures
constructed below the RFE; and
[3] Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good
and sufficient cause, shall be the minimum relief
necessary, shall not cause increased risks to public safety
or nuisances, shall not increase costs for rescue and relief
efforts and shall not be contrary to the purpose of the
chapter.
(c) A variance shall not:
[1] Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning
district;
[2] Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic
gain or loss;
[3] Be granted for a hardship which is self-created;
[4] Damage the rights or property values of other persons in
the area;
[5] Allow actions without the amendments to this chapter or
map(s) required in § 290-8, Amendments; and
[6] Allow any alteration of an historic structure, including its
use, which would preclude its continued designation as an
historic structure.
(d) When a floodplain variance is granted, the Board shall notify
the applicant in writing that it may increase risks to life and
property and flood insurance premiums could increase. A copy
shall be maintained with the variance record.
D. To review appeals of permit denials.
(1) The Zoning Agency (Subsection B) or Board shall review all data
related to the appeal. This may include:
(a) Permit application data listed in § 290-7A(2);
(b) Floodway/flood-fringe determination data in § 290-5D;
(c) Data listed in § 290-3C(1)(b) where the applicant has not
submitted this information to the Zoning Administrator/
Building Inspector; and
(d) Other data submitted with the application, or submitted to the
Board with the appeal.
(2) For appeals of all denied permits the Board shall:
(a) Follow the procedures of § 290-7C;
§ 290-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-7
1:511
(b) Consider zoning agency recommendations; and
(c) Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal.
(3) For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation, the
Board shall:
(a) Uphold the denial where the Board agrees with the data
showing an increase in flood elevation. Increases may only be
allowed after amending the flood profile and map and all
appropriate legal arrangements are made with all adversely
affected property owners as per the requirements of § 290-8,
Amendments; and
(b) Grant the appeal where the Board agrees that the data
properly demonstrates that the project does not cause an
increase, provided no other reasons for denial exist.
E. Floodproofing standards for noncomforming structures or uses.
(1) No permit or variance shall be issued for a nonresidential structure
designed to be watertight below the regional flood elevation until
the applicant submits a plan certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures will protect
the structure or development to the flood protection elevation and
submits a FEMA floodproofing certificate.
(2) For a structure designed to allow the entry of floodwaters, no
permit or variance shall be issued until the applicant submits a plan
either:
(a) Certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or
(b) Meets or exceeds the following standards:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding;
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade; and
[3] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves,
or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(3) Floodproofing measures shall be designed, as appropriate, to:
(a) Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact
forces and other regional flood factors;
(b) Protect structures to the flood protection elevation;
§ 290-7 HOBART CODE § 290-7
1:512
§ 290-8. Amendments.
(c) Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral
movement; and
(d) Minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters.
(e) Minimize or eliminate discharges into floodwaters.
F. Public information.
(1) Place marks on structures to show the depth of inundation during
the regional flood.
(2) All maps, engineering data and regulations shall be available and
widely distributed.
(3) Real estate transfers should show what floodplain district any real
property is in.
A. Obstructions or increases may only be permitted if amendments are
made to this chapter, the official Floodplain Zoning Maps, floodway
lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with Subsection B.
(1) In AE Zones with a mapped floodway, no obstructions or increases
shall be permitted unless the applicant receives a Conditional
Letter of Map Revision from FEMA and amendments are made to
this chapter, the official Floodplain Zoning Maps, floodway lines
and water surface profiles, in accordance with Subsection B. Any
such alterations must be reviewed and approved by FEMA and the
DNR.
(2) In A Zones, increases equal to or greater than 1.0 foot may only be
permitted if the applicant receives a Conditional Letter of Map
Revision from FEMA and amendments are made to this chapter, the
official floodplain maps, floodway lines, and water surface profiles,
in accordance with Subsection B.
B. General. The governing body shall change or supplement the floodplain
zoning district boundaries and this chapter in the manner outlined in
Subsection C below. Actions which require an amendment to the
ordinance and/or submittal of a Letter of Map Change (LOMC) include,
but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Any fill or floodway encroachment that obstructs flow causing any
increase in the regional flood height;
(2) Any change to the floodplain boundaries and/or watercourse
alterations on the FIRM;
(3) Any changes to any other officially adopted floodplain maps listed
in § 290-1E(2)(b);
§ 290-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-8
1:513
§ 290-9. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter by any person shall be
unlawful and shall be referred to the municipal attorney who shall
expeditiously prosecute all such violators. A violator shall, upon conviction,
forfeit to the municipality a penalty of not less than $5 and not more than
$50, together with a taxable cost of such action. Each day of continued
violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this chapter
is a public nuisance and the creation may be enjoined and the maintenance
(4) Any floodplain fill which raises the elevation of the filled area to a
height at or above the flood protection elevation and is contiguous
to land lying outside the floodplain;
(5) Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles and
floodplain maps;
(6) Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning ordinance text required by § NR
116.05, Wis. Adm. Code, or otherwise required by law, or for
changes by the municipality; and
(7) All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway
lines or to remove an area from the floodway or the flood-fringe
that is based on a base flood elevation from a FIRM requires prior
approval by FEMA.
C. Procedures. Ordinance amendments may be made upon petition of any
party according to the provisions of § 62.23, Wis. Stats., for cities and
villages. The petitions shall include all data required by §§ 290-5D and
290-7A(2). The land use permit shall not be issued until a Letter of Map
Revision is issued by FEMA for the proposed changes.134
(1) The proposed amendment shall be referred to the zoning agency
for a public hearing and recommendation to the governing body.
The amendment and notice of public hearing shall be submitted to
the Department regional office for review prior to the hearing. The
amendment procedure shall comply with the provisions of § 62.23,
Wis. Stats., for cities and villages.
(2) No amendments shall become effective until reviewed and
approved by the Department.
(3) All persons petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs flow
causing any increase in the regional flood height, shall obtain
flooding easements or other appropriate legal arrangements from
all adversely affected property owners and notify local units of
government before the amendment can be approved by the
governing body.
134. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 290-8 HOBART CODE § 290-9
1:514
may be abated by action at suit of the municipality, the state, or any citizen
thereof pursuant to § 87.30, Wis. Stats.
§ 290-10. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined, words and phrases in this chapter shall have
their common law meaning and shall be applied in accordance with their
common usage. Words used in the present tense include the future, the
singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the
singular. The word "may" is permissive, "shall" is mandatory and is not
discretionary.
A ZONES — Those areas shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map
which would be inundated by the regional flood. These areas may be
numbered or unnumbered A Zones. The A Zones may or may not be
reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a given
area.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE — A facility, structure, building or use
which is accessory or incidental to the principal use of a property, structure
or building.
AH ZONE — See "area of shallow flooding."
ALTERATION — An enhancement, upgrading or substantial change or
modifications other than an addition or repair to a dwelling or to electrical,
plumbing, heating, ventilating, air conditioning and other systems within a
structure.
AO ZONE — See "area of shallow flooding."
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or
VO zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a onepercent
or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one foot
to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flood may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year, as published by FEMA as part of a FIS and
depicted on a FIRM.
BASEMENT — Any enclosed area of a building having its floor subgrade,
i.e., below ground level, on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
BULKHEAD LINE — A geographic line along a reach of navigable water
that has been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the
Department pursuant to § 30.11, Wis. Stats., and which allows limited filling
between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary high water mark,
except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this
chapter.
CAMPGROUND — Any parcel of land which is designed, maintained,
intended or used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent
§ 290-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-10
1:515
overnight use by four or more camping units, or which is advertised or
represented as a camping area.
CAMPING UNIT — Any portable device, no more than 400 square feet in
area, used as a temporary shelter, including but not limited to a camping
trailer, motor home, bus, van, pickup truck, or tent that is fully licensed, if
required, and ready for highway use.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A certification that the construction and
the use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a
structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks
to confine and conduct normal flow of water.
CRAWLWAYS or CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area below the first usable
floor of a building, generally less than five feet in height, used for access to
plumbing and electrical utilities.
DECK — An unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides, but has
a permeable floor which allows the infiltration of precipitation.
DEPARTMENT — The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
DEVELOPMENT — Any artificial change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings,
structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or
alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the repair of
any damaged structure or the improvement or renovation of any structure,
regardless of percentage of damage or improvement; the placement of
buildings or structures; subdivision layout and site preparation; mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; the
storage, deposition or extraction of materials or equipment; and the
installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems
or water supply facilities.
DRYLAND ACCESS — A vehicular access route which is above the regional
flood elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land
outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above regional flood
elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles.
ENCROACHMENT — Any fill, structure, equipment, use or development in
the floodway.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) — The federal
agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — A map of a community on which
the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the floodplain and
the risk premium zones applicable to the community. This map can only be
amended by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD FREQUENCY — The probability of a flood occurrence which is
determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a particular flood
event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average, once in a specified
number of years or as a percent chance of occurring in any given year.
§ 290-10 HOBART CODE § 290-10
1:516
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP — A map designating approximate flood
hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered A Zones
and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations. This map
forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects of the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) until superseded by a Flood
Insurance Study and a Flood Insurance Rate Map.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — A technical engineering examination,
evaluation, and determination of the local flood hazard areas. It provides
maps designating those areas affected by the regional flood and provides
both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations and may provide
floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered and
unnumbered A Zones. Flood Insurance Rate Maps, that accompany the
Flood Insurance Study, form the basis for both the regulatory and the
insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by one of the
following conditions:
FLOOD PROFILE — A graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the
relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations of
land surface elevations along a stream or river.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION — An elevation of two feet of freeboard
above the water surface profile elevation designated for the regional flood.
(Also see "freeboard.")
FLOOD STORAGE — Those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters
has been taken into account during analysis in reducing the regional flood
discharge.
FLOOD-FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway
which is covered by floodwaters during the regional flood and associated
with standing water rather than flowing water.
FLOODPLAIN — Land which has been or may be covered by floodwater
during the regional flood. It includes the floodway and the flood-fringe, and
may include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory purposes.
A. The overflow or rise of inland waters;
B. The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source;
The inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels along the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake
Superior; or
C.
The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a
natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an
unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly
unusual event.
D.
§ 290-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-10
1:517
FLOODPLAIN ISLAND — A natural geologic land formation within the
floodplain that is surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the
regional flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — Policy and procedures to insure wise use
of floodplains, including mapping and engineering, mitigation, education,
and administration and enforcement of floodplain regulations.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural provisions, changes or
adjustments to properties and structures, water and sanitary facilities and
contents of buildings subject to flooding, for the purpose of reducing or
eliminating flood damage.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood
discharge.
FREEBOARD — A safety factor expressed in terms of a specified number
of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for any
factors that cause flood heights greater than those calculated, including ice
jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and
floodways, the effects of watershed urbanization, loss of flood storage areas
due to development and aggregation of the river or stream bed.
HABITABLE STRUCTURE — Any structure or portion thereof used or
designed for human habitation.
HEARING NOTICE — Publication or posting meeting the requirements
of Ch. 985, Wis. Stats. For appeals, a Class 1 notice, published once at
least one week (seven days) before the hearing, is required. For all zoning
ordinances and amendments, a Class 2 notice, published twice, once each
week consecutively, the last at least a week (seven days) before the hearing.
Local ordinances or bylaws may require additional notice, exceeding these
minimums.
HIGH FLOOD DAMAGE POTENTIAL — Damage that could result from
flooding that includes any danger to life or health or any significant
economic loss to a structure or building and its contents.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is either:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
§ 290-10 HOBART CODE § 290-10
1:518
INCREASE IN REGIONAL FLOOD HEIGHT — A calculated upward rise in
the regional flood elevation greater than 0.00 foot, based on a comparison
of existing conditions and proposed conditions which is directly attributable
to development in the floodplain but not attributable to manipulation of
mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and
contraction coefficients and discharge.
LAND USE — Any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real
estate. (Also see "development.")
LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE — Elevation of the lowest ground surface that
touches any of the exterior walls of a building.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.
MAINTENANCE — The act or process of restoring to original soundness,
including redecorating, refinishing, nonstructural repairs, or the
replacement of existing fixtures, systems or equipment with equivalent
fixtures, systems or structures.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be
used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes a mobile home but does
not include a "mobile recreational vehicle."
MOBILE RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single
chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection, designed to be self-propelled, carried or permanently towable by
a licensed, light-duty vehicle, is licensed for highway use if registration is
required and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use. Manufactured homes that are towed or carried onto a parcel of land,
but do not remain capable of being towed or carried, including park model
homes, do not fall within the definition of "mobile recreational vehicles."
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land, divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by
an approved state program, as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior; or by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
D.
§ 290-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-10
1:519
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION, EXISTING —
A parcel of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for
rent or sale, on which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
is completed before the effective date of this chapter. At a minimum, this
would include the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK, EXPANSION TO EXISTING —
The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed. This
includes installation of utilities, construction of streets and either final site
grading, or the pouring if concrete pads.
MODEL, CORRECTED EFFECTIVE — A hydraulic engineering model that
corrects any errors that occur in the duplicate effective model, adds any
additional cross sections to the duplicate effective model, or incorporates
more detailed topographic information than that used in the current
effective model.
MODEL, DUPLICATE EFFECTIVE — A copy of the hydraulic analysis used
in the effective FIS and referred to as the "effective model."
MODEL, EFFECTIVE — The hydraulic engineering model that was used to
produce the current effective Flood Insurance Study.
MODEL, EXISTING (PRE-PROJECT) — A modification of the duplicate
effective model or corrected effective model to reflect any man-made
modifications that have occurred within the floodplain since the date of the
effective model but prior to the construction of the project for which the
revision is being requested. If no modification has occurred since the date
of the effective model, then this model would be identical to the corrected
effective model or duplicate effective model.
MODEL, REVISED (POST-PROJECT) — A modification of the existing or preproject
conditions model, duplicate effective model or corrected effective
model to reflect revised or post-project conditions.
MUNICIPALITY or MUNICIPAL — The Village of Hobart, Brown County,
Wisconsin.135
NAVD or NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM — Elevations referenced
to mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For floodplain management purposes, "new
construction" means structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain zoning regulations
adopted by this community and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures. For the purpose of determining flood insurance rates, it
includes any structures for which the start of construction commenced on
or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974,
whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
135. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 290-10 HOBART CODE § 290-10
1:520
NGVD or NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM — Elevations
referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — An existing lawful structure or
building which is not in conformity with the dimensional or structural
requirements of this chapter for the area of the floodplain which it occupies.
(For example, an existing residential structure in the flood-fringe district
is a conforming use. However, if the lowest floor is lower than the flood
protection elevation, the structure is nonconforming.)
NONCONFORMING USE — An existing lawful use or accessory use of a
structure or building which is not in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter for the area of the floodplain which it occupies (such as a residence
in the floodway).
OBSTRUCTION TO FLOW — Any development which blocks the conveyance
of floodwaters such that this development alone or together with any future
development will cause an increase in regional flood height.
OFFICIAL FLOODPLAIN ZONING MAP — That map, adopted and made
part of this chapter, as described in § 290-1E(2), which has been approved
by the Department and FEMA.
OPEN SPACE USE — Those uses having a relatively low flood damage
potential and not involving structures.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK — The point on the bank or shore up
to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to
leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of
terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily
recognized characteristic.
PERSON — An individual, or group of individuals, corporation, partnership,
association, municipality or state agency.
PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEM — A sewage treatment and disposal system
serving one structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field located
on the same parcel as the structure. It also means an alternative sewage
system approved by the Department of Safety and Professional Services,
including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption field, a holding
tank, a system serving more than one structure or a system located on a
different parcel than the structure.
PUBLIC UTILITIES — Those utilities using underground or overhead
transmission lines such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and
distribution and collection systems such as water, sanitary sewer and storm
sewer.
REASONABLY SAFE FROM FLOODING — Base floodwaters will not
inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the floodplain
and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage
existing or proposed buildings.
REGIONAL FLOOD — A flood determined to be representative of large
floods known to have occurred in Wisconsin. A regional flood is a flood with
§ 290-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-10
1:521
a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and if
depicted on the FIRM, the RFE is equivalent to the BFE.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement
of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such
as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For
an alteration, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object with form, shape and utility, either
permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground,
stream bed or lake bed, including, but not limited to, roofed and walled
buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts.
SUBDIVISION — Has the meaning given in § 236.02(12), Wis. Stats.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure,
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the equalized assessed value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the equalized assessed value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure
has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial
improvement regardless of the work preformed. The term does not,
however, include either any project for the improvement of a building
required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations
identified by the Zoning Administrator/Building Official and that are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or any alteration of
a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP — Where special conditions affecting a
particular property, which were not self-created, have made strict
conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height or
density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes
of the chapter.
§ 290-10 HOBART CODE § 290-10
1:522
VARIANCE — An authorization by the Board of Appeals for the construction
or maintenance of a building or structure in a manner which is inconsistent
with dimensional standards (not uses) contained in this chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without
required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, floodproofing
certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to
be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE PROFILE — A graphical representation showing the
elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along a
reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile of
the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas.
WATERSHED — The entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a
watercourse or body of water.
WELL — An excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring,
drilling, driving or other methods, to obtain groundwater regardless of its
intended use.
Chapter 293
SHORELAND ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Agricultural shoreland management — See
Ch. 288.
Floodplain zoning — See Ch. 290.
Zoning — See Ch. 295.
§ 293-1. Statutory authorization, findings of fact, statement of
purpose and title.
A. Statutory authorization. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the
authorization in §§ 61.35, 61.351, 87.30 and 281.31, Wis. Stats.136
B. Finding of fact. Uncontrolled use of the shorelands and pollution of the
navigable waters of the Village of Hobart would adversely affect the
public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare and impair the
tax base. The Legislature of Wisconsin has delegated responsibility to
villages to further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions;
prevent and control water pollution; protect spawning grounds, fish and
aquatic life; control building sites, placement of structures and land
uses; and to preserve shore cover and natural beauty. This
responsibility is hereby recognized by the Village of Hobart, Wisconsin.
136. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 290-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 293-1
1:523
§ 293-2. General provisions.
C. Purpose. For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety,
convenience and welfare, this chapter has been established to:
(1) Further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions and
prevent and control water pollution through:
(a) Limiting structures to those areas where soil and geological
conditions will provide a safe foundation.
(b) Establishing minimum lot sizes to provide adequate area for
private sewage disposal facilities.
(c) Controlling filling and grading to prevent serious soil erosion
problems.
(2) Protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life through:
(a) Preserving wetlands and other fish and aquatic habitat.
(b) Regulating pollution sources.
(c) Controlling shoreline alterations, dredging and lagooning.
(3) Control building sites, placement of structures and land uses
through:
(a) Separating conflicting land uses.
(b) Prohibiting certain uses detrimental to the shoreland area.
(c) Setting minimum lot sizes and widths.
(d) Regulating side yards and building setbacks from waterways.
(4) Preserve shore cover and natural beauty through:
(a) Restricting the removal of natural shoreland cover.
(b) Preventing shoreline encroachment by structures.
(c) Controlling shoreland excavation and other earthmoving
activities.
(d) Regulating the use and placement of boathouses and other
structures.
D. Title: "Shoreland Zoning Ordinance for the Village of Hobart,
Wisconsin."
A. Areas to be regulated. Areas regulated by this chapter shall include all
the lands (referred to herein as "shorelands") in the unincorporated
areas of the Village of Hobart which are:
§ 293-1 HOBART CODE § 293-2
1:524
(1) Within 1,000 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable
lakes, ponds or flowages. Lakes, ponds or flowages in the Village of
Hobart shall be presumed to be navigable if they are listed in the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources publication "Surface
Water Resources of Brown County" or are shown on United States
Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps.
(2) Within 300 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable rivers
or streams, or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever
distance is greater. Rivers and streams in the Village of Hobart
shall be presumed to be navigable if they are designated as
continuous waterways or intermittent waterways on United States
Geological Survey quadrangle maps. Flood hazard boundary maps,
flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary-floodway maps, county
soil survey maps or other existing county floodplain zoning maps
shall be used to delineate floodplain areas.
(3) Determinations of navigability and ordinary high-water mark
location shall initially be made by the Zoning Administrator/
Building Inspector. When questions arise, the Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector shall contact the appropriate
district office of the Department for a final determination of
navigability or ordinary high-water mark.
(4) Under § 281.31(2m), Wis. Stats., notwithstanding any other
provision of law or administrative rule promulgated thereunder,
this shoreland zoning chapter does not apply to lands adjacent to
farm drainage ditches if:
(a) Such lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable stream or
river;
(b) Those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands
were nonnavigable streams before ditching; and
(c) Such lands are maintained in nonstructural agricultural use.
B. Shoreland Zoning Maps. The maps designated below are hereby
adopted and made part of this chapter. They are on file in the office of
the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector for the Village of Hobart.
(1) United States Geological Survey Quadrangle Maps for Brown
County.
(2) Wisconsin Wetland Inventory maps stamped "FINAL."
(3) Floodplain Zoning Maps.
C. Compliance. The use of any land or water, the size, shape and
placement of lots, the use, size, type and location of structures on lots,
the installation and maintenance of water supply and waste disposal
facilities, the filling, grading, lagooning, dredging of any lands, the
cutting of shoreland vegetation, the subdivision of lots, shall be in full
§ 293-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 293-2
1:525
compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable local,
state or federal regulations. (However, see § 293-9 for standards
applicable to nonconforming uses.) Buildings, signs and other
structures shall require a permit unless otherwise expressly excluded
by a provision of this chapter. Property owners, builders and
contractors are responsible for compliance with the terms of this
chapter.
D. Municipalities and state agencies regulated. Unless specifically
exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are required to
comply with this chapter and obtain all necessary permits. State
agencies are required to comply when § 13.48(13), Wis. Stats., applies.
The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state
highways and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation
are exempt when § 30.2022, Wis. Stats., applies.
E. Abrogation and greater restrictions. The provisions of this chapter
supersede all the provisions of any Village zoning ordinance adopted
under §§ 61.35 and 62.23, Wis. Stats., which relates to shorelands.
However, where an ordinance adopted under a statute other than
§ 61.35 or 62.23, Wis. Stats., is more restrictive than this chapter, that
ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the
greater restrictions, but not otherwise.
(1) If an existing Village ordinance relating to shorelands is more
restrictive than this chapter or any amendments thereto, the
Village ordinance continues in all respects to the extent of the
greater restrictions but not otherwise.
(2) This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. However,
where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of
this chapter shall prevail.
(3) The following provisions of the Brown County Zoning Ordinance
are hereby incorporated by reference; these provisions shall only
apply to the shoreland area where they impose greater restrictions
than this chapter otherwise imposes: The Brown County Private
Sewage System Ordinance, the Brown County Floodplains
Ordinance, and the Brown County Subdivision Ordinance.137
F. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be
liberally construed in favor of the Village and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by Wisconsin Statutes.
Where a provision of this chapter is required by a standard in Ch. NR
115, Wis. Adm. Code, and where the chapter provision is unclear, the
provision shall be interpreted in light of the Ch. NR 115 standards in
137. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 293-2 HOBART CODE § 293-2
1:526
§ 293-3. Land division review and sanitary regulations.
effect on the date of the adoption of this chapter or in effect on the date
of the most recent text amendment to this chapter.
A. Land division review. The Village shall review, pursuant to § 236.45,
Wis. Stats., all land divisions in shoreland areas which create three or
more parcels or building sites of five acres each or less within a fiveyear
period. In such review, the following factors shall be considered:
(1) Hazards to the health, safety or welfare of future residents.
(2) Proper relationship to adjoining areas.
(3) Public access to navigable waters, as required by law.
(4) Adequate storm drainage facilities.
(5) Conformity to state law and administrative code provisions.
B. Limited rezoning to achieve reduced lot sizes and setbacks.
(1) Purpose. In some instances where an individual lot or small tract of
land has unique characteristics, such as unique terrain, which
would result in unnecessary hardship, as defined in § 293-13B, if
the owner were required to comply with one or more of the
requirements for minimum lots sizes, width and setback, the Board
of Appeals may grant a variance. In other instances where larger
areas are involved, the appropriate method for seeking a relaxation
of the same minimum standards is by rezoning to establish a
planned residential unit development overlay. The planned
residential unit development is intended to permit smaller lots and
setbacks where the physical layout of the lots is so arranged (often
by setting them back farther from navigable water) as to better
assure the control of pollution and preservation of ground cover
than would be expected if the lots were developed with the normal
lot sizes and setbacks and without special conditions placed upon
the planned residential unit development at the time of its
approval. A condition of all planned residential unit development is
the preservation of certain open space, preferably on the
shoreland, in perpetuity.
(2) Requirements for planned residential unit development. The
Village Board may, at its discretion, upon its own motion or upon
petition, approve a planned residential unit development either by
approving first an overlay district and then a plat or by approving
only a plat for the specific planned residential project upon finding,
after a public hearing, that all of the following facts exist:
(a) Area. The area proposed for the planned residential unit
development is at least 40 acres in size.
§ 293-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 293-3
1:527
(b) Pollution control. The location and nature of the septic systems
which will serve the home sites individually or collectively will
assure that effluent from the septic systems will not reach the
ground or surface waters in a condition which would
contribute to health hazards, taste, odor, turbidity, fertility or
impair the aesthetic character of navigable waters.
(c) Preservation of ground cover. The location of home sites and
the dedication of part of the land for use by the public or
residents of the planned residential unit development will
preserve the ground cover of the shoreland and scenic beauty
of the navigable water, prevent erosion, and other pertinent
factors. Land not used for lots and streets shall be dedicated in
perpetuity to remain in open space. This may be accomplished
by conveyance in common to each of the owners of lots in the
development or to a corporation formed by them, or by
dedication to the county or Village. Lands dedicated to the
public must be accepted by action of the governing body of the
accepting unit of government. If the land is to be conveyed to
owners of lots in the development, a homeowner's association
or similar legally constituted body shall be created to maintain
the open space land. Any restriction placed on platted land by
covenant, grant of easement or any other manner which was
required by a public body or which names a public body as
grantee, promisee or beneficiary, shall vest in the public body
the right to enforce the restriction at law or in equity against
anyone who has or acquires an interest in the land subject to
the restriction.
(d) Density. The number of platted home sites shall not exceed
those which would have been possible if the same land were
platted in accordance with the minimum lot sizes, setbacks and
widths provided by the applicable provisions of Chapter 295,
Zoning. This figure shall be determined by dividing the total
area of the subdivision, excluding streets, by the minimum lot
sizes required by § 293-4 of this chapter.
(e) Lot sizes, widths, setbacks, and tree-cutting. The lot sizes,
widths, and setbacks shall not be less than those provided for
in Ch. SPS 385, Wis. Adm. Code, and shall not be so small as to
cause pollution or erosion along streets or other public ways
and waterways or so small as to substantially depreciate the
property values in the immediate neighborhood. Shore cover
provisions in § 293-6 shall apply except that maximum width of
a lake frontage opening shall be 100 feet.
(3) Procedure for establishing a planned residential unit development
district. The procedure for establishing limited rezoning in the form
of a planned residential unit development district shall be as
follows:
§ 293-3 HOBART CODE § 293-3
1:528
(a) Petition. A petition setting forth all of the facts required in
Subsection B(2) shall be submitted to the Village Clerk-
Treasurer with sufficient copies to provide for distribution by
the Clerk-Treasurer as required by Subsection B(3)(b).
(b) Review and hearing.
[1] The petition shall be submitted to the Village Planning and
Zoning Commission established as required by §§ 61.35
and 62.23, Wis. Stats., which shall hold a public hearing
and report to the Village Board as required by law. Copies
of the petition and notice of the hearing shall also be sent
to the appropriate district office of the Department as
described in § 293-11B of this chapter.
[2] The Village Planning and Zoning Commission's report to
the Village Board shall reflect the recommendations of any
federal, state or local agency with which the Village
Planning and Zoning Commission consults. If a petition
seeks approval of a planned residential unit development
plat without first seeking the granting of an overlay
district, a hearing shall be held on such plat as in any
regular amendment to the zoning ordinance. If, however, a
hearing is first held on the overlay for a planned
residential unit development district, a second public
hearing need not be held in connection with the approval
of a subsequent plat or plats which comply with the
overlay district as approved.
(c) Findings and conditions of approval. The Village Board shall
make written findings as to the compliance or noncompliance
of the proposed overlay district with each of the applicable
requirements set forth in Subsection B(2). If the petition is
granted in whole or part, the Village Board shall attach such
written conditions to the approval as are required by and
consistent with Subsection B(2). The conditions of approval
shall in all cases establish the specific restrictions applicable
with regard to minimum lot sizes, width, setbacks and the
location of septic systems and the preservation of ground cover
and open space.
(d) Planning studies. A landowner or petitioner may at his own
expense develop the facts required to establish compliance
with the provisions of Subsection B(2) or may be required to
contribute funds to the Village to defray all or part of the cost
of such studies being undertaken by the Village or any agency
or person with whom the Village contracts for such work.
(4) Sanitary regulations. The Village shall adopt sanitary regulations
for the protection of health and the preservation and enhancement
of water quality.
§ 293-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 293-3
1:529
§ 293-4. Dimensions of building sites.
Dimensions shall be as set forth in Chapter 295, Zoning.
§ 293-5. Setbacks from water.
(a) Where public water supply systems are not available, private
well construction shall be required to conform to Ch. NR 812,
Wis. Adm. Code.
(b) Where a public sewage collection and treatment system is not
available, design and construction of private sewage disposal
systems shall be governed by private sewage system
ordinances adopted by the Village and all applicable Wisconsin
statutes and codes.
A. Lots that abut on navigable waters. All buildings and structures, except
piers, boat hoists, boathouses and open fences which may require a
lesser setback, shall be set back at least 75 feet from the ordinary highwater
mark of navigable waters.
B. Reduced building setbacks. A setback of less than that required by
Subsection A may be permitted by the Zoning Administrator/Building
Inspector where there is at least one main building on either side of the
applicant's lot within 200 feet of the proposed site that is built to less
than the required setback. In such case, the setback shall be the
average of the setbacks of the nearest main building on each side of the
proposed site or, if there is an existing main building on only one side,
the setback shall be the average of the existing building's setback and
the required setback. Any other setback reduction may be permitted by
the Board of Appeals pursuant to § 293-10E of this chapter.
C. Boathouses.
(1) Boathouses shall be designed and constructed solely for the
storage of boats and related equipment and shall not be used for
human habitation.
(2) Boathouses shall not be placed waterward beyond the ordinary
high-water mark.
(3) One boathouse is permitted on a lot as an accessory structure.
(4) Boathouses shall not be constructed where the existing slope is
more than 20%.
(5) Boathouses shall be set back a minimum 10 feet from the ordinary
high-water mark and shall be constructed in conformity with local
floodplain zoning standards.
(6) Boathouses shall not exceed one story and 500 square feet in floor
area.
§ 293-3 HOBART CODE § 293-6
1:530
§ 293-6. Removal of shore cover.
§ 293-7. Filling, grading, lagooning, dredging, ditching and
excavating.
A. Purpose. The purpose of tree and shrubbery cutting regulations
applicable to the shoreland area is to protect scenic beauty, control
erosion and reduce effluent and nutrient flow from the shoreland. The
provisions shall not apply to the removal of dead, diseased or dying
trees or shrubbery at the discretion of the landowner, or to silvicultural
thinning upon recommendation of a forester.
B. Shoreline cutting. Tree and shrubbery cutting in an area parallel to the
ordinary high-water mark, and extending 35 feet inland from all points
along the ordinary high-water mark, shall be limited in accordance with
the following provisions:
(1) No more than 30 feet in any 100 feet, as measured along the
ordinary high-water mark, may be clear cut to the depth of the
thirty-five-foot area.
(2) Natural shrubbery shall be preserved as far as practicable and,
where removed, it shall be replaced with other vegetation that is
equally effective in retarding runoff, preventing erosion and
preserving natural beauty.
C. Paths. Any path, road or passage within the thirty-five-foot area shall be
constructed and surfaced so as to effectively control erosion.
D. Cutting plan. As an alternative to Subsection B, a special cutting plan
allowing greater cutting may be permitted by the Board of Appeals by
issuance of a conditional use permit, pursuant to § 293-10D. An
application for such a permit shall include a sketch of the lot providing
the following information: location of parking, topography of the land,
existing vegetation, proposed cutting, and proposed replanting. The
Board may grant such a permit only if it finds that such special cutting
plans:
(1) Will not cause undue erosion or destruction of scenic beauty; and
(2) Will provide substantial visual screening from the water of
dwellings, accessory structures and parking areas. Where the plan
calls for replacement plantings, the Board may require the
submission of a bond which guarantees the performance of the
planned tree or shrubbery replacement by the lot owner.
E. Cutting more than 35 feet inland. From the inland edge of the thirtyfive-
foot area to the outer limits of the shoreland, the cutting of trees
and shrubbery shall be allowed when accomplished using accepted
forest management and soil conservation practices which protect water
quality.
§ 293-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 293-7
1:531
A. General standards. Filling, grading, lagooning, dredging, ditching or
excavating which does not require a permit under Subsection B may be
permitted in the shoreland area, provided that:
(1) It is done in a manner designed to minimize erosion, sedimentation
and impairment of fish and wildlife habitat.
(2) Filling, grading, lagooning, dredging, ditching or excavating in a
shoreland-wetland district meets the requirements of § 293-8C(2)
and (3) of this chapter.
(3) All applicable federal, state and local authorizations is obtained in
addition to a permit under this chapter.138
(4) Any fill placed in the shoreland area is protected against erosion by
the use of riprap, vegetative cover or a bulkhead.
B. Permit required. Except as provided in Subsection C, a conditional use
permit is required:
(1) For any filling or grading of any area which is within 300 feet
landward of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable water and
which has surface drainage toward the water and on which there is
either:
(a) Any filling or grading on slopes of more than 25%.
(b) Filling or grading of more than 1,000 square feet on slopes of
12% to 25%.
(c) Filling or grading of more than 2,000 square feet on slopes less
than 12%.
(2) For any construction or dredging commenced on any artificial
waterway, canal, ditch, lagoon, pond, lake or similar waterway
which is within 300 feet landward of the ordinary high-water mark
of a navigable body of water or where the purpose is the ultimate
connection with a navigable body of water.
C. Soil conservation practices and agricultural drainage maintenance.
(1) Soil conservation practices such as tiled terraces, runoff diversions
and grassed waterways used for erosion control shall not require a
permit under Subsection B when designed and constructed to
Natural Resource Service technical standards.
(2) The maintenance of existing agricultural drainage systems shall be
permitted in conformity with the following construction standards:
138. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 293-7 HOBART CODE § 293-7
1:532
§ 293-8. Shoreland-Wetland District.
(a) The maintenance dredging of farm drainage ditches is limited
to reestablishing the original ditch cross section unless a
conditional use permit under Subsection B(2) is obtained.
(b) Ditch banks shall be constructed at a slope of two horizontal to
one vertical (50% grade) or flatter.
(c) Ditch banks shall be maintained in a sod cover and free of
woody vegetation.
(d) A ten-foot-wide buffer strip of untilled, ungrazed sod cover
shall be maintained adjacent to the ditch bank.
D. Permit conditions. In granting a conditional use permit under
Subsection B, the Board of Appeals shall attach the following
conditions, where appropriate, in addition to those provisions specified
in § 293-10D(2) and (3):
(1) The smallest amount of bare ground shall be exposed for as short a
time as feasible.
(2) Temporary ground cover (such as mulch or jute netting) shall be
used and permanent vegetative cover shall be established.
(3) Diversion berms or bales, silting basins, terraces, filter fabric
fencing, and other methods shall be used to prevent erosion.
(4) Lagoons shall be constructed to avoid fish trap conditions.
(5) Fill shall be stabilized according to accepted engineering
standards.
(6) Filling shall comply with any local floodplain zoning ordinance and
shall not restrict a floodway or destroy the flood storage capacity of
a floodplain.
(7) Channels or artificial watercourses shall be constructed with side
slopes of two units horizontal distance to one unit vertical or flatter
which shall be promptly vegetated, unless bulkheads or riprap are
provided.
A. Designation. This district shall include all shorelands within the
jurisdiction of this chapter which are wetlands of five acres or more
(excluding point symbols), and which are shown on the Wisconsin
Wetland Inventory maps that are adopted and made a part of this
chapter. A portion of a wetland which is less than five acres in size, and
which is located in the unincorporated shoreland area within the
Village, shall be included in the shoreland-wetland district where the
wetland as a whole is five acres or larger, but extends across the
corporate limits of a municipality, across the Village boundary or across
§ 293-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 293-8
1:533
the shoreland limits, so that the wetland is not regulated in its entirety
by the Village.
(1) Locating shoreland-wetland boundaries. Where an apparent
discrepancy exists between the shoreland-wetland district
boundary shown on the Wisconsin Wetland Inventory maps and
actual field conditions at the time the maps were adopted, the
Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector shall contact the
appropriate district office of the Department to determine if the
shoreland-wetland district boundary as mapped is in error. If
Department staff concur with the Zoning Administrator/Building
Inspector that a particular area was incorrectly mapped as a
wetland, the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector shall have
the authority to immediately grant or deny a zoning permit in
accordance with the regulations applicable to the correct zoning
district. The Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector shall initiate
a map amendment to correct the discrepancy.
B. Purpose. This district is created to maintain safe and healthful
conditions, to prevent water pollution, to protect fish spawning grounds
and wildlife habitat, to preserve shore cover and natural beauty and to
control building and development in wetlands whenever possible. When
development is permitted in a wetland, the development should occur
in a manner that minimizes adverse impacts upon the wetland.
C. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be allowed, subject to general
shoreland zoning regulations contained in this chapter, the provisions
of Chs. 30 and 31, Wis. Stats. and the provisions of other applicable
local, state and federal laws:
(1) Activities and uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning
permit, but which must be carried out without any filling, flooding,
draining, dredging, ditching, tiling or excavating except as allowed
under Subsection C(2) or (3).
(a) Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting, swimming, and boating;
(b) The harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss,
wild rice, berries, tree fruits, and tree seeds, in a manner that
is not injurious to the natural reproduction of such crops;
(c) The pasturing of livestock;
(d) The cultivation of agricultural crops;
(e) The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning,
and harvesting of timber; and
(f) The construction or maintenance of duck blinds.
(2) Uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning permit and
which may include limited filling, flooding, draining, dredging,
§ 293-8 HOBART CODE § 293-8
1:534
ditching, tiling, or excavating but only to the extent specifically
provided below:
(a) Temporary water level stabilization measures necessary to
alleviate abnormally wet or dry conditions that would have an
adverse impact on silvicultural activities if not corrected;
(b) The cultivation of cranberries, including flooding, dike and
dam construction or ditching necessary for the growing and
harvesting of cranberries;
(c) The maintenance and repair of existing agricultural drainage
systems including ditching, tiling, dredging, excavating and
filling necessary to maintain the level of drainage required to
continue the existing agricultural use. This includes the
minimum filling necessary for disposal of dredged spoil
adjacent to the drainage system, provided that dredged spoil is
placed on existing spoil banks where possible;
(d) The construction or maintenance of fences for the pasturing of
livestock, including limited excavating and filling necessary for
such construction or maintenance;
(e) The construction or maintenance of piers, docks or walkways
built on pilings, including limited excavating and filling
necessary for such construction and maintenance; and
(f) The maintenance, repair, replacement or reconstruction of
existing Village and county highways and bridges, including
limited excavating and filling necessary for such maintenance,
repair, replacement or reconstruction.
(3) Uses which require the issuance of a zoning permit under
§ 293-10B and which may include limited filling, flooding, draining,
dredging, ditching, tiling or excavating, but only to the extent
specifically provided below:139
(a) The construction and maintenance of roads which are
necessary to conduct silvicultural activities or agricultural
cultivation, provided that:
[1] The road cannot as a practical matter be located outside
the wetland;
[2] The road is designed and constructed to minimize adverse
impact upon the natural functions of the wetland
enumerated in Subsection E(2);
[3] The road is designed and constructed with the minimum
cross-sectional area practical to serve the intended use;
139. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 293-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 293-8
1:535
[4] Road construction activities are carried out in the
immediate area of the roadbed only.
(b) The construction or maintenance of nonresidential buildings,
provided that:
[1] The building is essential for and used solely in conjunction
with the raising of waterfowl, minnows or other wetland or
aquatic animals; or some other use permitted in the
shoreland-wetland district;
[2] The building cannot, as a practical matter, be located
outside the wetland;
[3] Such building is not designed for human habitation and
does not exceed 500 square feet in floor area; and
[4] Only limited filling or excavating necessary to provide
structural support for the building is authorized.
(c) The establishment of public and private parks and recreation
areas, natural and outdoor education areas, historic and
scientific areas, wildlife refuges, game bird and animal farms,
fur animal farms, fish hatcheries, and public boat launching
ramps and attendant access roads, provided that:
[1] Any private development is used exclusively for the
permitted use and the applicant has received a permit or
license under Ch. 29, Wis. Stats., where applicable;
[2] Filling or excavating necessary for the construction or
maintenance of public boat launching ramps or attendant
access roads is allowed only where such construction or
maintenance meets the criteria in Subsection C(3)(a)[1]
through [4]; and
[3] Ditching, excavating, dredging, or dike and dam
construction in public and private parks and recreation
areas, natural and outdoor education areas, historic and
scientific areas, wildlife refuges, game bird and animal
farms, fur animal farms, and fish hatcheries is allowed only
for the purpose of improving wildlife habitat and to
otherwise enhance wetland values.
(d) The construction or maintenance of electric, gas, telephone,
water and sewer transmission and distribution facilities, by
public utilities and cooperative associations organized for the
purpose of producing or furnishing heat, light, power or water
to their members and the construction or maintenance of
railroad lines, provided that:
§ 293-8 HOBART CODE § 293-8
1:536
[1] The transmission and distribution facilities and railroad
lines cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the
wetland;
[2] Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner
designed to minimize adverse impact upon the natural
functions of the wetland enumerated in Subsection E(2).
D. Prohibited uses. Any use not listed in Subsection C(1), (2) or (3) is
prohibited, unless the wetland or portion of the wetland has been
rezoned by amendment of this chapter in accordance with Subsection E
of this chapter and §§ 61.35 and 62.23, Wis. Stats.
E. Rezoning of lands in the Shoreland-Wetland District.
(1) For all proposed text and map amendments to the shorelandwetland
provisions of this chapter, the appropriate district office of
the Department shall be provided with the following:
(a) A copy of every petition for a text or map amendment to the
shoreland-wetland provisions of this chapter, within five days
of the filing of such petition with the Village Clerk-Treasurer.
Such petition shall include a copy of the Wisconsin Wetland
Inventory map adopted as part of this chapter describing any
proposed rezoning of a shoreland-wetland;
(b) Written notice of the public hearing to be held on a proposed
amendment at least 10 days prior to such hearing;
(c) A copy of the Village Planning and Zoning Commission's
findings and recommendations on each proposed amendment
within 10 days after the submission of those findings and
recommendations to the Village Board; and
(d) Written notice of the Village Board's decision on the proposed
amendment within 10 days after it is issued.
(2) A wetland, or a portion thereof, in the shoreland-wetland district
shall not be rezoned if the proposed rezoning may result in a
significant adverse impact upon any of the following:
(a) Storm and flood water storage capacity;
(b) Maintenance of dry season stream flow, the discharge of
groundwater to a wetland, the recharge of groundwater from a
wetland to another area, or the flow of groundwater through a
wetland;
(c) Filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or
organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable
waters;
(d) Shoreline protection against soil erosion;
§ 293-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 293-8
1:537
§ 293-9. Nonconforming uses and structures.
The lawful use of a building, structure or property which existed at the
time this chapter, or an applicable amendment to this chapter, took effect
and which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, including
the routine maintenance of such a building or structure, may be continued,
subject to the following conditions:
(e) Fish spawning, breeding, nursery or feeding grounds;
(f) Wildlife habitat; or
(g) Areas of special recreational, scenic or scientific interest,
including scarce wetland types.
(3) If the Department notifies the Village Planning and Zoning
Commission that a proposed text or map amendment to the
shoreland-wetland provisions of this chapter may have a significant
adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in Subsection E(2) of
this chapter, that amendment, if approved by the Village Board,
shall contain the following provision:
"This amendment shall not take effect until more than 30 days
have elapsed after written notice of the Village Board's approval
of this amendment is mailed to the Department of Natural
Resources. During that thirty-day period, the Department of
Natural Resources may notify the Village Board that it will adopt
a superseding shoreland ordinance for the Village under §§ 61.35
and 62.23, Wis. Stats. If the Department does so notify the Village
Board, the effect of this amendment shall be stayed until the
§§ 61.35 and 62.23 adoption procedure is completed or otherwise
terminated."
A. If a nonconforming use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any
future use of the building, structure or property shall conform to this
chapter.
B. The maintenance and repair of nonconforming boathouses that extend
waterward beyond the ordinary high-water mark of any navigable
waters shall comply with the requirements of § 30.121, Wis. Stats.
C. If the nonconforming use of a temporary structure is discontinued, such
nonconforming use may not be recommenced.
D. Uses which are nuisances shall not be permitted to continue as
nonconforming uses.
E. No structural alteration, addition or repair to any building or structure
with a nonconforming use or any nonconforming building or structure,
over the life of the building or structure, shall exceed 50% of its current
estimated fair market value unless it is permanently changed to
conform to the requirements of this chapter.
§ 293-8 HOBART CODE § 293-9
1:538
§ 293-10. Administrative provisions.
F. If the alteration, addition or repair of a building or structure with a
nonconforming use or a nonconforming building or structure is
prohibited because it is in excess of 50% of the current estimated fair
market value, the property owner may still make the proposed
alteration, addition or repair if:
(1) A nonconforming use is permanently changed to a conforming use.
(2) The property owner appeals the determination of the Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector and either the Village Board of
Appeals or the circuit court find in the property owner's favor
under §§ 61.35 and 62.23, Wis. Stats.
(3) The property owner successfully petitions to have the property
rezoned by amendment to this chapter in accordance with § 293-11
of this chapter and §§ 61.35 and 62.23, Wis. Stats.
(4) If the structure is damaged or destroyed after March 2, 2006, by
violent wind, vandalism, fire, flood, ice, snow, mold, or infestation,
if the structure will be restored to the size, location, and use that it
had immediately before the damage or destruction occurred.140
A. Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector. The Zoning Administrator/
Building Inspector shall have the following duties and powers:
(1) Advise applicants as to the provisions of this chapter and assist
them in preparing permit applications and appeal forms.
(2) Issue permits and certificates of compliance and inspect properties
for compliance with this chapter.
(3) Keep records of all permits issued, inspections made, work
approved and other official actions.
(4) Provide copies of variances, conditional uses and decisions on
appeals for map or text interpretations and map or text
amendments within 10 days after they are granted or denied to the
appropriate district office of the Department.
(5) Investigate and report violations of this chapter to the Village
Planning and Zoning Commission and the district attorney or
Village Administrator.141
B. Building permits.
(1) When required. Except where another section of this chapter
specifically exempts certain types of development from this
140. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
141. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 293-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 293-10
1:539
requirement [as in § 293-8C(1) and (2)], a building permit shall be
obtained from the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector before
any new development, as defined in § 293-13B, or any change in
the use of an existing building or structure, is initiated.
(2) Application. An application for a building permit shall be made to
the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector upon forms furnished
by the Village and shall include for the purpose of proper
enforcement of these regulations, the following data:
(a) Name and address of applicant and property owner.
(b) Legal description of the property and type of proposed use.
(c) A sketch of the dimensions of the lot and location of buildings
relative to the lot lines, center line of abutting highways and
the ordinary high-water mark of any abutting watercourses
and water level on a date specified.
(d) Location and description of any existing private water supply
or sewage system or notification of plans for any such
installation.
(3) Expiration of permit. Building permits shall expire 12 months from
date issued if no substantial work has commenced.
C. Certificates of compliance.
(1) No land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter
erected, altered or moved shall be occupied, until a certificate of
compliance is issued by the Zoning Administrator/Building
Inspector.
(a) The certificate of compliance shall certify that the building or
premises or part thereof, and the proposed use thereof,
conform to the provisions of this chapter.
(b) Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the
application for a zoning permit.
(c) The certificate of compliance shall be issued within 10 days
after notification of the completion of the work specified in the
building permit, if the building or premises or proposed use
thereof conforms with all the provisions of this chapter.
(2) The Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector may issue a
temporary certificate of compliance for part of a building, pursuant
to rules and regulations established by the Village Board.
(3) Upon written request from the owner, the Zoning Administrator/
Building Inspector shall issue a certificate of compliance for any
building or premises existing at the time of the adoption of this
chapter, certifying after inspection the extent and type of use made
§ 293-10 HOBART CODE § 293-10
1:540
of the building or premises and whether or not such use conforms
to the provisions of this chapter.
D. Conditional use permits.
(1) Application for a conditional use permit. Any use listed as a
conditional use in this chapter shall be permitted only after an
application has been submitted to the Zoning Administrator/
Building Inspector and a conditional use permit has been granted
by the Board of Appeals.
(2) Standards applicable to all conditional uses. In passing upon a
conditional use permit, the Board of Appeals shall evaluate the
effect of the proposed use upon:
(a) The maintenance of safe and healthful conditions.
(b) The prevention and control of water pollution, including
sedimentation.
(c) Compliance with local floodplain zoning ordinances and
opportunity for damage to adjacent properties due to altered
surface water drainage.
(d) The erosion potential of the site based upon degree and
direction of slope, soil type and vegetative cover.
(e) The location of the site with respect to existing or future access
roads.
(f) The need of the proposed use for a shoreland location.
(g) Its compatibility with uses on adjacent land.
(h) The amount of liquid and solid wastes to be generated and the
adequacy of the proposed disposal systems.
(i) Location factors under which:
[1] Domestic uses shall be generally preferred;
[2] Uses not inherently a source of pollution within an area
shall be preferred over uses that are or may be a pollution
source;
[3] Use locations within an area tending to minimize the
possibility of pollution shall be preferred over use
locations tending to increase that possibility.
(3) Conditions attached to conditional uses. Upon consideration of the
factors listed above, the Board of Appeals shall attach such
conditions, in addition to those required elsewhere in this chapter,
as are necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. Violations
of any of these conditions shall be deemed a violation of this
§ 293-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 293-10
1:541
chapter. Such conditions may include specifications for, without
limitation because of specific enumeration: type of shore cover;
specific sewage disposal and water supply facilities; landscaping
and planting screens; period of operation; operational control;
sureties; deed restrictions; location of piers, docks, parking and
signs; and type of construction. To secure information upon which
to base its determination, the Board of Appeals may require the
applicant to furnish, in addition to the information required for a
zoning permit, the following information:
(a) A plan of the area showing surface contours, soil types,
ordinary high-water marks, groundwater conditions,
subsurface geology and vegetative cover.
(b) Location of buildings, parking areas, traffic access, driveways,
walkways, piers, open space and landscaping.
(c) Plans of buildings, sewage disposal facilities, water supply
systems and arrangement of operations.
(d) Specifications for areas of proposed filling, grading, lagooning
or dredging.
(e) Other pertinent information necessary to determine if the
proposed use meets the requirements of this chapter.
(4) Notice, public hearing and decision. Before passing upon an
application for a conditional use permit, the Board of Appeals shall
hold a public hearing. Notice of such public hearing, specifying the
time, place and matters to come before the Board, shall be given as
a Class 2 notice under Ch. 985, Wis. Stats. Such notice shall be
provided to the appropriate district office of the Department at
least 10 days prior to the hearing. The Board shall state in writing
the grounds for granting or refusing a conditional use permit.
(5) Recording. When a conditional use permit is approved, an
appropriate record shall be made of the land use and structures
permitted and such permit shall be applicable solely to the
structures, use and property so described. A copy of any decision
on a conditional use permit shall be provided to the appropriate
district office of the Department within 10 days after it is granted
or denied.
(6) Revocation. Where the conditions of a conditional use permit are
violated, the conditional use permit shall be revoked by the Board
of Appeals.
E. Variances. The Board of Appeals may grant upon appeal a variance from
the dimensional standards of this chapter where an applicant
convincingly demonstrates that: literal enforcement of the provisions of
the chapter will result in unnecessary hardship on the applicant; the
§ 293-10 HOBART CODE § 293-10
1:542
hardship is due to special conditions unique to the property; and such
variance is not contrary to the public interest.
(1) No use variance. A variance shall not grant or increase any use of
property which is prohibited in the zoning district.
(2) Notice, hearing and decision. Before passing on an application for a
variance, the Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing. Notice
of such hearing specifying the time, place and matters of concern,
shall be given a Class 2 notice under Ch. 985, Wis. Stats. Such
notice shall be provided to the appropriate district office of the
Department at least 10 days prior to the hearing. The Board shall
state in writing the reasons for granting or refusing a variance and
shall provide a copy of such decision to the appropriate Department
district office within 10 days of the decision.
F. Board of Appeals. The President of the Village Board shall appoint a
Board of Appeals consisting of five members and two alternate
members under §§ 61.35 and 62.23, Wis. Stats. The Village Board shall
adopt such rules for the conduct of the business of the Board of Appeals
as required by §§ 61.35 and 62.23, Wis. Stats.142
(1) Powers and duties.
(a) The Board of Appeals shall adopt such additional rules as it
deems necessary and may exercise all of the powers conferred
on such boards by §§ 61.35 and 62.23, Wis. Stats.
(b) It shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is
error in any order, requirements, decision or determination
made by an administrative official in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
(c) It shall hear and decide applications for conditional use
permits pursuant to Subsection D.
(d) It may grant a variance from the dimensional standards of this
chapter pursuant to Subsection E.
(e) In granting a conditional use permit or variance, the Board
may not impose conditions which are more restrictive than any
of the specific standards in the chapter. Where the chapter is
silent as to the extent of restriction, the Board may impose any
reasonable permit conditions to effect the purpose of this
chapter.
(2) Appeals to the Board. Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be made
by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or
bureau of the Village affected by any decision of the Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector or other administrative officer.
142. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 293-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 293-10
1:543
Such appeal shall be made within a reasonable time, as provided
by the rules of the Board, by filing with the officer whose decision
is in question, and with the Board of Appeals, a notice of appeal
specifying the reasons for the appeal. The Zoning Administrator/
Building Inspector or other officer whose decision is in question
shall promptly transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the
record concerning the matter appealed.
(3) Hearing appeals and applications for variances and conditional use
permits.
(a) The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing
on the appeal or application. The Board shall give public notice
thereof by publishing a Class 2 notice under Ch. 985, Wis.
Stats, specifying the date, time and place of the hearing and
the matters to come before the Board. Notice shall be mailed to
the parties in interest. Written notice shall be given to the
appropriate district office of the Department at least 10 days
prior to hearings on proposed shoreland variances, conditional
uses, and appeals for map or text interpretations.
(b) A decision regarding the appeal or application shall be made as
soon as practical. Copies of all decisions on shoreland
variances, conditional uses, and appeals for map or text
interpretations shall be submitted to the appropriate district
office of the Department within 10 days after they are granted
or denied.
(c) The final disposition of an appeal or application to the Board of
Appeals shall be in the form of a written resolution or order
signed by the Chairperson and secretary of the Board. Such
resolution shall state the specific facts which are the basis of
the Board's determination and shall either affirm, reverse, vary
or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed, in whole or in part, dismiss the appeal for lack of
jurisdiction or prosecution or grant the application.
(d) At the public hearing, any party may appear in person or by
agent or by attorney.
G. Fees, general. The Village Board may, by resolution, adopt fees for the
following:
(1) Land use permits.
(2) Building permits.
(3) Certificates of compliance.
(4) Planned residential unit development reviews.
(5) Public hearings.
§ 293-10 HOBART CODE § 293-10
1:544
§ 293-11. Changes and amendments.
The Village Board may, from time to time, alter, supplement or change the
boundaries of use districts and the regulations contained in this chapter in
accordance with the requirements of §§ 61.35 and 62.23, Wis. Stats, Ch. NR
115, Wis. Adm. Code and § 293-8E of this chapter, where applicable.
§ 293-12. Enforcement; violations and penalties.143
Any development, any building or structure constructed, moved or
structurally altered, or any use established after the effective date of this
chapter in violation of the provisions of this chapter, by any person, firm,
association, corporation (including building contractors or their agents)
shall be deemed a violation. The Village Zoning Administrator/Building
Inspector shall refer violations to the Village Attorney, who shall
expeditiously prosecute violations. Any person, firm, association or
corporation who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided in § 1-3. Each day
which the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation
of this chapter is a public nuisance and the creation thereof may be enjoined
and the maintenance thereof may be abated pursuant to §§ 61.35 and 62.23,
Wis. Stats.
§ 293-13. Definitions.
(6) Legal notice publications.
(7) Conditional use permits.
A. Amendments to this chapter may be made on petition of any interested
party as provided in §§ 61.35 and 62.23, Wis. Stats.
B. Every petition for a text or map amendment filed with the Village Clerk-
Treasurer shall be referred to the Village Planning and Zoning
Commission. A copy of each petition shall be mailed to the appropriate
district office of the Department within five days of the filing of the
petition with the Village Clerk-Treasurer. Written notice of the public
hearing to be held on a proposed amendment shall be provided to the
appropriate district office of the Department at least 10 days prior to
the hearing.
C. A copy of the Village Board's decision on each proposed amendment
shall be forwarded to the appropriate district office of the Department
within 10 days after the decision is issued.
A. For the purpose of administering and enforcing this chapter, the terms
or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: Words used in the
present tense include the future; words in the singular number include
the plural number; and words in the plural number include the singular
143. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 293-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 293-13
1:545
number. The word "shall" is mandatory, not permissive. All distances
unless otherwise specified shall be measured horizontally.
B. The following terms used in this chapter mean:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE — A detached subordinate
structure or a use which is clearly incidental to, and customarily found
in connection with, the principal structure or use to which it is related,
and which is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use.
BOATHOUSE — A structure used for the storage of watercraft and
associated materials which has one or more walls or sides.144
CONDITIONAL USE — A use which is permitted by this chapter,
provided that certain conditions specified in the chapter are met and
that a permit is granted by the Board of Appeals or, where appropriate,
the Planning and Zoning Commission or Village Board.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Natural Resources.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including, but not limited to the construction of buildings,
structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or
substantial alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures;
the placement of mobile homes; ditching, lagooning, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, and the deposition or
extraction of earthen materials.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — One or more artificial ditches, tile drains or
similar devices which collect surface runoff or groundwater and convey
it to a point of discharge.
FLOODPLAIN — The land which has been or may be hereafter covered
by flood water during the regional flood. The floodplain includes the
floodway and the flood fringe as those terms are defined in Ch. NR 116,
Wis. Adm. Code.
NAVIGABLE WATERS — Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, all natural
inland lakes within Wisconsin and all streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages
and other waters within the territorial limits of this state, including the
Wisconsin portion of boundary waters, which are navigable under the
laws of this state. Under § 281.31(2)(d), Wis. Stats, notwithstanding any
other provision of law or administrative rule promulgated thereunder,
shoreland ordinances required under §§ 61.35 and 62.23, Wis. Stats,
and Ch. NR 115, Wis. Adm. Code, do not apply to lands adjacent to farm
drainage ditches if:
(1) Such lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable stream or river.
Those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were
not navigable streams before ditching; and
(2)
144. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 293-13 HOBART CODE § 293-13
1:546
Chapter 295
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 121.
Agricultural shoreland management — See
Ch. 288.
Floodplain zoning — See Ch. 290.
Shoreland wetland zoning — See Ch. 293.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — The point on the bank or shore up
to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to
leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention
of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other
easily recognized characteristics.
REGIONAL FLOOD — A flood determined to be representative of large
floods known to have generally occurred in Wisconsin and which may
be expected to occur on a particular stream because of like physical
characteristics, once in every 100 years.
SHORELANDS — Lands within the following distances from the
ordinary high-water mark of navigable waters: 1,000 feet from a lake,
pond or flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream or to the landward
side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater.
SHORELAND-WETLAND DISTRICT — The zoning district, created as
a part of this shoreland zoning ordinance, comprised of shorelands
that are designated as wetlands on the wetland maps which have been
adopted and made a part of this chapter.
UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP — That circumstance where special
conditions, which were not self-created, affect a particular property
and make strict conformity with restrictions governing area, setbacks,
frontage, height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable
in light of the purposes of this chapter.
VARIANCE — An authorization granted by the Board of Appeals to
construct, alter or use a building or structure in a manner that deviates
from the dimensional standards of this chapter.
WETLANDS — Those areas where water is at, near or above the land
surface long enough to be capable of supporting aquatic or hydrophytic
vegetation and which have soils indicative of wet conditions.
(3) Such lands are maintained in nonstructural agricultural use.
§ 293-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 293-13
1:547

ARTICLE I
Title, Authority, and Adoption
§ 295-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as "the Village of Hobart
Zoning Ordinance, Brown County, Wisconsin."
§ 295-2. Authority.145
The Village Board of the Village of Hobart has the specific authority, powers,
and duties pursuant to §§ 61.35, and 62.23, the Wisconsin Statutes, as
amended or renumbered from time to time, pursuant to the specific
statutory sections noted in this chapter to zone certain areas in the Village
of Hobart and to regulate, prohibit and restrict construction, alteration,
erection, and enlargement of certain structures and buildings in the Village
of Hobart, and to regulate and control certain uses, activities, businesses
and operations in the Village of Hobart.
§ 295-3. Confirmation of authority, powers and duties.
The Village Board of the Village of Hobart has, by adoption of this chapter,
confirmed the specific statutory authority, powers, and duties noted in the
specific sections of this chapter and has established by these sections and
this chapter, the specific areas and the regulations and controlling of certain
uses, activities, businesses, and operations in the Village of Hobart.
145. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 295-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-3
1:549

ARTICLE II
Intent, Purpose, and Severability
§ 295-4. Intent.
This chapter is intended to promote the orderly development of the
community in accordance with the Official Village Comprehensive Plan or
any of the component parts thereof.
§ 295-5. Purpose.
The Zoning Ordinance of the Village of Hobart, Brown County, Wisconsin
is adopted for the following purposes: to lessen congestion in the streets;
to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote and to
protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare;
to provide adequate standards of light, air and open space; to maintain
the aesthetic appearances and scenic values of the Village; to prevent
the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population;
to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage,
schools, parks, and other public requirements; and to foster a more rational
pattern of relationship among agricultural, residential, business,
commercial, and manufacturing uses for the mutual benefit of all.
§ 295-6. Severability.
A. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
B. If any application of this chapter to a particular structure, land or water
is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such judgment shall not be applicable to any other
structure, land, or water not specifically included in said judgment.
§ 295-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-6
1:551

ARTICLE III
Terminology
§ 295-7. Word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, words used in the present tense shall
include the future; words used in the singular shall include the plural
number, and the plural the singular.
§ 295-8. Definitions.
Certain words and terms in this chapter are to be interpreted as defined
herein.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — An uninhabited, subordinate structure
exceeding 150 square feet in area, attached or detached to the principal
structure, the use of which is incidental to and customary in conjunction
with the principal use of the structure (e.g., garages, carports, and other
similar buildings used for the storage of common household supplies,
equipment and vehicles).146
ACCESSORY USE — A subordinate use which is incidental to and customary
in conjunction with the principal structure or use and which is located on
the same lot with such principal structure or use.
ADVERTISING DEVICE — Any advertising sign, billboard, statuary, or
poster panel which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or
entertainment not exclusively related to the premises where such sign is
located or to which it is affixed; but does not include those advertising signs,
billboards, or poster panels which direct attention to the business on the
premises or to a brand name of a product or commodity with which the
business is specifically identified and which is sold on the premises.
AGRICULTURE — The science and practice of the cultivation of the soil.
A. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
B. The word "may" is permissive.
C. The word "lot" shall include the words "piece," "parcel," and "plats"; the
word "building" includes all other structures of every kind regardless of
similarity to buildings; and the phrase "used for" shall include the
phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for,"
and "occupied for."
D. All "measured distances" shall be to the nearest "integral foot." If a
fraction is 1/2 foot or less, the next "integral foot" below shall be taken.
E. Any words not herein defined shall be construed as defined in other
respective state, county, and town codes.
146. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 295-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-8
1:553
AIRPORT — Any area of land or water which is used or intended for use
for the landing and taking off of aircraft, and any appurtenant areas which
are used or intended for use for airport buildings or other airport facilities
or rights-of-way, including all necessary taxiways, aircraft storage and tiedown
areas, hangars, and other necessary buildings and open spaces.
ALLEY — A public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as
secondary access to abutting properties.
ARTIFICIAL LAKE — A man-made body of water utilized for recreational or
conservational purposes.
ATTIC — The vertical cross-sectional space created within and/or bounded
by the roof structure and the floor/ceiling line of the story below. This crosssectional
space will have no exterior wall planes extending above the attic
floor to the underside of the roof structure except as necessary to enclose
the ends of a gable or gambrel roof.[Added 1-15-2013]
AUTO WRECKING YARD — Any premises on which more than one
automotive vehicle, not in running or operating condition, is stored in the
open.
BASEMENT — That portion of any structure located below the first floor or
ground floor with its entire floor below grade.147[Amended 1-15-2013]
BLOCK — A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets
and public parks, cemeteries, railroad right-of-way, shorelines of waterways
or municipal boundary lines.
BOARDINGHOUSE (LODGING HOUSE) — A building or premises, other
than a hotel, containing lodging rooms accommodating for compensation,
four or more persons not of the keeper's family. Lodging may be provided
with or without meals.
BUILDING — Any structure built, used, designed, or intended for the
support, shelter, protection, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or
property of any kind, and which is permanently affixed to the land. When
a building is divided into separate parts by unpierced fire or party walls
extending continuously from the ground through all stories to and above the
roof, each part shall be deemed a separate building.
BUILDING, ATTACHED — One which is joined to another dwelling at one or
more sides by a party wall or walls.
BUILDING, DETACHED — One which is entirely surrounded by open space
on the same lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building to the highest
point of a ceiling in the case of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof
and to the average height between the eaves and the ridge of a gable, hip,
or gambrel roof.
147. Editor’s Note: the former definition of “bed-and-breakfast establishment,” which
immediately followed, was repealed 1-2-2019 by Ord. No. 2018-20.
§ 295-8 HOBART CODE § 295-8
1:554
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — A line located a stated distance from and
parallel with a lot line or street right-of-way, including the nearest point to
which a lot line or center line of a building may be erected.
BUILDING, TEMPORARY — Any building not designed to be permanently
located in the place where it is, or where it is intended to be placed or
affixed. Manufactured homes used as residences shall not be classified
as temporary buildings. They are further defined in the definition of
"manufactured home."
CAMPGROUND — A tract or parcel of land on which space is provided for
camping. Includes day and overnight camping.
CANOPY (MARQUEE) — A roof-like structure projecting from a wall and
supported in whole or in part by vertical supports from the ground and
erected primarily to provide shelter from the weather.
CAPACITY IN PERSONS OF AN ESTABLISHMENT OR USE — The
maximum number of persons that can avail themselves of the services (or
goods) of such establishment at any one time, with reasonable safety and
comfort, as determined by Chapter 121, Building Construction, or as may
be determined by the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector.
CLINIC, MEDICAL OR DENTAL — An organization of specializing
physicians or dentists, or both, who have their offices in a common building.
A clinic shall not include in-patient care.
CLUB — An association of persons for some common purpose, but not
including groups organized primarily to render a service which is
customarily carried on as a business. All organizations shall be recognized
clubs or fraternities.
COMMERCIAL FEEDLOTS — An agriculture enterprise where livestock is
purchased and raised and then sold to a buyer, feedlot, or slaughterhouse.
COMMUNITY-BASED RESIDENTIAL FACILITY — A place where three or
more unrelated adults reside, in which care, treatment, or services above
the level of room and board, but not including nursing care, are provided
to persons residing in the facility as a primary function of the facility and
licensed by the Department of Health and Social Services under § 50.01,
Wisconsin Statutes.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The adopted Comprehensive Plan of the Village
of Hobart (including any future amendments) that identifies where growth
should occur, makes recommendations for future development in the Village
through the use of text, tables, and maps, and includes a mechanism for the
review and update of the plan on a regular basis.[Added 1-6-2015 by Ord.
No. 01-2015]
CORNER SIDE — A yard extending along a side lot line from front yard to
rear yard when said side lot line is parallel with a street right-of-way line.
CORPORATE RETREAT — A dwelling unit which is provided, with or without
monetary compensation, by a business, company or corporation, including
a nonprofit corporation, to paying or nonpaying guests (including but not
§ 295-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-8
1:555
limited to agents, customers, clients, consultants, employees, directors,
executives or shareholders of the business, company or corporation) for a
period of less than 28 consecutive calendar days.[Amended 1-6-2015 by
Ord. No. 01-2015]
DAY-CARE CENTER, GROUP — A licensed establishment for the care and
supervision of nine or more children under seven years old for more than
four and less than 24 hours a day for more than 10 days a month.
DAY-CARE HOME, FAMILY — A licensed establishment for the care and
supervision of one to eight children under seven years old for more than
four and less than 24 hours a day for more than 10 days a month.
DORMITORY — A communal-type living arrangement of four or more
persons not related by blood, adoption, or marriage who share common
kitchen, bath or rest room facilities. This definition includes, but is not
limited to, shelter facilities, educational facility housing, rooming houses,
boarding or lodging houses, community living arrangements, communitybased
residential facilities, seminary or similar institution.[Amended
1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
DRIVE-IN BUSINESS — An establishment with street access, which
provides no interior seating or service; or an establishment which allows for
interior seating or service, but the majority of its business is conducted in
the following manner:
DWELLING — A building, or portion thereof, excluding a manufactured
home, hotel, motel, boardinghouses, and trailers designed or used
exclusively for residential occupancy.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms which are arranged, designed
or used as living quarters for one family only. Individual bathrooms and
complete kitchen facilities, permanently installed, shall always be included
for each "dwelling unit."
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A building, or portion thereof,
containing three or more dwelling units, each occupied exclusively by one
family with the intent to use the structure as the principal place of
abode.[Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A building designed for and occupied
exclusively by one family with the intent to use the structure as the principal
place of abode.[Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building designed for and occupied
exclusively by two families with the intent to use the structure as the
principal place of abode.[Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
EARTHEN BERM — A vegetated, elongated earthen mound used as a
sound, sight and/or landscape barrier.148
A. By means of a service window;
B. In-car service; and
C. Restaurant or confectioneries with carry-out counter.
§ 295-8 HOBART CODE § 295-8
1:556
ESTABLISHMENT, BUSINESS — A place of business carrying out
operations, the ownership and management of which are separate and
distinct from those of any other place of business located on the same
zoning lot.
FAMILY — One or more persons, related by blood, adoption, domestic
partnership, foster or ward relationship or marriage, living together in one
dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit, or up to five persons living
and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit when not so related,
provided that the number limitation of this provision shall not apply to the
number of unrelated individuals authorized to reside in a community living
arrangement consistent with § 62.23(7)(i), Wis. Stats.[Amended 1-6-2015
by Ord. No. 01-2015]
FARM — Any parcel of land which is used for gain in the raising of
agricultural products, livestock, poultry, and dairy products.
FARM POND — A body of water utilized for the farm operation.
FENCE — A barrier made of wood, iron, stone or other inorganic material.
FLOOR AREA — (For determining off-street parking and loading
requirements.) The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors
of the building or portion thereof, devoted to such use, including accessory
storage areas, located within selling or working space, such as counters,
racks or closets, and any basement floor area devoted to retailing activities
to the production or processing of goods, or to business or professional
offices. However, "floor area," for the purposes of measurement for offstreet
parking spaces, shall not include: floor area devoted primarily to
storage purposes (except as otherwise noted herein); floor area devoted
to off-street parking or loading facilities, including aisles, ramps, and
maneuvering space; or basement floor area other than area devoted to
retailing activities, to the production or processing of goods, or to business
or professional offices.
FRONTAGE — The length of all the property fronting on one side of a street
between two nearest intersecting streets, measured along the line of the
street, or if dead-ended, then all property abutting on one side between an
intersecting street and the dead-end of the street.
FRONTAGE, ZONING LOT — The length of all the property of such zoning
lot fronting on a street, measured between side lot lines.
FUR FARM — Agricultural operation, where the major income is derived
from the selling or sale of fur-bearing animals and/or pelts.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory to the main building, which provides
for the storage of motor vehicles and in which no occupation, business, or
service for profit is carried on.
148. Editor's Note: The original definition of "establishment," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015.
§ 295-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-8
1:557
GARAGE, PUBLIC AND STORAGE — Any building or premises, other than
a private garage, where motor-driven vehicles are equipped, repaired,
serviced, hired, sold, or stored.
GRADE — The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent
to the exterior walls of the building or structure.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of a building or buildings measured from the exterior faces of exterior
walls or from the center line of party walls separating two buildings.
GROUND FLOOR — That level of a building or structure below the first
floor, located on a site with a sloping or multilevel grade and which has a
portion of its floor at grade and a portion of its floor below grade.[Added
1-15-2013]
GROUP HOME — Community living arrangements for the care and
maintenance of five to eight children under 18 years of age, which are
licensed child welfare agencies, as set forth in Wisconsin State Statutes
§ 48.02(7).[Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
HARD-SURFACED — A driveway or parking lot surfaced with concrete,
bituminous paving or other approved impervious surface.
HEALTH AND MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS — Institutions or organizations
which provide specialized inpatient or outpatient medical and dental care.
HEDGE — A dense row of shrubs, etc., forming a boundary, fence, or
barrier.
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation or profession carried on by a
resident of the principal structure, provided all of the following are met:149
There is no sign or display that will indicate from the exterior that the
building is being utilized in whole or in part for any purpose other than
that of a dwelling;
A.
B. There is no commodity sold upon the premises;
No person is employed on site other than a member of the immediate
family residing on the premises;
C.
No mechanical or electrical equipment is used, except such as is
permissible for purely domestic or household purposes;
D.
E. No accessory building shall be used for such home occupation;
Exterior alterations or modifications that change the residential
character or appearance of the dwelling, accessory structures or the
property itself are prohibited;
F.
There shall be no noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odor, electrical
interference, or other such condition created by the home occupation
G.
149. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 295-8 HOBART CODE § 295-8
1:558
HOTEL — A building in which lodging, with or without meals, is offered to
transient guests for compensation and in which there are more than five
sleeping rooms with or without cooking facilities in any individual room or
apartment.
INDUSTRIAL PARK — A special or exclusive type of planned industrial
area designed and equipped to accommodate a community of industries,
providing them with all necessary facilities and services in attractive
surroundings among compatible neighbors. Industrial parks may be
promoted or sponsored by private developers, community organizations, or
government organizations.
JUNK (OR SALVAGE) YARD — An area where waste or scrap materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled,
including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags,
rubber tires, and bottles. A "junk" or "salvage" yard includes an auto
wrecking yard, but does not include uses established entirely within
enclosed buildings.
KENNELS — A lot or building in which three or more dogs or four or more
cats or other animals at least two months of age are kept commercially for
board and/or propagation, training or sales, or other uses, all of which are
conducted on the property itself.
LANDSCAPING MATERIALS — Materials used to make a plot of ground
more attractive and/or stable these materials may include, but are not
limited to, trees, grasses, ground cover, vines, flowers, earthen berms, earth
stabilization materials, rocks and stones, and wood chips.
LOT — A parcel of land having a width and depth sufficient to provide
the space necessary for one principal building and its accessory building,
together with the open spaces required by this chapter and abutting on a
public street.
LOT AREA, GROSS — The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front,
side, and rear lot lines, but not including any area occupied by the waters
of a duly recorded lake or river and/or public right-of-way.
LOT, CORNER — A lot located at the intersection of two streets, the interior
angle of such intersection not exceeding 135°.
LOT, DEPTH OF — The mean horizontal distance between the front lot
line and the rear lot line of a lot measured within the lot boundaries. (See
diagram in Illustrations on file in the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer.)
LOT GRADE — The average of the finished lot elevation upon completion
of construction and landscaping between the street right-of-way line and a
perpendicular point on the front yard setback line.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot. (See
diagram in Illustrations on file in the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer.)
that has any observable impact upon any location outside the principal
structure where the home occupation is conducted.
§ 295-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-8
1:559
LOT LINE, FRONT — That boundary of a lot which is along an existing or
dedicated public street, or where no public street exists along a public way.
LOT LINE, REAR — That boundary of a lot which is most distant from and
is, or is most nearly, parallel to the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a
rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which
has been recorded in the Office of the register of Deeds of Brown County;
or a parcel of land, the deed to which was recorded in the Office of said
Register of Deeds prior to the adoption of this chapter, and certified survey
maps approved and recorded in the Register of Deeds' Office of Brown
County.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER — A corner lot, the street side lot line of which
is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its
rear. (See diagram in Illustrations on file in the office of the Village Clerk-
Treasurer.)
LOT, THROUGH — A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two more
or less parallel public streets, and which is not a corner lot. (See diagram
in Illustrations on file in the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer.) On a
"through lot," both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a
lot, measured at the narrowest width within the first 30 feet of lot depth
immediately in back of the front yard setback line. (See diagram in
Illustrations on file in the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer.)
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used for
long-term residential use when connected to required utilities.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A contiguous parcel of land containing
two or more manufactured homes.150
MINI WAREHOUSE — A business consisting of a building or group of
buildings of varying sizes of individual compartmentalized and controlled
access stalls, spaces or lockers which are rented to individuals for the
storage of personal property.151
MOTEL — Establishment consisting of a group of attached or detached
living or sleeping accommodations with bathroom and closet space, located
on a single zoning lot and designed for use by transient guests; and where
there is no permanent occupancy of any unit, except by the owner, his agent
or his employees.
MOTOR VEHICLES — A self-propelled device used or intended to be used
for the transportation of freight or passengers upon a street or highway.
150. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
151. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 295-8 HOBART CODE § 295-8
1:560
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A dwelling or other building that
existed lawfully before the current zoning ordinance was enacted or
amended, but that does not conform with one or more of the development
regulations in the current zoning ordinance.152
NONCONFORMING USE — Any use of land, buildings, or structures, lawful
at the time of the enactment of this chapter, which does not comply with
all of the regulations of this chapter or of any amendment hereto governing
use for the zoning district in which such use is located.
PARKING SPACE — A graded and surfaced area of not less than 180 square
feet in area either enclosed or open for the parking of a motor vehicle,
having adequate ingress and egress to a public street or alley, exclusive of
passageways, driveways, or other means of circulation or access.153
PARTY WALL — A wall constructed between two attached units or rooms
which may or may not be separately owned.
PET BOARDING FACILITY — A building in which dogs or cats are kept
commercially for boarding and/or grooming, all of which are conducted on
the property itself.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — A tract of land which contains or will
contain two or more principal buildings, developed under single ownership
or control; the development of which is unique and intended to permit
diversification and variation in the relationship of uses and structures and
open space for developments conceived and implemented as comprehensive
and unified projects. (See diagram in Illustrations on file in the office of the
Village Clerk-Treasurer.)
PLAT or PLATTED LAND — Land division created by the recording of a
subdivision plat or certified survey map as per the requirements of the
Brown County Subdivision and Platting Regulations.154
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE OR USE — One which determines the
predominant use as contrasted to accessory use, building or structure.155
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE (except health care) — The office of a member
of a recognized profession, including the offices of ministers, architects,
professional engineers, lawyers, and such other similar professional
occupation, including the office of a charitable organization and including
also an insurance or financial institution which conducts its activities
principally by mail.
152. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
153. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
154. Editor's Note: The original definition of "pond," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
155. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 295-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-8
1:561
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE (HEALTH CARE) — The office of a member of
a recognized health care professional licensed by Wisconsin State Statute
Chapters 441, 446 to 449.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle primarily used for leisure activities,
including, but not limited to, trailers, boats with or without trailers, allterrain
vehicles and snowmobiles. For the purpose of this Code,
"recreational vehicles" do not include four-wheel drive cars or trucks and
motorcycles.
RETAIL — Sale of commodities and services directly to customers when
such commodities and services are used or consumed by the customer and
not purchased primarily for purpose of resale.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied for
a special use. Rights-of-way intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains,
sanitary sewers, storm drains or any other use involving maintenance by
a public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat
on which such right-of-way is established. The usage of the term "right-ofway"
for land platted purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter
established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from
the lot or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the
dimension or areas of such lots or parcels.
ROADSIDE STAND — A structure not permanently fixed to the ground that
is readily removable in its entirety, covered or uncovered and not wholly
enclosed, and used solely for the sale of farm products produced on the
premises. No such roadside stand shall be more than 300 square feet in
ground area and limited to 10 feet maximum height.
RURAL ROAD SECTION — Road predominantly employing ditches for
stormwater conveyance.156
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA — A device incorporating a reflective surface
that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured and is in the shape of a shallow
dish, cone, horn, or cornucopia. Such device shall be used to transmit
and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or
orbitally based uses. This definition is meant to include, but not be limited
to what are commonly referred to as "satellite earth stations," "TVROs," and
"satellite microwave antennas."
SETBACK AREA — The minimum horizontal area between the front, side
and/or rear line of the building or use, including porches, and the lot lines,
or street right-of-way lines.
SETBACK LINES — Lines established adjacent to lot lines or street rightof-
way lines for the purpose of defining limits within which any or certain
buildings, structures, or uses may not be constructed, maintained or carried
on, except as shown herein.
SETBACK, CORNER SIDE YARD — The minimum horizontal distance
between the side line of the building or use that runs perpendicular to the
156. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 295-8 HOBART CODE § 295-8
1:562
fronting street, and the side right-of-way line perpendicular to the fronting
street.
SETBACK, FRONT YARD — The minimum horizontal distance between the
front line of the building or use and the street right-of-way line.
SETBACK, REAR YARD — The minimum horizontal distance between the
back line of the building or use, and the rear lot lines.
SETBACK, SIDE YARD — The minimum horizontal distance between the
side line of the building or use, and the side lot lines; unless the side line of
the building or use is parallel to a street, whereas it shall be a corner side
yard setback.
SHELTER FACILITY — A temporary place of lodging for temporarily
displaced individuals or families or other reasons.[Amended 1-6-2015 by
Ord. No. 01-2015]
SIGN — A name, identification, description, display, or illustration which is
affixed to, or represented directly or indirectly upon, a building, structure,
or piece of land, and which directs attention to an object, product, place,
activity, person, institution, organization, or business. However, a "sign"
shall not include any display of official court or public office notices nor shall
it include the flag, emblem, or insignia of a nation, political unit, school, or
religious group. A "sign" shall not include a sign located completely within
an enclosed building, unless the content shall so indicate. (See diagram in
Illustrations on file in the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer.)
SIGN, ADVERTISING — A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment not exclusively related to the premises
where such sign is located or to which it is affixed. (See diagram in
Illustrations on file in the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer.)
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession conducted, or to a commodity, service or entertainment sold or
offered, upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is
affixed. (See diagram in Illustrations on file in the office of the Village Clerk-
Treasurer.)
STOCK FARM — An agricultural operation, usually non-dairying in nature,
where livestock is raised to the required age or weight for slaughterhouse
purposes or for sale to commercial feedlots.
STORAGE UNIT — Individual unit, cold storage only, and no business to be
run out of unit.
STORY — That part of a building between any floor at or above grade and
the floor next above, and if there be no floor above, then the ceiling above.
A story shall not include a basement or a ground floor as defined in this
chapter.[Amended 1-15-2013]
STREET — A public or private right-of-way which affords a primary means
of vehicular access to abutting property, whether designated as a street,
avenue, highway, road, boulevard, lane, throughway, or however otherwise
designated, but does not include driveways to buildings.
§ 295-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-8
1:563
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change, other than incidental repairs
which would prolong the life of the supporting members of a building, such
as the addition, removal, or alteration of bearing walls, columns, beams,
girders, or foundations.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
a permanent location on the ground or attached to something having
permanent location on the ground.
TRANSIENT RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANT — A person who is entitled to
occupancy at any transient residential use.[Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord.
No. 01-2015]
TRANSIENT RESIDENTIAL USE — A dwelling unit in which the owner's
paying guests or a corporate retreat's guests are entitled to occupancy for
a period of less than 28 consecutive calendar days.[Amended 1-6-2015 by
Ord. No. 01-2015]
UNIT — A dwelling for a single family.
URBAN ROAD SECTION — Road predominantly employing curb and gutter
to convey stormwater to a system of underground pipes for stormwater
conveyance.[Added 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
USE, CONDITIONAL — A use, either public or private, which, because of its
unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a permitted use in
a particular district or districts. After due consideration, in each case of the
impact of such use upon neighboring land, and of the public need for the
particular use of the particular location, such "conditional use" may or may
not be granted, subject to the terms of this chapter.
USE, PERMITTED — A use which may be lawfully established in a particular
district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations,
and standards of such district.
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main use of land or buildings as distinguished
from a subordinate or accessory use. A "principal use" may be "permitted,"
"conditional" or "nonconforming."
UTILITY STORAGE BUILDING — An uninhabited, subordinate structure,
not exceeding 150 square feet in area, attached or detached to the principal
structure, the use of which is incidental to and customary in conjunction
with the principal use of the structure (e.g., tool houses, sheds and other
similar buildings used for the storage of common household supplies,
equipment and vehicles).157
VARIANCE — A departure from the terms of this chapter as applied to a
specific building, structure, or parcel of land which the Board of Appeals
may permit when the Board finds that a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter will result in practical difficulty or unnecessary
hardship, owing to circumstances unique to the individual property on
which the variance is sought, or a literal application of such regulation
157. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 295-8 HOBART CODE § 295-8
1:564
will effect a limitation on the use of the property which does not generally
apply to other properties in the same district, and for which there is not
compensating gain to the public health, safety and welfare. In no case shall
a variance be granted to permit any use not permitted in a particular zone.
VILLAGE — The Village of Hobart.
VILLAGE BOARD — The governing body of the Village of Hobart.
VILLAGE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR/BUILDING INSPECTOR — The
Administrator appointed by the Village Board to administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
VISION CORNER — The vision corner is formed by measuring 30 feet
along each property line from the corner where the two street sides of the
property meet. Connecting these two lines with a diagonal line completes
the triangle and forms the vision corner. (See Corner Vision Triangle
diagram in Illustrations on file in the office of the Village Clerk-
Treasurer.)158
WAREHOUSE — A large building in which goods, raw materials or
commodities are stored or sold as wholesale.
YARD — An open space on the same lot with a building or structure,
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except for
vegetation. A "yard" extends along a lot line, and to a depth or width
specified in the yard requirements for the zone the lot is located in. (See
diagram in Illustrations on file in the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer.)
YARD, CORNER SIDE — A side yard which adjoins a public street. (See
diagram in Illustrations on file in the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer.)
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending along the full length of the front lot line
between the side lot lines. (See diagram in Illustrations on file in the office
of the Village Clerk-Treasurer.)
YARD, INTERIOR SIDE — A side yard which is located immediately adjacent
to another zoning lot or to an alley separating such side yard from another
zoning lot. (See diagram in Illustrations on file in the office of the Village
Clerk-Treasurer.)
YARD, REAR — A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line
between the side lot lines. (See diagram in Illustrations on file in the office
of the Village Clerk-Treasurer.)
ZONING DISTRICT — Divisions of the Village, each area being accurately
defined to boundaries and locations on the Official Zoning Map and in the
Zoning Ordinance, for which the regulations and requirements governing
use, lot, and bulk of buildings and premises are uniform.
ZONING LOT — An area within a single tract of land, under single
ownership having a specific zoning district. A zoning lot may, therefore, not
158. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 295-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-8
1:565
coincide with the lot of record and may be located on a parcel of land with
two or more zoning districts.
§ 295-8 HOBART CODE § 295-8
1:566
ARTICLE IV
General Provisions
§ 295-9. Jurisdiction.
The jurisdiction of this chapter shall include all lands and waters within the
Village of Hobart.
§ 295-10. Effect on existing provisions.
Restriction or requirements with respect to buildings or land or both which
appear in other ordinances of the Village of Hobart or are established by
federal, state, and county laws, and which are greater than those set forth
herein, shall take precedence over those herein. Otherwise, the provisions
of this chapter shall apply.
§ 295-11. Building and uses.
A. The use of buildings hereafter erected, enlarged, converted,
structurally altered, rebuilt or moved; and existing land shall be used
only for purposes as specified in this chapter. Furthermore, land and
building uses shall be in compliance with the regulations as established
herein or each district.
B. Not more than one principal detached residential building shall be
located on a lot of record or a zoning lot, except in the case of planned
unit residential developments or multifamily uses.
C. Permitted, permitted accessory uses, and conditional uses are limited
to the uses indicated for the respective zone districts. Additional uses
shall be allowed upon written recommendation by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and approval by the Village Board. Additional uses,
however, cannot be allowed in the Exclusive Agriculture District, unless
farm-related.
D. Accessory and utility storage buildings.159
(1) Attached accessory buildings and utility storage buildings.
(a) Where an accessory or utility storage building is part of the
main building or is substantially attached thereto, all
dimensional regulations (e.g., setbacks and height) for the
principal buildings or structure shall be applied to the attached
accessory and utility buildings.
(b) Total combined building footprint square footage of attached
accessory building and attached utility storage building use
spaces shall not exceed 50% of the combined footprint of the
159. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 295-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-11
1:567
principal building, attached accessory building and attached
utility building spaces.
(2) Detached accessory buildings located on lots within the R-1, R-2,
R-3 and R-2-R, R-4 and R-5 Zones which are utilized by a singlefamily
or two-family dwelling shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) Not more than one such building shall be located on a lot;
(b) Shall meet the zoning district setback requirements identified
in the respective zoning district;
(c) Detached accessory building structure area is subject to the
following requirements:
[1] May be the greater of 864 square feet or 1/60th of the lot
square footage, but shall not exceed 2,500 square feet;
[2] Shall not occupy more than 30% of an area lying between
the main residential structure and the required rear yard
setback in all zones;
[3] Detached accessory buildings located closer to a street
right-of-way than the rear plane of the principal structure
shall not exceed the lesser of 864 square feet or the
maximum allowed accessory building square footage as
described in Subsection D(1)(b).
(d) The width and lengths dimensions of any such building shall
not exceed a ratio of 3:1;
(e) The height of any such building shall not exceed 25 feet or the
height of the principal structure, whichever is less, and shall
not exceed one story plus a walk-up attic;
(f) The exterior finish shall be of residential materials which are
substantially similar to those used in the principal structure
with respect to texture, color and general appearance;
(g) No accessory building shall be constructed on a property
before a principal structure exists or a building permit to
construct a principal structure is issued.
(3) Detached utility storage buildings located on lots within the R-1,
R-2, R-3, and R-2-R, R-4 and R-5 Zones which are utilized by a
single-family or two-family dwelling shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) Not more than one such building shall be located on a lot;
(b) Shall be located in the rear yard;
§ 295-11 HOBART CODE § 295-11
1:568
(c) The width and lengths dimensions of any such building shall
not exceed a ratio of 3:1;
(d) Building height shall not exceed 10 feet;
(e) The exterior finish shall be of residential material which are
substantially similar to those used in the principal structure
with respect to texture, color and general appearance;
(f) No utility storage building shall be constructed on a property
before a principal structure exists or a building permit to
construct a principal structure is issued.
E. If a nonconforming use of a building or premises is discontinued for a
period of 12 months, any future use of the building or premises shall
conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located. Existing
farming operations shall be exempt from these restrictions.
F. When a building containing a nonconforming use is damaged by fire,
explosion, act of God, or the public enemy to the extent of more than
50% of its current local assessed value, it definitely shall not be
restored, except in conformity with the regulations of the district in
which it is located. Total structural repairs or alterations in any
nonconforming use shall not, during its life, exceed 50% of the local
assessed value of the building at the time of its becoming a
nonconforming use, unless permanently changed to a conforming use.
G. No lot area shall be reduced so that the yards and open spaces shall be
smaller than is required by this chapter. If the lot area is less than that
required for the zoning district in which it is located and was a lot of
record at the time of the passage of this chapter, such lot may be built
upon, if it meets the other district requirements and other requirements
of the Brown County Sanitary and Subdivision Ordinances.
H. Where the Village Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector has issued a
building permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, such permit
shall become null and void, unless work thereon is substantially
underway within six months of the date of the issuance of such permit.
I. Where a building permit for a building or structure has been issued in
accordance with the law prior to the effective date of this chapter, and
provided that construction is begun within six months of such effective
date and diligently prosecuted to completion, said building or structure
may be completed in accordance with the approved plans on the basis
of which the building permit has been issued, and further, may, upon
completion, be occupied under a certificate of occupancy by the use for
which originally designed and subject thereafter to the provisions of
Article XXXI.
J. Radio and television transmitting and receiving antennas, as well as
dish antennas, shall be allowed within the lot area not required for the
§ 295-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-11
1:569
§ 295-12. Area regulations.
building setback area in all zones and on the roof of a building in all
business and industrial zones.
K. Satellite dish antennas greater than 38 inches are not allowed on the
roof of a building in any residential or agricultural zone. However, radio
and television transmitting and receiving antennas are allowed on roofs
in these zones.
L. Mini warehouse.
(1) Must have a continuous roof.
(2) Must have a common wall.
(3) Must be nonheated.
(4) Must be nonsewered.
(5) Maximum height of door shall be 12 feet.
(6) Access points shall be kept clear of ice and/or snow buildup.
(7) Water shall be drained away from structure.
(8) Driveway shall have hard surface within one year of building
completion.
(9) There shall be no outside storage.
(10) Green space shall be maintained, mowed, etc.
(11) Roof pitch shall be a minimum of 4/12.
(12) Overhang is to be one foot on eave end.
A. Lot size shall comply with the required regulations of the established
district.
B. No building permit shall be issued for a lot that abuts on half a street.
Said permit shall be issued only after the entire street right-of-way has
been dedicated.
C. For all lots measuring under five acres in area located in A-1
Agricultural District that were a lot of record prior to August 5, 2003
(the date of the adoption of the A-1 zoning ordinance), the Village may,
upon application of the lot owner, issue a building permit for building
additions, remodeling, or accessory buildings based upon the zoning
requirement for R-1, R-2, R-2-R, or Estate Residential, as selected by
the Village Board, provided that said owner(s) sign(s) an agreement
waiving any objection and consenting to the rezoning of the lot to the
same R-1, R-2, R-2-R, or Estate Residential zoning that was the basis for
the building permit conditions set forth above. The agreement with
respect to rezoning shall be a covenant running with the title to the lot
§ 295-11 HOBART CODE § 295-12
1:570
§ 295-13. Height regulations.
§ 295-14. Front, side, and rear yard regulations.
and shall apply to the rezoning of the lot at such time as any
comprehensive rezoning of the area in which the lot is located is
completed by the Village.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the height of any building
thereafter erected, converted, enlarged or structurally altered shall be
in compliance with the regulations established herein for the district in
which such building is located.
B. Accessory farm buildings, belfries, chimneys, cooling towers, elevator
bulkheads, fire towers, monuments, silos, scenery lofts, tanks, water
towers, ornamental towers, spires, wireless television or broadcasting
towers, masts or aerials, telephone, telegraph and power transmission
poles and lines, microwave radio relay structures and necessary
mechanical appurtenances are hereby exempted from the height
regulations of this chapter.
C. Churches, schools, hospitals, sanitariums and other public and quasipublic
buildings may be erected to a height not exceeding 60 feet,
provided the front, side, and rear yards required in the district in which
such building is to be located are each increased at least one foot for
each foot of additional building height above the height limit otherwise
established for the district in which such building is to be located.
D. Residences may be increased in height by not more than 10 feet when
all yards and other required open spaces are increased by one foot for
each foot by which such building exceeds the height limit of the district
in which it is located.
A. No front yard in any residential district shall be used for open storage of
boats, vehicles, or any other equipment, except for vehicular parking on
driveways.
B. No part of a yard or other open space provided about any building for
the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be
included as part of a yard or any other open space required for another
building.
C. Buildings on through lots and extending from street to street may waive
the requirements for a rear yard by furnishing an equivalent open space
on the same lot in lieu of the required rear yard, provided that the
setback requirements on both streets are complied with; and further
provided that no accessory building shall extend within the setback line
on either street.
D. Only fences, hedges, shrubs or other natural objects three feet or less in
height may be located within a vision corner. Single stem trees are
permitted only if all the foliage between three feet and eight feet in
§ 295-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-14
1:571
§ 295-15. Fences, walls, hedges and berms.
height is removed. The height measurement is the vertical distance
between the top of the nearest curb or center line of the road and the
top of the fence, shrub or tree.
A. A fence, wall, hedge or berm may be erected, placed, maintained or
grown subject to the following location and height restrictions:
(1) No fence, wall, hedge or berm which is located in a required front
or corner side yard shall exceed a height of three feet except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.
(2) No fence, wall, hedge or berm which is located in a side or rear
yard shall exceed a height of eight feet.
Note: Fences located in the PDD Centennial Centre at Hobart
Zoning District may have additional standards specific to that
district.
B. In the Agricultural and Exclusive Agricultural Districts, no fence, wall,
or hedge shall be erected, constructed, maintained, or grown to a
height exceeding four feet above the ground within 15 feet of any street
right-of-way or street right-of-way projected.
C. In the Community Business, Limited Industrial, and Industrial Park
Districts, no fence, wall, or hedge shall be erected, constructed,
maintained, or grown to a height exceeding three feet above the ground
within 15 feet of any street right-of-way or street right-of-way projected.
D. Fencing not in the required setback area may not exceed eight feet in
any zone.
E. Construction and maintenance.
(1) The height of fences, walls and hedges shall be measured from the
natural grading and contours of the land.
(2) Fences shall be constructed with the finished side facing the
neighboring property. Where support posts are installed on one
side of the fence, the posts shall be on the side facing the owner of
the fence.
(3) Every fence shall be constructed in a straight and true, substantial
workmanlike manner. Fences shall be erected and constructed in a
uniform fashion with uniformity in material use, application and
construction. Fences shall be constructed of material reasonably
suited for the purpose for which the fence is proposed to be used.
(4) Fences shall be constructed so the bottom side of the fence follows
the contour of the land with any space between the bottom of the
fence and grade maintaining a uniform height above grade for the
length of the fence.
§ 295-14 HOBART CODE § 295-15
1:572
§ 295-16. (Reserved)161
(5) Every fence shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair
and shall not be allowed to become and remain in a condition of
disrepair or danger or constitute a nuisance, public or private. Any
such fence which is, or has become, dangerous to the public safety,
health or welfare, is a public nuisance and shall be repaired,
replaced or removed.
(6) No fence, wall, hedge or berm shall be erected, placed, maintained
or grown which creates an obstruction to the natural or designed
surface storm drainage patterns in the surrounding area.
(7) In those instances where a fence exists as an enclosure which
restricts access from the front to the rear yard, a gate, identifiable
as a collapsible section, or other such means of recognizable
ingress, shall be unobstructed and a minimum of three feet in
width. The location of such ingress points shall be positioned at any
point paralleling the front lot line between the side lot property line
and the principal structure.
F. Earthen berms shall be constructed not less than six feet from property
lines. The property owner must ensure proper drainage. Any fence, wall
or hedge placed on a berm shall comply with all requirements of this
section. The height of berms, fences and hedges shall be measured from
the natural grading and contours of the land, not from the grade
elevation of the berm.
G. Prohibited materials and their exclusions. Barbed wire, razor wire,
chain link fencing with barbed/sharp ends, aboveground electric
fencing, snow fencing, chicken wire, hardware cloth and fencing of
similar materials are prohibited, except as provided by the following:
[Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-205]
(1) Barbed wire, chicken wire, hardware cloth and fencing of similar
materials where erected on farming lands used to enclose or create
boundaries for areas used for cultivation, crops or livestock.
(2) Barbed wire in Industrial District fencing where the barbed wire is
placed at least seven feet above the ground.
(3) Low-voltage electric fencing erected on farming lands where said
fencing is used to create barriers/boundaries for the containment
of livestock.
(4) Snow fencing, chicken wire, hardware cloth and fencing of similar
materials are allowed as a temporary use without a building permit
from October 15 through April 15 or to barricade construction sites
any time during the year.160
160. Editor's Note: Original Subsection 8, Words defined, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015.
§ 295-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-17
1:573
§ 295-17. Swimming pools.
A. No construction of a swimming pool shall begin unless a permit therefor
has been obtained. The application for such permit shall be
accompanied by a site plan showing the size, location and description of
the property.
B. Permanent above or in-ground pools shall comply with setback
requirements of the zone in which the proposed pool is to be located. In
determining this setback for aboveground pools with permanent
fencing or decks, any deck, walkway, or similar structure shall be
considered part of the pool.
C. All pools shall be encompassed by fencing as provided under this
section.
D. All fences under this section shall be constructed in such a manner as to
comply with the following requirements:
(1) The fence must be able to withstand 200 pounds of force in any
direction.
(2) The fence shall be so constructed and designed so as to prevent
penetration of an object greater than six inches in diameter.
(3) All such fences shall be constructed with a locking door or gate
which complies with all other height and structural requirements in
this section.
E. Permanent in-ground pools shall be encompassed by a freestanding
fence not less than 48 inches nor more than 96 inches from the ground
level. Such fence shall be no less than three feet from the pool at its
nearest point. The fence shall comply with Subsection D above.
F. Aboveground pools shall be encompassed by fencing which complies
with one or any combination of options listed below and complies with
Subsection D of this section.
(1) A fence in compliance with Subsection B of this section.
(2) A fence, no closer than three feet to the pool, provided such fence
be at least 36 inches above the top edge of the pool and not less
than 48 inches nor more than 96 inches from ground level.
(3) A fence attached to a deck or walkway, provided such fence is at
least 36 inches above the surface of the deck or walkway and
complies with Subsection F(2) above.
(4) An aboveground pool at least 48 inches aboveground does not
require a fence.
161. Editor’s Note: Former § 295-16, Mounds, septic systems, drain fields, was repealed
9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-11
§ 295-17 HOBART CODE § 295-17
1:574
§ 295-18. House numbering.
(5) All decks or ladders attached to a pool require a lockable gate.
G. No person shall operate a public swimming pool on any premises zoned
residential. The operation of a public swimming pool on residential
premises is declared to be a public nuisance. A public swimming pool is
any swimming pool operated by the owner or lessee thereof for
financial gain, no matter how incidental the financial gain is to the
overall operation.
H. No residential swimming pool shall be so located, designed, operated,
or maintained as to interfere unduly with the enjoyment of the property
rights by owners of property adjoining the swimming pool or located in
the neighborhood.
I. Lights used to illuminate any residential swimming pool shall be so
arranged and shaded as to reflect light away from adjoining premises.
J. No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued at any
residential swimming pool any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or
any noise which annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort,
repose, health, peace, or safety of others. In the operation of a
residential swimming pool, the use or permitting the use or operation of
any radio, receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other
machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such
manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the neighboring
inhabitants, or at any time within louder volume than is necessary for
convenient hearing of the persons who are in the residential swimming
pool premises, shall be prohibited.
K. Every person using an outdoor residential swimming pool shall wear a
bathing suit or other suitable garment to protect his/her person from
indecent exposure.
A. House numbering according to map.
(1) All lots and parts of lots in the Village of Hobart shall be numbered
in accordance with the plat book now on file in the Village Office.
(2) All lots and parts of lots hereafter platted shall be numbered to
conform as nearly as possible to the general scheme of numbering
as outlined on such map.
B. Correcting existing numbers.
(1) The owner of any dwelling, tenement, or building required by this
chapter to be numbered, and which is not numbered or is
incorrectly numbered shall cause the same to be numbered or
renumbered, as the case may be, forthwith and not later than 30
days from the effective date hereof, and shall thereafter maintain
the same, in compliance with this chapter.
§ 295-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-18
1:575
(2) It shall be the duty of each owner of any dwelling, tenement, or
building fronting upon any street or alley, within 30 days from the
effective date of this chapter, to properly number the same as
herein provided and shall thereafter maintain the same.
C. Placement and size of number.
(1) Numbers must be in Arabic numeral form.
(2) Numbers shall be not less than three inches high.
(3) The numbers shall be in contrasting colors and conspicuously
placed immediately above garage door or at the side of the main
door of each building so that the numbers can be seen plainly from
the street.
(4) Whenever any building is more than 50 feet from property right-ofway,
the number of the building shall be conspicuously displayed at
the property right-of-way line, within 10 feet of walk, driveway or
common entrance to such building and upon the gatepost, mailbox,
post, or other appropriate place so it is easily discernible at all
times from the street.
(5) Where a common driveway is used by two or more private property
owners, they shall post the building addresses at the road right-ofway
within 10 feet of the common driveway entrance and where
each private driveway branches off of a common driveway.
D. House numbering for second floor. Where the second floor of a
structure is separately occupied, the same shall be given a separate
letter in addition to the number of the first floor. In multiple dwellings,
numbering shall be as directed by the Zoning Administrator/Building
Inspector.
E. Enforcement.
(1) The Police Department, Public Works Department, or Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector shall inform the owner and
Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector of said property of
address numbering violation.
(2) The owner shall within 30 days of notice correct the numbering
address violation.
F. Violations and penalties.
(1) If the owner of any dwelling, tenement or building required to be
numbered or renumbered by this chapter neglects or fails to do so
within the said thirty-day period, the Zoning Administrator/
Building Inspector shall cause to be served upon such owner a
notice requiring such owner to comply with this chapter. If he/she
neglects or fails to do so within 10 days of notification, he/she shall
be deemed to have violated this chapter.
§ 295-18 HOBART CODE § 295-18
1:576
§ 295-19. Nonconforming uses, developments and structures.
[Added 3-18-2014]
(2) Upon conviction thereof, violators shall be subject to the penalties
provided in § 1-3. Each day shall be considered a separate
violation.162
A. Applicability and intent. Any use of land or structures, or any lot or
structure which lawfully existed at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter which would not be permitted or
permissible by the provisions of this chapter as adopted or amended,
shall be deemed nonconforming. It is the intent of this chapter to permit
such nonconformities to continue until they are removed, subject to
certain restrictions.
B. Nonconforming structures. Where, at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter, a building or structure exists which could
not be erected in the district in which it is located by reason of
restriction on area or coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot or
other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may
continue in existence subject to the following restrictions:
(1) Maintenance, repair, renovation and remodeling.
(a) Maintenance, repair, renovation or remodeling are defined as
follows:
[1] The repair or replacement of doors, windows, interior
walls, fixtures, heating and air-conditioning components,
wiring, plumbing, siding, roofing, or other nonstructural
components.
[2] Adding, removing, changing or rearranging of supporting
members of an existing structure such as walls, columns,
beams, girders or partitions.
(b) Maintenance, repair, renovation and remodeling made to
nonconforming buildings and structures are permitted,
provided that the nonconforming structure or building does
not increase the nonconformity.
(2) Additions.
(a) An addition shall be defined as anything that increases the size
or volume of a building or structure.
[1] For purposes of this section, size is defined as the site
coverage, physical dimension, volume, height, length,
width, or gross floor area.
162. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 295-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-19
1:577
(b) Additions made to nonconforming structures are permissible
subject to the following:
[1] Additions meeting all zoning district setbacks are allowed.
[2] Additions employing established nonconforming yard
setbacks shall be limited to 50% of the current assessed
fair market value of the nonconforming structure for the
lifetime of the structure. Such additions shall not encroach
any further into established nonconforming yard setbacks.
[a] A record shall be kept which lists the nonconforming
structures, their assessed fair market value, and the
cost of those additions which have been permitted.
Such records shall be cumulative and track the cost of
the additions for the lifetime of the structure.
(c) Additions shall meet all other provisions of this chapter,
including, but not limited to, height, maximum lot coverage,
off-street parking and loading facilities, and landscaping
standards.
(3) Relocation.
(a) Relocation shall be defined as any repositioning of a structure
on its site or moving any structure to another site.
(b) No structure shall be moved in whole or in part to any other
location on the same or any other site unless the structure
complies with all current code standards.
(c) If a structure is relocated to a new site, it shall also comply
with all other provisions of this chapter, including but not
limited to, maximum lot coverage, off-street parking, and
loading facilities, and landscaping standards.
(4) Restoration of nonconforming buildings.
(a) Nonconforming buildings damaged or destroyed by violent
wind, vandalism, fire, flood, ice, snow, mold, or infestation may
be restored to the size and location and use that it had
immediately before the damage or destruction occurred,
subject to:
[1] Restoration may be made without limits on the costs of the
repair, reconstruction or improvements;
[2] A nonconforming building may be constructed larger than
the size it was immediately before the damage or
destruction if necessary for the structure to comply with
applicable state or federal requirements, subject to
compliance with Subsection B(2).
§ 295-19 HOBART CODE § 295-20
1:578
§ 295-20. Preexisting substandard parcels.
§ 295-21. Preexisting nonconforming uses and developments.
A. Lots or parcels used or proposed to be placed in a use allowable under
this chapter that are deficient in minimum lot area or minimum lot
width may be allowable for such use if the parcel was of record with the
Register of Deeds on the effective date of this chapter (October 1975) in
its current size or shape and if the following conditions are met:
[Amended 12-16-2014]
(1) If one or more adjoining parcels are owned by the same party and if
joinder of parcels or movement of parcel boundaries is determined
to be feasible, the substandard parcel may be required to be made
standard by combination with the adjoining parcel or movement of
parcel boundaries.
(2) If the deficiency is lack of required frontage on a public street, an
existing substandard parcel may nevertheless be approved if it has
either 20 feet of frontage on a public street or (for residential
parcels) effective and workable easement access to a public street.
(3) An existing substandard parcel that is zoned residential may be
allowable as a site for a residential dwelling structure not to exceed
two units if it has 6,000 square feet of lot area and at least 60 feet
of lot width at the building line and effective and workable
easement access to a public street. If such a parcel is 6,000 square
feet or more in area but less than standard dimensions, the area of
such lot may not be reduced.
B. These allowances apply only to preexisting substandard parcels and do
not establish policy or precedent favoring the creation of new
substandard lot configurations.
A. Applicability and intent. Any use of land or structures or any lot or
structure which lawfully existed at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter which would not be permitted or
permissible by the provisions of this chapter as adopted or amended,
shall be deemed nonconforming. It is the intent of this chapter to permit
such nonconformities to continue, subject to certain restrictions.
B. Nonconforming uses of land (or land with minor structures only).
Where at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter a
lawful use of land exists which would not be permitted or permissible in
the district in which it is located, and where such use involves a
structure or structures with a fair market value of less than $10,000,
such use may be continued subject to the following restrictions:
[Amended 12-16-2014]
(1) Such use shall not be enlarged, increased, nor extended to occupy
a greater area of the lot than was occupied at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this chapter.
§ 295-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-21
1:579
(2) Such use shall not be moved in whole or part to any other portion of
the lot other than the portion occupied by such use at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this chapter.
(3) When such use is discontinued or abandoned for a period of more
than 12 consecutive months for any reason whatever, or when such
use is replaced by a permitted or permissible use, a nonconforming
use shall not thereafter be resumed.
(4) No additional structure in connection with such use shall be
erected.
C. Nonconforming uses of structures. Where at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this chapter the use of a structure exists
which would not be permitted or permissible in the district in which it is
located, and where such use involves a structure with a fair market
value exceeding $10,000, such use may be continued, subject to the
following restrictions:
(1) No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted or permissible
shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or
structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a
use permitted or permissible in the district in which it is located.
(2) Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use
at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter. Any
nonconforming use which occupied a portion of a building not
originally designed or intended for such use shall not be extended
to any part of the building. No nonconforming use shall be
extended to occupy any land outside the building, nor any other
building not used for such nonconforming use.
(3) There may be a change in tenancy, ownership, or management of a
nonconforming use, provided there is no change in the nature or
character of such nonconforming use.
(4) When such use of a structure is discontinued or abandoned for a
period of more than 12 consecutive months for any reason
whatever, or when such use is replaced by a permitted or
permissible use, a nonconforming use shall not thereafter be
resumed.
(5) If a structure occupied by a nonconforming use is removed or
destroyed or damaged to an extent of more than 50% of its fair
market value at the time of destruction, the nonconforming use
shall not be resumed.
D. Nonconforming structures. Where, at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter, a lawful building or structure exists which
could not be erected in the district in which it is located by reason of
restriction on area or coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot or
§ 295-21 HOBART CODE § 295-21
1:580
other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may
continue in existence, subject to the following restrictions: [Amended
12-16-2014]
(1) Such structure shall not be altered in any manner which would
increase the degree of nonconformity. The total structural repairs
or alterations in such nonconforming structure shall not during its
life exceed 50% of the fair market value of the structure.
(2) If such structure is destroyed or damaged to an extent of less than
50% of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it may be
reconstructed, provided reconstruction shall substantially reflect
the prior structural arrangement and shall not increase the degree
of nonconformity. If such structure is destroyed or damaged to an
extent of more than 50% of its fair market value at the time of
destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with
the provisions of the district in which it is located.
E. Nonconforming characteristics of use. If characteristics of use such as
lighting, parking, noise or other matters pertaining to the use of land,
structures and premises are made nonconforming by the provisions of
this chapter as adopted or amended, no change shall thereafter be
made in such characteristics of use which increases the nonconformity;
provided, however, that changes may be made which do not increase, or
which decrease, such nonconformity.
F. Nonconforming lots of record.
(1) In any district, any permitted or permissible structure may be
erected on a single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter. This provision shall apply even though
such lot fails to meet the requirements of lot area, lot width, or both
for the district in which it is located, provided such lot shall be in
separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots
in the same ownership, and provided all other requirements for the
district are met.
(2) If two or more lots, or combinations of lots and portions of lots with
continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, the lands
involved shall be considered to be in individual parcel for the
purposes of this chapter, and no portion of such parcel shall be
used, divided, or sold which does not meet the lot area and lot
width requirements for the district in which it is located.
G. Nonconforming signs. No nonconforming sign shall be altered in any
manner which would increase the degree of nonconformity. If such sign
is destroyed or damaged to an extent of more than 50% of its
replacement cost at the time of destruction, such sign shall be replaced
as a conforming sign. If a nonconforming sign is destroyed or damaged
to an extent of less than 50% of its replacement cost at the time of
§ 295-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-21
1:581
destruction, it may be reconstructed, provided any reconstruction does
not increase the degree of nonconformity which previously existed
unless approved by the Village Board.
H. Casual, temporary, or illegal use. The casual, temporary, or illegal use of
land or structures, or land structures in combination, shall not be
sufficient to establish the existence of a nonconforming use or to create
rights in the continuance of such use.
I. Repairs and maintenance. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
prevent normal maintenance or repair of any structure or to prevent
restoring to a safe condition any structure declared to be unsafe.
J. Existing special exceptions. Any use or structure existing on the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter which is
classified as a special exception in the district in which it is located shall
be deemed to have been granted approval, subject to maintaining the
character and extent of such use or structure existing on that date. Any
extension, enlargement or change in such use or structure shall require
approval according to the terms of this chapter.
§ 295-21 HOBART CODE § 295-21
1:582
ARTICLE V
Establishment of Zones
§ 295-22. Zone districts. [Amended 12-16-2014; 1-6-2015 by Ord.
No. 01-2015; 3-17-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-04]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Village of Hobart, Brown County,
Wisconsin is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
R-1 Residential District
R-2 Residential District
R-3 Residential District
R-4 Single- and Two-Family Residential District
R-5 Two-Family Through Eight-Family Residential District
R-6 Multifamily Residential District
R-7 Planned Development Overlay District
ER Estate Residential
R-2-R Rural Residential District
A-1 Agricultural District
A-2 Exclusive Agricultural District
B-1 Community Business District
B-2 Limited Community Business District
C-1 Limited Commercial District
I-1 Limited Industrial District
I-2 Industrial Park District
I-3 Airport Industrial District
AEO Adult Entertainment Overlay District
PDD #1 Centennial Centre at Hobart Planned Development District
PDD #2 Orlando/Packerland Planned Development District
PDD #3
Gambling District Overlay
§ 295-23. Zoning Map. [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
The location and boundaries of the districts established by this chapter
are set forth on the Zoning Map, entitled "Zoning District Map for the
Village of Hobart, Brown County, Wisconsin," dated October 6, 1986, and as
subsequently amended, which are incorporated herein and hereby made a
part of this chapter. The said map, together with everything shown thereon
and all amendments thereto, shall be as much a part of this chapter as
though fully set forth and described herein.
§ 295-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-24
1:583
§ 295-24. Zone boundaries.
The following rules shall apply with respect to the boundaries of the various
districts as shown on the Zoning District Map.
§ 295-25. Exempted uses.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the following uses are
exempted by this chapter and permitted in any zone district: poles, towers,
wires, cable conduits, vaults, laterals, pipes, mains, valves, or any other
similar distributing equipment for telephone or other communications,
public highway rights-of-way and improvement projects, and electric power,
gas, water and sewer lines, provided that the installation shall conform to
the Federal Communication Commission and Federal Aviation Agency rules
and regulations, and other authorities having jurisdiction.
A. District boundary lines are the center line of highways, streets, alleys,
and pavements; or right-of-way lines of railroads, toll roads, and
expressways; or section, division of section, tract and lot lines; or such
lines extended, unless otherwise indicated. Conservancy districts shall
follow soil unit delineations identified on the U.S. Department of
Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service Maps for the
Village of Hobart, as determined by the Village Zoning Administrator/
Building Inspector.
B. In areas not subdivided into lots and blocks, wherever a district is
indicated as a strip adjacent to and paralleling a street or highway, the
depth of such strips shall be in accordance with dimensions shown on
the maps measured at right angles from the center line of the street or
highway, and the length of frontage shall be in accordance with
dimensions shown on the map from section, quarter section, or division
lines, or center lines of streets and highways, or railroad right-of-way,
unless otherwise indicated.
C. Where a district boundary line divides a lot in single ownership on the
effective date of this chapter, the Board of Appeals, after due hearing,
may extend the regulation for either portion of such lot.
D. It should be pointed out that various properties within the Village of
Hobart are affected by the Austin Straubel Airport Zoning Ordinance
administered by Brown County. The Airport Director can ascertain
exact locations and any development conditions or requirements.
§ 295-24 HOBART CODE § 295-25
1:584
ARTICLE VI
R-1 Residential District
§ 295-26. Applicability.
The following regulations shall apply in R-1 Districts.
§ 295-27. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in the R-1 District:
§ 295-28. Prohibited uses.
The following uses are prohibited in the R-1 District:
§ 295-29. Permitted accessory uses.
The following are permitted accessory uses in the R-1 District:
§ 295-30. Conditional uses. [Amended 1-15-2013; 1-2-2019 by Ord.
No. 2018-20]
The following are conditional uses in the R-1 District:
A. Single-family dwellings.
B. Parks, playgrounds and athletic fields.
C. Public recreational and community center buildings and grounds.
A. Corporate retreats.
B. Outdoor wood burners/solid-fuel heating devices. [Added 1-6-2015 by
Ord. No. 01-2015]
A. Home occupations.
B. Private garages, carports and driveways.
C. Private swimming pools.
D. Satellite dish antennas less than 38 inches in diameter.
E. Tool houses, sheds and other similar buildings used for the storage of
common supplies.
F. Telephone, cable television, and public utility installations.
A. Cemeteries.
B. Colleges and universities.
C. Fire stations, police stations, post offices, and other municipal facilities
necessary for Village operation.
§ 295-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-30
1:585
§ 295-31. Lot requirements with public sewer.
D. In regard to single-family residences only, the keeping of more than two
dogs, or the operation of a kennel, as defined in this chapter or the
Wisconsin Statutes.
E. Manufactured home parks.
F. Planned unit development.
G. Ponds.
H. Public, parochial and private, elementary, junior high and senior high
schools.
I. Religious institutions in the form of convents, seminaries, monasteries,
churches, chapels, temples, synagogues, rectories, parsonages, and
parish houses.
J. Satellite dish antennas larger than 38 inches and less than 12 feet in
diameter.
K. Accessory structures and fences which do not conform to the
requirements identified elsewhere in this chapter, but which are
designed, constructed and maintained so as to be harmonious and
appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of
the general vicinity or use and will not change the essential character of
the same area.
L. Public utility and service uses, and civic buildings as follows:
(1) Substations.
(2) Fire stations.
(3) Gas regulator stations.
(4) Police stations, public works facilities.
(5) Railroad right-of-way but not including railroad yards and shops,
other than for passenger purposes.
(6) Telephone exchanges, transmission equipment buildings and
microwave relay towers.
(7) Parcels that do not meet any one of the zoning requirements
regarding building setbacks, lot frontage, lot size, accessory
building size and number of buildings per parcel; provided that the
remaining zoning requirements are all met.
A. Lot area. Lot size for subdivision plats and multi-lot certified survey
maps shall achieve a density of no more than three residential lots for
each two acres of land, except that no lot shall be less than 12,000
§ 295-30 HOBART CODE § 295-31
1:586
§ 295-32. Height regulations.
All structures: 35 feet maximum, except as provided in § 295-13, Height
regulations.
§ 295-33. Building setbacks. [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No.
01-2015]
Yard Principal Structure
Accessory
Building Driveways
Front yard 40 feet minimum from
right-of-way
30 feet minimum from
right-of-way for urban
road sections
40 feet minimum
from right-ofway
30 feet minimum
from right-ofway
for urban
road sections
6 feet from
property line
Side yard 1 story - 10 feet
minimum each side;
2 story - 15 feet
minimum each side
10 feet minimum 6 feet from
property line
Rear yard 25 feet minimum 10 feet minimum 6 feet from
property line
Corner lot 40 feet minimum from
right-of-way
30 feet minimum from
right-of-way for urban
road sections
40 feet minimum
from right-ofway
30 feet minimum
from right-ofway
for urban
road sections
75 feet rom
center line of
intersection
§ 295-34. Building size and facades.
square feet. Lot size for unplatted individual lots and one lot certified
survey maps shall be no less than 2/3 of an acre.
B. Zoning lot frontage. Residential lots, where served by public sewer,
shall not be less than 100 feet wide measured at the right-of-way line,
except where said lot is located on the outer radius of a cul-de-sac, the
lot width may be measured at the right-of-way line, but shall not be less
than 75 feet wide.
A. Minimum size of dwelling shall be 1,200 square feet for a single-family
residence.
B. All single- and two-family dwellings and attached/detached accessory
and utility buildings shall have faces constructed of or faced with finish
§ 295-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-34
1:587
§ 295-35. Attached and detached accessory and utility buildings.
[Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
Attached and detached accessory and utility buildings shall conform to
district requirements and those set forth in § 295-11, Building and uses.
§ 295-36. Parking.
Parking shall conform to the requirements as set forth in Article XXVIII, Off-
Street Parking Requirements.
§ 295-37. Signs.
Signs shall be regulated as set forth in § 295-361, Regulation of signs.
materials which are intended for that use by the manufacturer for
purposes of preservation and appearance, are aesthetically compatible
with other dwelling facades in the general area, and presents an
attractive appearance to the public and to surrounding properties.
Acceptable materials include, but are not limited to, weatherproof
materials such as wood, decorative masonry, decorative concrete,
stucco, exterior insulation and finish systems (EFIS), Masonite, "hardie"
board and vinyl, aluminum or steel lap siding, or other materials of a
similar character, providing said materials or combination of materials
meet the intent of this section. This regulation has been established
to enhance the aesthetic compatibility with the surrounding area and
neighborhood. [Added 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
§ 295-34 HOBART CODE § 295-37
1:588
ARTICLE VII
R-2 Residential District
§ 295-38. Applicability.
The following regulations shall apply in R-2 Districts.
§ 295-39. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in the R-2 District:
§ 295-40. Prohibited uses.
The following uses are prohibited in the R-2 District:
§ 295-41. Permitted accessory uses.
The following are permitted accessory uses in the R-2 District:
§ 295-42. Conditional uses. [Amended 1-15-2013; 1-2-2019 by Ord.
No. 2018-20]
The following are conditional uses in the R-2 District:
A. Parks, playgrounds, and athletic fields.
B. Public recreational and community center buildings and grounds.
C. Single-family dwellings.
A. Corporate retreats.
B. Outdoor wood burners/solid-fuel heating devices. [Added 1-6-2015 by
Ord. No. 01-2015]
A. Home occupations.
B. Private garages, carports, and driveways.
C. Private swimming pools.
D. Tool houses, sheds and other similar buildings used for the storage of
common supplies.
E. Satellite dish antennas less than 38 inches in diameter.
F. Telephone and public utility installations and cable television
installations.
G. The keeping or maintaining of no more than six chickens (hens or
pullets) when licensed in compliance with Chapter 102. [Added
7-15-2014]
A. Artificial lake, pond.
§ 295-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-42
1:589
§ 295-43. Lot requirements.
B. Cemeteries.
C. Colleges and universities.
D. Floriculture, forestry, horticulture, hatcheries, nurseries, orchards,
paddocks, riding academies and stables, game farms, wildlife
sanctuaries and game preserves.
E. In regard to single-family residences only, the keeping of more than two
dogs, or the operation of a kennel, as defined in this chapter or the
Wisconsin Statutes.
F. Planned unit development.
G. Public, parochial and private, elementary, junior high and senior high
schools.
H. Quarries, sand and gravel pits.
I. Religious institutions in the form of convents, seminaries, monasteries,
churches, chapels, temples, synagogues, rectories, parsonages, and
parish houses.
J. Satellite dish antennas larger than 38 inches and less than 12 feet in
diameter.
K. Accessory structures and fences which do not conform to the
requirements identified elsewhere in this chapter, but which are
designed, constructed and maintained so as to be harmonious and
appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of
the general vicinity or use and will not change the essential character of
the same area.
L. Public utility and service uses, and civic buildings as follows:
(1) Substations.
(2) Fire stations.
(3) Gas regulator stations.
(4) Police stations, public works facilities.
(5) Railroad right-of-way but not including railroad yards and shops,
other than for passenger purposes.
(6) Telephone exchanges, transmission equipment buildings and
microwave relay towers.
A. Area: 2 1/2 acres minimum.
§ 295-42 HOBART CODE § 295-43
1:590
§ 295-44. Height regulations.
Residential dwellings: 35 feet maximum, except as provided by § 295-13,
Height regulations.
§ 295-45. Building setbacks.
Principal Structure
Accessory
Building Driveways
Front yard 40 feet minimum from
right-of-way
40 feet minimum
from right-ofway
6 feet from
property line
Side yard 25 feet minimum 10 feet minimum 6 feet from
property line
Rear yard 25 feet minimum 10 feet minimum 6 feet from
property line
Corner lot 40 feet minimum from
right-of-way
40 feet minimum
from right-ofway
125 feet from
center line of
intersection
§ 295-46. Building size and facades.
(1) Exception. Upon the approval of the Village Board, lot area
requirements for a platted area may be reduced, so long as the
following requirements are maintained:
(a) The lot shall be no less than one acre in size where said area is
measured from the right-of-way line.
(b) No more than 12 1/2% of the number of lots shall have lot size
indicated in Subsection A(1)(a) above.
(c) No more than 25% of the number of lots shall have lot size less
than two acres in size where said lot size is measured from the
right-of-way line.
B. Lot frontage: 200 feet minimum.
(1) Exception. Upon the approval of the Village Board, lot frontage
requirements for a platted area may be reduced so long as the
following requirements are maintained:
(a) No more than 25% of the number of lots shall have zoning lot
frontage less than 200 feet as measured from the right-of-way
line on subdivisions of five or more lots.
A. Minimum size of residential dwelling shall be 1,200 square feet for a
single-family dwelling.
B. All single- and two-family dwellings and attached/detached accessory
and utility buildings shall have faces constructed of or faced with finish
§ 295-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-46
1:591
§ 295-47. Attached and detached accessory and utility buildings.
[Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
Attached and detached accessory and utility buildings shall conform to
district requirements and those set forth in § 295-11, Building and uses.
§ 295-48. Parking.
Parking shall conform to the requirements as set forth in Article XXVIII, Off-
Street Parking Requirements.
§ 295-49. Signs.
Signs shall be regulated as set forth in § 295-361, Regulation of signs.
§ 295-50. Other requirements.
materials which are intended for that use by the manufacturer for
purposes of preservation and appearance, are aesthetically compatible
with other dwelling facades in the general area, and presents an
attractive appearance to the public and to surrounding properties.
Acceptable materials include, but are not limited to, weatherproof
materials such as wood, decorative masonry, decorative concrete,
stucco, exterior insulation and finish systems (EFIS), Masonite, "hardie"
board and vinyl, aluminum or steel lap siding, or other materials of a
similar character, providing said materials or combination of materials
meet the intent of this section. This regulation has been established
to enhance the aesthetic compatibility with the surrounding area and
neighborhood. [Added 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
A. Other structures or buildings allowed within the R-2 District shall meet
the requirements of the district and remaining articles of this chapter,
as determined by the Village Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector.
B. The Village Board shall require the certification of the Brown County
Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector's office stating that adequate
area exists on each lot for an on-site sanitary soil absorption system or
alternative system conforming to state and county sanitary regulations
and that sufficient area also exists for a replacement absorption system.
§ 295-46 HOBART CODE § 295-50
1:592
ARTICLE VIII
R-3 Residential District
§ 295-51. Applicability.
The following regulations shall apply in R-3 Districts.
§ 295-52. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in the R-3 District:
§ 295-53. Prohibited uses.
The following uses are prohibited in the R-3 District:
§ 295-54. Permitted accessory uses.
The following are permitted accessory uses in the R-3 District:
§ 295-55. Conditional uses. [Amended 1-15-2013; 1-2-2019 by Ord.
No. 2018-20]
The following are conditional uses in the R-3 District:
A. Parks, playgrounds, and athletic fields.
B. Public recreational and community center buildings and grounds.
C. Single-family dwellings.
A. Corporate retreats.
B. Outdoor wood burners/solid-fuel heating devices. [Added 1-6-2015 by
Ord. No. 01-2015]
A. Home occupations.
B. Private garages, carports, and driveways.
C. Private swimming pools.
D. Satellite dish antennas less than 38 inches in diameter.
E. Tool houses, sheds and other similar buildings used for the storage of
common supplies.
F. Telephone and public utility installations and cable television
installations.
G. The keeping or maintaining of no more than six chickens (hens or
pullets) when licensed in compliance with Chapter 102. [Added
6-7-2016 by Ord. No. 06-2016]
A. Artificial lake, pond.
§ 295-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-55
1:593
§ 295-56. Lot requirements served by public sewer.
B. Cemeteries.
C. Colleges and universities.
D. In regard to single-family residences only, the keeping of more than two
dogs, or the operation of a kennel, as defined in this chapter or the
Wisconsin Statutes.
E. Public, parochial and private, elementary, junior high and senior high
schools.
F. Religious institutions in the form of convents, seminaries, monasteries,
churches, chapels, temples, synagogues, rectories, parsonages, and
parish houses.
G. Satellite dish antennas larger than 38 inches and less than 12 feet in
diameter.
H. Accessory structures and fences which do not conform to the
requirements identified elsewhere in this chapter, but which are
designed, constructed and maintained so as to be harmonious and
appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of
the general vicinity or use and will not change the essential character of
the same area.
I. Public utility and service uses, and civic buildings as follows:
(1) Substations.
(2) Fire stations.
(3) Gas regulator stations.
(4) Police stations, public works facilities.
(5) Railroad right-of-way but not including railroad yards and shops,
other than for passenger purposes.
(6) Telephone exchanges, transmission equipment buildings and
microwave relay towers.
A. Area: 18,000 square feet minimum.
B. Lot frontage. Minimum lot frontage shall be 120 feet, as measured
along the street right-of-way line. An exception shall be made for culsde-
sac or curvilinear streets, in which case, the one-hundred-twentyfoot
minimum shall be as measured along the lot's building setback line.
Right-of-way frontage, in no case, however, shall be less than 85 feet.
§ 295-55 HOBART CODE § 295-57
1:594
§ 295-57. Height regulations.
Residential dwellings: 35 feet maximum, except as provided by § 295-13,
Height regulations.
§ 295-58. Building setbacks.
Principal Structure
Accessory
Building Driveways
Front yard 40 feet minimum from
right-of-way
40 feet minimum
from right-ofway
6 feet from
property line
Side yard 1 story - 10 feet
minimum each side
2 story - 15 feet
minimum each side
10 feet minimum 6 feet from
property line
Rear yard 25 feet minimum 10 feet minimum 6 feet from
property line
Corner lot 40 feet minimum from
right-of-way
40 feet minimum
from right-ofway
75 feet from
center line of
intersection
§ 295-59. Building size and facades.
§ 295-60. Attached and detached accessory and utility buildings.
[Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
Attached and detached accessory and utility buildings shall conform to
district requirements and those set forth in § 295-11, Building and uses.
A. Minimum size of residential dwelling shall be 1,400 square feet for a
single-family dwelling.
B. All single- and two-family dwellings and attached/detached accessory
and utility buildings shall have faces constructed of or faced with finish
materials which are intended for that use by the manufacturer for
purposes of preservation and appearance, are aesthetically compatible
with other dwelling facades in the general area, and presents an
attractive appearance to the public and to surrounding properties.
Acceptable materials include, but are not limited to, weatherproof
materials such as wood, decorative masonry, decorative concrete,
stucco, exterior insulation and finish systems (EFIS), Masonite, "hardie"
board and vinyl, aluminum or steel lap siding, or other materials of a
similar character, providing said materials or combination of materials
meet the intent of this section. This regulation has been established to
enhance the aesthetic compatibility with the surrounding area and
neighborhood. [Added 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
§ 295-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-61
1:595
§ 295-61. Parking.
Parking shall conform to the requirements as set forth in Article XXVIII, Off-
Street Parking Requirements.
§ 295-62. Signs.
Signs shall be regulated as set forth in § 295-361, Regulation of signs.
§ 295-61 HOBART CODE § 295-62
1:596
ARTICLE IX
R-4 Single- and Two-Family Residential District
§ 295-63. Purpose.
The R-4 Single- and Two-Family Residential District is designed to
accommodate single-family homes and duplexes along with compatible uses
that are characteristic of low- to medium-density neighborhoods.
§ 295-64. Applicability.
The following regulations shall apply in R-4 Districts.
§ 295-65. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in the R-4 District:
§ 295-66. Prohibited uses.
The following uses are prohibited in the R-4 District:
§ 295-67. Permitted accessory uses.
The following are permitted accessory uses in the R-4 District:
A. Single-family dwellings.
B. Two-family dwellings.
C. Park, playgrounds, and athletic fields.
D. Public recreational and community center buildings and grounds.
A. Corporate retreats.
B. Outdoor wood burners/solid-fuel heating devices. [Added 1-6-2015 by
Ord. No. 01-2015]
A. Home occupations.
B. Private garages, carports, and driveways.
C. Private swimming pools.
D. Tool houses, sheds and other similar buildings used for the storage of
common supplies.
E. Satellite dish antennas less than 38 inches in diameter.
F. Telephone and public utility installations and cable television
installations.
§ 295-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-68
1:597
§ 295-68. Conditional uses. [Amended 1-15-2013; 1-2-2019 by Ord.
No. 2018-20]
The following are conditional uses in the R-4 District:
A. Artificial lakes and ponds.
B. Cemeteries and mausoleums.
C. Colleges and universities.
D. Day-care centers.
E. Planned unit development.
F. Public utility and service uses, and civic buildings as follows:
(1) Substations and transmission lines.
(2) Fire stations.
(3) Gas regulator stations.
(4) Police stations.
(5) Railroad right-of-way but not including railroad yards and shops
other than for passenger purposes.
(6) Telephone exchanges, transmission equipment buildings and
microwave relay towers.
G. Public, parochial and private, elementary, junior high and senior high
schools.
H. Quarries, sand and gravel pits.
I. Radio and television stations and similar electronic communicating
systems, towers - transmitting and receiving.
J. Religious institutions in the form of convents, seminaries, monasteries,
churches, chapels, temples, synagogues, rectories, parsonages, and
parish houses.
K. Accessory structures and fences which do not conform to the
requirements identified elsewhere in this chapter, but which are
designed, constructed and maintained so as to be harmonious and
appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of
the general vicinity or use and will not change the essential character of
the same area.
L. Satellite dish antennas larger than 38 inches and less than 12 feet in
diameter.
M. Telephone and public utility installations, and cable television
installations.
§ 295-68 HOBART CODE § 295-69
1:598
§ 295-69. Lot requirements.
§ 295-70. Building height and area.
§ 295-71. Building setbacks.
Principal Structure
Accessory
Building Driveways
Front yard 30 feet minimum
from right-of-way for
an urban road
section
30 feet
minimum from
right-of-way for
an urban road
section
6 feet from
property line
40 feet minimum
from right-of-way for
a rural road section
40 feet
minimum from
right-of-way for
a rural road
section
6 feet from
property line
Side yard
(sewered)
7 feet for a singlestory
7 feet for a two-story
7 feet 6 feet from
property line
Side yard
(nonsewered)
25 feet 10 feet 6 feet from
property line
Rear yard 25 feet 10 feet 6 feet from
property line
Corner lot 30 feet minimum
from right-of-way for
an urban road
section
30 feet
minimum from
right-of-way for
an urban road
section
75 feet from
center line of
intersection
40 feet minimum
from right-of-way for
a rural road section
40 feet
minimum from
right-of-way for
a rural road
section
75 feet from
center line of
intersection
A. Area. Sewered lots shall have a minimum of 10,000 square feet in area,
with not less than 5,000 square feet per dwelling unit of lot area.
Corner lots must have a minimum of 12,000 square feet of lot area.
Nonsewered lots shall remain at 2 1/2 acres minimum.
B. Lot frontage. Lots shall be not less than 120 feet in width.
A. No principal building or parts of a principal building shall exceed 35
feet in height except as provided by § 295-13, Height regulations.
B. No accessory building shall exceed 15 feet in height.
§ 295-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-72
1:599
§ 295-72. Building size and facades.
§ 295-73. Attached and detached accessory and utility buildings.
[Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
Attached and detached accessory and utility buildings shall conform to
district requirements and those set forth in § 295-11, Building and uses.
§ 295-74. Parking.
Parking shall conform to the requirements as set forth in Article XXVIII, Off-
Street Parking Requirements.
§ 295-75. Green space.
Forty percent of the total lot area must remain open green space.
§ 295-76. Conformity with all other laws.
Each development must conform with all applicable federal, state, and
local laws, including Article XXXIII, Site Review/Development and Design
Standards, of this chapter.
§ 295-77. Setback review.
At the time of rezoning, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
determine if a greater setback distance is needed.
A. The minimum size of a dwelling shall be 1,200 square feet of livable
area for a single-family dwelling, and 1,000 square feet per unit of
livable area for a two-family dwelling.
B. The minimum first floor area of a bi-level or two-story dwelling shall be
750 square feet for single-family dwellings and 1,400 square feet for a
two-family building.
C. All single- and two-family dwellings and attached/detached accessory
and utility buildings shall have faces constructed of or faced with finish
materials which are intended for that use by the manufacturer for
purposes of preservation and appearance, are aesthetically compatible
with other dwelling facades in the general area, and presents an
attractive appearance to the public and to surrounding properties.
Acceptable materials include, but are not limited to, weatherproof
materials such as wood, decorative masonry, decorative concrete,
stucco, exterior insulation and finish systems (EFIS), Masonite, "hardie"
board and vinyl, aluminum or steel lap siding, or other materials of a
similar character, providing said materials or combination of materials
meet the intent of this section. This regulation has been established to
enhance the aesthetic compatibility with the surrounding area and
neighborhood. [Added 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
§ 295-72 HOBART CODE § 295-77
1:600
ARTICLE X
R-5 Two-Family Through Eight-Family Residential District
§ 295-78. Purpose.
The Two-Family Through Eight-Family Residential District is designed to
accommodate duplexes and apartments along with compatible uses that are
characteristic of medium- to high-density neighborhoods.
§ 295-79. Applicability.
The following regulations shall apply in R-5 Districts.
§ 295-80. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in the R-5 District:
§ 295-81. Prohibited uses.
The following uses are prohibited in the R-5 District:
§ 295-82. Permitted accessory uses.
The following are permitted accessory uses in the R-5 District:
§ 295-83. Conditional uses. [Amended 1-15-2013; 1-2-2019 by Ord.
No. 2018-20]
The following are conditional uses in the R-5 District:
A. Two-family through eight-family dwellings.
B. Park, playgrounds, and athletic fields.
C. Public recreational and community center buildings and grounds.
A. Corporate retreats.
B. Outdoor wood burners/solid-fuel heating devices. [Added 1-6-2015 by
Ord. No. 01-2015]
A. Private garages, carports, and driveways.
B. Private swimming pools.
C. Tool houses, sheds and other similar buildings used for the storage of
common supplies.
D. Satellite dish antennas less than 38 inches in diameter and not more
than one per lot.
E. Telephone and public utility installations, and cable television
installations.
§ 295-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-83
1:601
§ 295-84. Lot requirements.
A. Artificial lakes and ponds.
B. Cemeteries and mausoleums.
C. Colleges and universities.
D. Day-care centers.
E. Planned unit development.
F. Public, parochial and private, elementary, junior high and senior high
schools.
G. Religious institutions in the form of convents, seminaries, monasteries,
churches, chapels, temples, synagogues, rectories, parsonages, and
parish houses.
H. Public utility and service uses, and civic buildings as follows:
(1) Substations and transmission lines.
(2) Fire stations.
(3) Gas regulator stations.
(4) Police stations.
(5) Railroad right-of-way but not including railroad yards and shops
other than for passenger purposes.
(6) Telephone exchanges, transmissions equipment buildings and
microwave relay towers.
I. Radio and television stations and similar electronic communicating
systems, towers - transmitting and receiving.
J. Accessory structures and fences which do not conform to the
requirements identified elsewhere in this chapter, but which are
designed, constructed and maintained so as to be harmonious and
appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of
the general vicinity or use and will not change the essential character of
the same area.
K. Satellite dish antennas larger than 38 inches and less than 12 feet in
diameter.
A. Area. Sewered lots shall have a minimum of 10,000 square feet in area,
with not less than 5,000 square feet per dwelling unit of lot area.
Corner lots must have a minimum of 12,000 square feet of lot area.
Nonsewered lots shall remain at 2 1/2 acres minimum.
B. Lot frontage. Lots shall not be less than 125 feet in width.
§ 295-83 HOBART CODE § 295-85
1:602
§ 295-85. Building height.
§ 295-86. Building setbacks.
Principal Structure
Accessory
Building Driveways
Front yard 30 feet minimum from
right-of-way for an
urban road section
30 feet minimum
from right-ofway
for an urban
road section
6 feet from
property line
40 feet minimum from
right-of-way for a
rural road section
40 feet minimum
from right-ofway
for a rural
road section
6 feet from
property line
Side yard 10 feet each side for a
single-story
15 feet each side for a
two-story
10 feet each side
for a single-story
6 feet from
property line
Rear yard 25 feet 10 feet 6 feet from
property line
Corner lot 30 feet minimum from
right-of-way for an
urban road section
30 feet minimum
from right-ofway
for an urban
road section
75 feet from
center line of
intersection
40 feet minimum from
right-of-way for a
rural road section
40 feet minimum
from right-ofway
for a rural
road section
75 feet from
center line of
intersection
§ 295-87. Building size and facades. [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No.
01-2015]
A. No principal building or parts of a principal building shall exceed 35
feet in height except as provided by § 295-13, Height regulations.
B. No accessory building shall exceed 15 feet in height.
A. The minimum size of a dwelling shall be 1,200 square feet of livable
area for each side of a two-family dwelling, and the minimum size of a
dwelling for three to eight units shall be approved by the Village of
Hobart Site Review Committee.
B. The minimum first floor area of a bi-level or two-story shall be 1,400
square feet for a two-family building. The minimum first floor area of a
dwelling for three to eight units shall be 700 square feet per unit, and
must be approved by the Village of Hobart Site Review Committee.
§ 295-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-87
1:603
§ 295-88. Attached and detached accessory and utility buildings.
[Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
Attached and detached accessory and utility buildings shall conform to
district requirements and those set forth in § 295-11, Building and uses.
§ 295-89. Parking.
Parking shall conform to the requirements as set forth in Article XXVIII, Off-
Street Parking Requirements.
§ 295-90. Green space.
Forty percent of the total lot area must remain open green space.
§ 295-91. Conform with all other laws.
Each development must conform with all applicable federal, state and
local laws, including Article XXXIII, Site Review/Development and Design
Standards, of this chapter.
§ 295-92. Setback review.
At the time of rezoning, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
determine if a greater setback distance is needed.
C. All single- and two-family dwellings and attached/detached accessory
and utility buildings shall have faces constructed of or faced with finish
materials which are intended for that use by the manufacturer for
purposes of preservation and appearance, are aesthetically compatible
with other dwelling facades in the general area, and presents an
attractive appearance to the public and to surrounding properties.
Acceptable materials include, but are not limited to, weatherproof
materials such as wood, decorative masonry, decorative concrete,
stucco, exterior insulation and finish systems (EFIS), Masonite, "hardie"
board and vinyl, aluminum or steel lap siding, or other materials of a
similar character, providing said materials or combination of materials
meet the intent of this section. This regulation has been established to
enhance the aesthetic compatibility with the surrounding area and
neighborhood.
§ 295-87 HOBART CODE § 295-92
1:604
ARTICLE XI
R-6 Multifamily Residential District
§ 295-93. Purpose.
This district is designed to accommodate residential dwellings of three or
more units, along with compatible uses that are characteristic of highdensity
neighborhoods.
§ 295-94. Applicability.
The following regulations shall apply in R-6 Districts.
§ 295-95. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in the R-6 District:
§ 295-96. Prohibited uses.
The following uses are prohibited in the R-6 District:
§ 295-97. Permitted accessory uses.
The following are permitted accessory uses in the R-6 District:
§ 295-98. Conditional uses. [Amended 1-15-2013; 1-2-2019 by Ord.
No. 2018-20]
The following are conditional uses in the R-6 District:
A. Multiple-family dwellings of three through 12 units.
B. Community living arrangements.
C. Day-care center, group.
D. Day-care center, family.
E. Park, playgrounds, and athletic fields.
F. Public recreational and community center buildings and grounds.
A. Corporate retreats.
B. Outdoor wood burners/solid-fuel heating devices. [Added 1-6-2015 by
Ord. No. 01-2015]
A. Private carports for multiple-family dwellings.
B. Private garages for multiple-family dwellings.
C. Telephone and public utility installations, and cable television
installations.
A. Cemeteries and mausoleums.
§ 295-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-98
1:605
§ 295-99. Lot requirements.
§ 295-100. Building height.
B. Colleges and universities.
C. Multifamily dwellings of 13 or more units as a planned development
district.
D. Planned unit development.
E. Public, parochial and private, elementary, junior high and senior high
schools.
F. Public utility and service uses, and civic buildings as follows:
(1) Substations.
(2) Fire stations.
(3) Gas regulator stations.
(4) Police stations.
(5) Railroad right-of-way, but not including railroad yards and shops
other than for passenger purposes.
(6) Telephone exchanges, transmissions equipment buildings and
microwave relay towers.
G. Religious institutions in the form of convents, seminaries, monasteries,
churches, chapels, temples, synagogues, rectories, parsonages, and
parish houses.
H. Radio and television stations and similar electronic communicating
systems, towers - transmitting and receiving.
I. Accessory structures and fences which do not conform to the
requirements identified elsewhere in this chapter, but which are
designed, constructed and maintained so as to be harmonious and
appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of
the general vicinity or use and will not change the essential character of
the same area.
A. Area. Lots shall have a minimum of 15,000 square feet with a minimum
of 3,000 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit.
B. Lot frontage. Lots shall not be less than 125 feet in width.
C. Urban road design is required.
D. Sewer and water is required.
A. No principal building or parts of a principal building shall exceed 35
feet in height except as provided by § 295-13, Height regulations.
§ 295-98 HOBART CODE § 295-100
1:606
§ 295-101. Building setbacks.
Principal Structure
Accessory
Building Driveways
Front yard 30 feet minimum
from right-of-way for
an urban road
section
30 feet minimum
from right-ofway
for an urban
road section
10 feet from
property line
40 feet minimum
from right-of-way for
a rural road section
40 feet minimum
from right-ofway
for a rural
road section
10 feet from
property line
Side yard 20 feet 10 feet 10 feet from
property line
Rear yard 25 feet 10 feet 6 feet from
property line
Corner lot 30 feet minimum
from right-of-way for
an urban road
section
30 feet minimum
from right-ofway
for an urban
road section
75 feet from
center line of
intersection
40 feet minimum
from right-of-way for
a rural road section
40 feet minimum
from right-ofway
for a rural
road section
75 feet from
center line of
intersection
§ 295-102. Building size.
There shall be at least 700 square feet per dwelling unit, and the size of any
dwellings shall be approved by the Site Review Committee.
§ 295-103. Accessory building.
Accessory uses shall conform to district requirements and those set forth in
§ 295-11, Building and uses.
§ 295-104. Parking.
Parking shall conform to the requirements as set forth in Article XXVIII, Off-
Street Parking Requirements.
§ 295-105. Green space.
Forty percent of the total lot area must remain open green space.
B. No accessory building shall exceed 15 feet in height.
§ 295-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-106
1:607
§ 295-106. Conformance required.
Each development must conform with all applicable federal, state and
local laws, including Article XXXIII, Site Review/Development and Design
Standards, of this chapter.
§ 295-106 HOBART CODE § 295-106
1:608
ARTICLE XII
R-7 Planned Development Overlay District
§ 295-107. Application to existing use districts.
This district shall operate as a conditional use and as an alternative to the
permitted uses and regulations applicable to existing districts, and shall
be applicable only to those lands which are hereby and may hereafter be
zoned planned development by the Village Board. Basic underlying zoning
requirements for lands conditionally zoned as a planned development
district shall continue in full force and effect and shall be solely applicable
until such time as the Village Board grants final approval as hereinafter
provided.
§ 295-108. Purpose.
The purpose of the Planned Development District and the regulations
applicable to the same are to encourage and provide means for effecting
desirable and quality development by permitting greater flexibility and
design freedom than that permitted under the basic district regulations,
and to accomplish a well-balanced aesthetically satisfying Village and
economically desirable development of building sites with a planned
development district. These regulations are established to permit latitude
in the development of the building site if such development is found to be
in accordance with the purpose, spirit and intent of this chapter and is
found not to be hazardous, harmful, offensive or otherwise adverse to the
environment, property values or the character of the neighborhood or the
health, safety and welfare of the community. It is intended to permit and
encourage diversification, variation and imagination in the relationship of
uses, structures, open spaces and height of structures for developments
conceived and implemented as comprehensive and cohesive unified
projects. It is further intended to encourage more rational and economic
development with relationship to public services, and to encourage and
facilitate preservation of open space and other natural features, such as
woodlands, floodplain and wetlands.
§ 295-109. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BASIC ZONING REGULATIONS — Such zoning regulations as are
applicable to the use district other than the regulations set forth in this
article.
BUILDING SITE — A tract of land not divided by public streets or into
lots, excepting for single-family dwelling purposes and which will not be
subdivided, or where the tract of land, if so divided, is in single ownership
or is owned by a condominium group. (The site must be located on a public
street or highway.)163
§ 295-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-109
1:609
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units permitted per square foot of land
area or number of dwelling units permitted per acre of land area.
FINAL PLAN — The proposal for development of a planned unit
development, including a plat of subdivision (if any), all covenants,
easements and other conditions relating to use, location and bulk of
buildings, density of development, common open space and public facilities.
The plan shall include such information as required by § 295-116 herein.
IMPROVED OPEN SPACE — The above parcels and any structure or
improvements which are placed upon such parcels (i.e., rest rooms, tennis
courts, ball diamonds, etc.).
OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a
combination thereof, within the site designated for planned development
district and designated and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents
of the planned development.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT — An area of land,
controlled by a single owner, corporation, or other legal entity which is to
be developed as a single unit and is referred to herein as PUD.
PRELIMINARY PLAN — The preliminary drawings described in § 295-114
herein, indicating the proposed manner and/or layout of the PUD to be
submitted to the Hobart Planning and Zoning Commission for its
recommendation to the Village Board.
UNIMPROVED OPEN SPACE — Open space kept free of structures or
improvements, except for hiking, horseback riding, bicycle trails, ponds,
picnic areas and nature parks.
§ 295-110. Permitted and prohibited uses.
A. Basic zoning uses. The following uses are permitted in a Planned
Development District upon obtaining all necessary approvals required
under the article:
(1) All uses permitted under the basic zoning regulations applicable to
the zoning district in which the particular property is located.
(2) Where a building site is situated in more than one use district, all
uses permitted under the basic zoning regulations of one district
may be extended into the adjacent district, but only under the
condition that the maximum area of such extension shall not exceed
an area computed to be 50% of the smaller of the areas of the
portion of the property located in either district.
(3) Such additional uses, or mixture of uses, as are recommended by
the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the Village
Board.
163. Editor's Note: The original definition of "comprehensive plan," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 295-109 HOBART CODE § 295-110
1:610
§ 295-111. General provisions.
(4) Building restrictions. When all necessary approvals required under
this chapter are obtained, the building height, size and floor area,
lot size, setback, side and rear yard, density and open space
requirements under the basic zoning regulations shall not be
applicable, but rather such requirements as are made a part of the
approved precise development plan and the plan itself, shall be
construed to be and shall be enforced as part of this chapter.
B. Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited in the R-7 District:164
(1) Outdoor wood burners/solid-fuel heating devices.
A. Engineering design standards. Normal standards or operational policy
regarding right-of-way widths, provision of sidewalks, streetlighting
and similar environmental design criteria shall not be mandatory in a
planned development, but precise standards satisfactory to the Village,
pursuant to the criteria as set forth in § 295-111 herein shall be made a
part of the approval plan and shall be enforceable as a part of this
article.
B. Approvals. The developer shall develop the site in accordance with the
terms and conditions of development presented to and approved by the
Village Board. Any changes or additions to the original approved
development site, structures, or plans of operation shall require
approval by the Village Board.
C. Rescinding approval. Failure to comply with the conditions,
commitments, guarantees, or the recommendations established in the
approval of such development project shall be cause for rescinding the
approval of the same. Upon notice given by the Zoning Administrator/
Building Inspector, the developer then shall be required to appear
before the Village Board at its next public meeting, to explain any such
failure to comply. The Village Board at such meeting shall determine
whether or not the developer shall have failed to comply and, if there
has been such a failure, may either:
(1) Rescind its approval, whereupon such rescission and cessation of
all rights and privileges of the developer and owner, including the
right to complete construction or to construct any building or other
structure or improvement, shall become effective on the 31st day
following mailing by certified mail to the developer at his/her last
known address of written notice of such rescission; or
(2) Adjourn such discussion at the Village Board meeting for a period
not to exceed 65 days to enable the developer to comply;
whereupon, if the developer is then in substantial compliance and
has then established, to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board,
164. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 295-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-111
1:611
§ 295-112. Criteria for approval.
As a basis for determining the acceptability of a planned development
proposal, the following criteria shall be applied to the development plan
with specific consideration as to whether or not it is consistent with the
spirit and intent of this chapter, has been prepared with competent
professional advice and guidance, and produces significant benefits in
terms of environmental design.
that there will be compliance in the future, the rights and privileges
of the developer and owner shall continue for such period of time
that there shall be such compliance; but, if the developer is not
then in substantial compliance, or does not establish to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Board that there will be compliance
in the future, the Board will proceed in accordance with Subsection
C(1) immediately above.
A. Character and intensity of land use. The uses proposed and their
intensity and arrangement on the site shall be a visual, aesthetic and
operational character which:
(1) Is compatible to the physical nature of the site, with particular
concern for preservation of natural features, tree growth and open
space.
(2) Would produce an attractive environment of sustained aesthetic
and ecologic desirability, economic stability and functional
practicality compatible with the general development plans for the
area as established by the community.
(3) Would not adversely affect the anticipated provision for school,
sewer, water, snow removal, garbage pickup, fire protection or
other municipal services.
(4) Would provide sufficient and accessible off-street parking and
loading facilities in the amount specified in Article XXVIII, Off-
Street Parking Requirements.
B. Landscaping of parking areas. The parking site shall be planned to
provide a desirable transition from the streetscape and to provide for
adequate landscaping, pedestrian movement and parking areas. In
keeping with this purpose, the following design standards shall be set
forth:
(1) Where natural or existing topographic features contribute to the
beauty and utility of a development, consideration shall be given to
this preservation. Modification to topographic features should only
occur where it contributes to good appearance.
(2) Plan material shall be selected for interest in its structure, texture,
color and for its ultimate growth. Further, it is recommended that
§ 295-111 HOBART CODE § 295-112
1:612
native materials be employed for their ability to tolerate the
prevailing adverse conditions.
(3) In locations where plant materials will be susceptible to injury by
pedestrians and/or motor vehicles, appropriate curbs, tree guards
or other protective devices shall be employed.
(4) Parking areas shall be arranged so as to prevent through traffic to
other parking areas.
(5) Parking areas shall be screened from adjacent structures, road and
traffic arteries with hedges, dense planting, earth berms, changes
in grade or walls, except where parking areas are designed as an
intricate part of the street.
(6) No more than 15 parking spaces shall be permitted in a continuous
row without being interrupted by landscaping.
(7) All parking areas shall be adequately lighted. All such lighting shall
be so arranged as to direct the light away from adjoining
residences and public right-of-way.
(8) All off-street loading and unloading areas shall be paved, and the
design thereof approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(9) All parking areas and off-street loading and unloading areas shall
be graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface water without
erosion, flooding and other inconveniences.
C. Engineering design standards. The width of rights-of-way, width and
location of street or other paving, requirements for outdoor lighting,
location of sanitary and storm sewer and water lines and provision for
drainage and other similar environmental engineering considerations
shall be based upon a determination as to the appropriate standards
necessary to insure the public safety and welfare.
D. Preservation and maintenance of open space. Adequate provision shall
be made for the permanent preservation and maintenance of common
"open space" and right-of-way either by private reservation or
dedication to the public.
(1) In the case of private reservation, the open area to be reserved
shall be protected against building development by conveying to
the Village, as part of the conditions for project approval, an open
space easement over such open areas restricting the areas against
any further building or use, except as is consistent with that of
providing landscaped open space for the aesthetic and recreational
satisfaction of the surrounding residences. Building or uses for
noncommercial recreational or cultural purposes compatible with
the open space objective may be permitted only where specifically
authorized as part of the development plan, or subsequently with
the express approval of the Village Board following the
§ 295-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-112
1:613
recommendation of building, site and operational plans by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
(2) In the case of roadways and other rights-of-way which are not
dedicated to the public as part of the conditions for project
approval, there shall be granted to the Village such easements over
the same as may be necessary to enable the Village to provide
suitable and adequate fire protection, sanitary and storm sewer,
water and other required municipal services to the project area.
(3) The care and maintenance of such open space reservations and
rights-of-way shall be assured, either by establishment of
appropriate management organization for the project or by
agreement with the Village for establishment of a special service
district for the project area, on the basis of which the Village shall
provide the necessary maintenance service and levy the cost
thereof as a special assessment on the tax bills of properties within
the project area. In any case, the Village shall have the right to
carry out and levy an assessment for the cost of any maintenance
which feels necessary if it is not otherwise taken care of to the
satisfaction of Village. The manner of assuring maintenance and
assessing such cost to individual properties shall be determined
prior to the approval of the final project plans and shall be included
in the title to each property.
(4) Ownership and tax liability of private open space reservations and
rights-of-way shall be established in a manner acceptable to the
Village and made a part of the conditions of the plan approval.
E. Factors and requirements to be considered by the Planning and Zoning
Commission/Site Review and Village Board.
(1) Heights of structures.
(2) Auto parking facilities.
(3) Screening and fencing.
(4) Landscaping.
(5) Setbacks.
(6) Open space reservations.
(7) The site itself as it relates to neighborhood environment,
compatibility to existing neighborhood use, and general
neighborhood characteristics.
(8) Nature and use of the proposed structures and design, architecture
and materials to be used. The Planning and Zoning Commission
may require a dimensional rendering, video tape or a scale model.
§ 295-112 HOBART CODE § 295-112
1:614
§ 295-113. Preapplication conference.
Prior to filing of an application for a PUD, the applicant of the proposed
PUD is encouraged to arrange a conference with the Village. The primary
purpose of the conference shall be to provide the applicant with an
opportunity to gather information and obtain guidance as to the general
suitability of the proposal for the area for which it is proposed and its
(9) Highway access to the site, number of openings and location of
same.
(10) Traffic generation, number of vehicles parked and rate of turnover
per hour.
(11) Drainage must conform to Chapter 150, Erosion Control and
Stormwater Management.
(12) Capacities required for sewer, water and other necessary utilities.
(13) Educational capacity capabilities (number of families and school
load).
(14) Economic impact on the Village, its inducements, attractions and
detractions.
(15) Lighting.
(16) Proposed methods and hours of operation.
(17) Comparison of open space as required by the underlying basic
zones with that of proposed project.
(18) Operational control.
(19) Commencement and completion dates.
(20) Highway dedication.
(21) Deed restrictions and sureties deemed necessary to protect the
health, safety and welfare of the community.
(22) Such other limitations, conditions, or special requirements, as may
be deemed necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the Village.
F. Implementation schedule. The proponents of a planned development
shall submit a reasonable schedule for the implementation of the
development to the satisfaction of the Planning and Zoning Commission
and the Village Board, including suitable provisions (and the Village
may require the furnishing of a suitable and sufficient performance
bond) for assurance that each phase could and should be brought to
completion in a manner which shall not result in adverse effect upon the
community as a result of termination at the end of any phase.
§ 295-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-113
1:615
conformity to the provisions of this chapter before incurring substantial
expense in the preparation of plans, surveys and other data.
§ 295-114. Procedure.
The procedure for approval of a planned development project shall consist
of two phases:
§ 295-115. Preliminary approval.
A. Preliminary approval. Consisting of approval of the proposed project in
principle only; and
B. Final approval. Consisting of approval of the proposed project in all its
terms and details.
A. Notice and fee. A person desiring to develop a particular site as a
planned development project shall apply to the Zoning Administrator/
Building Inspector on such forms as shall be provided by the Village and
shall pay a fee as determined by the Village Board, which shall
accompany such written application. Such application shall contain the
names, mailing addresses and telephone numbers of the owners and
developers and a description of the development site. Appropriate
supporting documents and maps, as required in Subsection D herein,
shall be filed with the application.
B. Notice to Commission. The Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector
shall inform the Planning and Zoning Commission of such desire and
shall secure a date for a preliminary discussion between the developer
and the Planning and Zoning Commission and shall notify such
developer of such date.
C. Commission recommendations. The Planning and Zoning Commission,
after such preliminary discussions and such further discussions as may
be required with the developer, shall report in writing such proposed
project development to the Village Board, together with its
recommendation for either approval or disapproval of the same. Such
report and recommendation of the Commission shall be made to the
Village Board no later than four months from the date of the filing of the
application with the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector and
receipt of any required supportive information by the Planning and
Zoning Commission. A recommendation of approval by the Commission
shall in no way be binding on the Village Board. The Village Board shall
either approve or disapprove the proposed development project,
without modification within 60 days receipt of the Planning and Zoning
Commission recommendation. Any such approval shall be a preliminary
approval only and shall not bind the Village Board regarding final
approval.
§ 295-113 HOBART CODE § 295-115
1:616
D. Information required. The following information shall be provided by
the applicant in adequate detail to satisfy the Committee for its
recommendation regarding preliminary approval.
(1) A statement describing the general character of the intended
development.
(2) An accurate map of the project area drawn at a scale no less than
one inch equals 200 feet, showing the nature, use and character of
abutting properties prepared by a registered surveyor.
(3) Four copies of a general development plan of the proposed project
drawn at a scale no less than one inch equals 200 feet, showing the
following information in sufficient detail to make possible the
evaluation of the criteria for approval set forth in § 295-112A, B, C,
D and F of this article:
(a) Tract boundaries and a statement of the total acreage of the
tract;
(b) Significant physical features within the tract, including
existing two-foot contours, watercourses, drainage, ponds,
lakes, wetlands, floodplain, floodways and proposed major
changes in those features;
(c) Zoning district(s) on and within 400 feet adjacent to the
proposed project;
(d) Property line (if any) within the proposed project;
(e) All contemplated land uses within the tract;
(f) An indicator of the contemplated intensity of use; i.e., gross
density in residential development; number of prospective
tenants in office, commercial and industrial development or
recreational development;
(g) Number and type of dwelling units;
(h) Existing buildings that may affect future development and
proposed location of all principal structures and associated
parking areas;
(i) Proposed lot coverage of buildings and structures;
(j) Proposed circulation systems (pedestrian, bicycle, auto, mass
transit) by type, how they relate to the existing network
outside this site;
(k) Existing rights-of-way and easements which may affect the
PUD project;
(l) In the case of plans which call for development in stages, a
map at an appropriate scale showing the successive stages;
§ 295-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-115
1:617
§ 295-116. Amendment of preliminary approval.
The recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the
preliminary approval of the Village Board shall be based on and include
as conditions thereto the building, site and operational plans for the
development as approved, as well as all other commitments offered or
required with regard to project value, character or other factors pertinent
to an assurance that the proposed development will be carried out basically
as presented in the approved plans. Detailed construction time and the
approval of such preliminary plan shall be conditioned upon the subsequent
submittal and approval of more specific and detailed plans. Any subsequent
change or addition to the plans or use shall be submitted to the Village
Board relating to an amendment of the preliminary approval. If the change
is determined by the Village Board to be a major change, it will be referred
first to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
§ 295-117. Final approval.
(m) The location of sanitary and storm sewer lines, water mains,
fire hydrants and lighting;
(n) The location of recreational and open space areas and areas
reserved or dedicated for public uses, such as schools, park,
etc.;
(o) Description of proposed system for drainage;
(p) General landscape treatment.
(4) Appropriate statistical data on the size of the development,
residential density, ratio of various land uses, economic analysis of
the development and any other data pertinent to the evaluation
under the criteria of § 295-112A, B, C, D and F above.
(5) Architectural drawings and sketches illustrating the design and
character of proposed structures. Architectural drawing may
include a dimensional rendering, video tape, or scale model.
(6) General outline of intended organization structure related to
property owner's association, deed restrictions and private
provision of common services, if any.
(7) Economic feasibility and impact report may be required by the
Planning and Zoning Commission to provide satisfactory evidence
of the project's economic feasibility, of prosperity of the Village or
the values of surrounding properties.
A. Petition for final approval. When the Village Board has issued its
preliminary approval of the proposed plan, then the developer may file
with the Village Clerk-Treasurer a petition executed by the owner of the
property to be developed, or his/her agent, for the final approval,
§ 295-115 HOBART CODE § 295-117
1:618
stating that he seeks to develop such property under the provisions of
this article. Such petition shall include:
(1) The names, mailing addresses and telephone numbers of any
additional owners and developers of the development site, and the
names of owners and developers listed on the application who no
longer have an interest in the project, in the event there has been a
change in owners or developers since the date of the application.
(2) An accurate topographical map showing topographical data at twofoot
intervals and extending within 100 feet of the exterior
boundaries of the site, showing all public rights-of-way and all
buildings accurately located within 100 feet of the exterior
boundaries of such site. Such map shall contain all available
utilities, including drainage and the capacities thereof and highwater
elevations along rivers.
(3) A plot plan at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet showing the
location, type and size of every proposed structure and its proposed
use; also driveways, driveway access roads, parking facilities,
lighting, appliances, recreation areas, loading docks, open spaces,
screening, fencing, and landscaped areas and utility easements.
(4) A statistical table showing the size of the site in square feet, the
acreage (exclusive of public streets), proposed population densities
and open area (both in square feet and as a percentage of the
project area).
(5) Architectural drawings of all buildings and structures and sketches
showing the design characteristics and treatment of exterior
elevations and typical floor plans of proposed structures. The
Planning and Zoning Commission may require a dimensional
rendering, video tape, or scale model.
(6) A table showing the approximate costs of structures.
(7) A statement showing the starting and completion dates of the
project.
(8) Any other pertinent data, statements, drawings or plans which may
be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Village
Board.
(9) The following additional information for commercial and industrial
developments:
(a) Square feet of buildings;
(b) Square feet of offices, production areas and the proposed
number of employees in each such areas;
(c) Details of proposed use or uses and manner of operation; and
§ 295-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-117
1:619
(d) The municipal services that may be required to serve the site.
B. Approval of the preliminary development plan shall entitle the
developer to final approval if the final development plan is submitted
within 12 months of the date of approval of the preliminary plan and
conforms to such layout and conditions of the approved preliminary
plan and required final approval information. The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall make a recommendation to the Village Board within
60 days of the submittal of a final plan. The Village Board then shall
have an additional 60 days after receipt of the Planning and Zoning
Commission recommendation in which to make a decision.
§ 295-117 HOBART CODE § 295-117
1:620
ARTICLE XIII
PDD #1: Centennial Centre at Hobart District
§ 295-118. Title and purpose.
This article applies only to the Centennial Centre at Hobart District, which
is a mixed-use development district (hereinafter referred to as the
"District").
§ 295-119. Legal description.
The legal description of the borders of the District shall be described as
follows:
Beginning at the southwest corner of N. Overland Drive and Sunlite Drive,
thence easterly 66 feet to the southeast corner of N. Overland Drive and
Sunlite Drive, thence continuing easterly along the southerly line of Sunlite
Drive approximately 6,120 feet, thence northerly 70 feet to the north line
of Sunlite Drive, thence continuing northerly 1,160 feet to the north line
of STH 29/32, thence northwesterly along the northerly right-of-way line of
STH 29/32 10,020 feet, thence continuing on the same angle, not following
the northerly right-of-way line of STH 29/32 but following the northerly line
of parcel HB-480 for 1,660 feet, thence southerly 2,110 feet to the north
line of Triangle Drive, thence southerly 66 feet to the south line of Triangle
Drive, thence continuing southerly 3,105 feet, thence easterly 1,307 feet,
thence northerly 120 feet, thence easterly 445.96 feet, thence southerly
85.30 feet, thence easterly 70.04 feet along the north end of Log Cabin
Lane right-of-way, thence southerly 30 feet along the east line of Log Cabin
Road, thence easterly 764.10 feet to the west line of N. Overland Road,
thence southerly 785.73 feet along the west line of N. Overland Road to the
northwest corner of N. Overland Road and Sunlite Drive, thence southerly
60 feet to the southwest corner of N. Overland Road and Sunlite Drive,
which is the point of beginning.
A map of the above described District is attached.
§ 295-120. Purpose.
The Centennial Centre at Hobart District is intended to implement the
development strategies as identified in the adopted Village of Hobart
Centennial Centre at Hobart Master Plan. The plan provides a blueprint
and design guide for a residential and commercial district and Village
center that celebrates the Village's history and looks toward the future
by providing for and expanding a stable tax base. The District is intended
to be a recognizable and cohesive mixed-use district where individuals
and families will reside and where commercial activities will be located.
Other complementary activities will provide support to both the residential
and commercial feature and bring a strong economic base to the District.
Specifically, this District's purpose is to:
§ 295-118 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-120
1:621
§ 295-121. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CENTENNIAL CENTRE AT HOBART MASTER PLAN — (Hereafter referred
to as "Master Plan" or "Master Plan document.") A more detailed
neighborhood plan that supplements the Village's Comprehensive Plan for
a specific geographic area of the Village of Hobart (as legally described
above, or as may be amended from time to time). The Master Plan design
guidelines and standards shall be used as the criteria to obtain approval of
a site development plan in the District, including any future amendments
to the District as approved by the Village Board. The Master Plan shall be
readily available upon request to the Village and can also be found on the
Village's official website.165
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The adopted Comprehensive Plan of the Village
of Hobart (including any future amendments) that identifies where growth
should occur, makes recommendations for future development in the Village
through the use of text, tables, and maps, and includes a mechanism for the
review and update of the Plan on a regular basis.
LAND USE — The activities, actions or classification upon land within the
District.
OWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners, tenant, holder of
an option or contract to purchase, or other party having an enforceable
proprietary interest of land within the District.
RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS — The restrictive covenants filed by the Village
on certain Village-owned real estate located within the District and fully set
forth on Appendix A hereto.166
A. Assure that planned growth accomplishes goals set forth in the Village's
Comprehensive Plan and the Centennial Centre at Hobart Master Plan;
B. Promotes flexibility in design and the efficient use of land to facilitate a
more economic arrangement of buildings, uses, circulation systems and
utilities;
C. Provide for the accomplishment of external architectural unity so as to
promote cohesiveness of design aesthetics throughout the entire
district;
D. Provide more usable and suitably located common and open space
areas than would otherwise be provided under conventional land
development procedures.
165. Editor's Note: The original definition of "comprehensive plan," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
166. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Village office.
§ 295-120 HOBART CODE § 295-122
1:622
§ 295-122. General provisions for district. [Amended 1-8-2016 by
Ord. No. 01-2016; 3-17-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-02]
A. Engineering design standards. Normal standards or operational policy
regarding right-of-way widths, provision for sidewalks, streetlighting
and similar environmental design criteria shall not be mandatory in the
district, but precise standards satisfactory to the Village, pursuant to
the criteria as set forth in §§ 295-135 through 295-139 hereof, shall be
made a part of the approved plan and shall be enforceable as a part of
this chapter.
B. Contractual requirements and guarantees. The owner shall enter into
an appropriate contract or agreement with the Village to guarantee the
development and operation in accordance with the terms and
conditions established between the Village and the owner of the
development project and to provide the Village with sufficient
assurances that the owner will abide by the Village's zoning, taxing and
other municipal authority. Any changes or additions to the original
approved development site, structures or plans of operation shall
require resubmittal and approval by the Site Review Committee.
C. Parking. Parking shall conform to the requirements as set forth in
Article XXVIII, Off-Street Parking Requirements, of the Village of
Hobart Code of Ordinances to the maximum extent practicable in
addition to any requirements set forth in this article. The Site Review
Committee may require shared parking, or require other parking
strategies that promote an open/green space concept set forth in the
Master Plan, or strategies to otherwise mitigate the promotion of
impervious parking surfaces. Parking availability in residential land
uses shall be calculated per dwelling unit and shall match the number
of bedrooms in such unit, and at least one of the parking arrangements
must be garage parking. All other parking must be off-street.
Throughout the district, parking spaces shall be provided on the basis
required for each individual use as determined by first, the Village
Engineer, and second, ultimate approval of the Site Review Committee.
Loading docks for semitrailer or delivery trucks shall be rear- or sideloaded,
or otherwise not visible from the roadway. In the limited
industrial (LI), large commercial and retail (LCR), and small
commercial and retail (SCR) land use designations, no overnight
parking, storage or idling of vehicles shall be allowed on site without
prior approval from the Village Board.
D. Signs. Private signs shall be regulated as set forth in § 295-361,
Regulation of signs. All public signs within the district shall be
aesthetically cohesive and follow the regulations set forth in § 295-361,
Regulation of signs. The Site Review Committee may approve signs that
may not comply with the afore-referenced ordinances, provided such
sign(s) promotes or adheres to the general design aesthetics, themes
and guidelines of the Centennial Centre Master Plan.
§ 295-122 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-122
1:623
E. Stormwater and erosion control. The intent of the Master Plan
document encourages a regional approach to stormwater detention and
management. Wherever possible, a plan encompassing existing or
pending regional stormwater management shall be encouraged.
Throughout the district, stormwater management requirements shall
be in accordance with Chapter 150, Erosion Control and Stormwater
Management, Article I, Stormwater Runoff. Requirements for erosion
control, per Chapter 150, Article II, Erosion Control, shall also be
required throughout the subdivision and development of land
throughout the district. Easements for stormwater management
facilities shall also be required and granted upon request from the
Village.
F. Failure to comply. Failure to comply with the conditions, commitments,
guarantees or the recommendations established in the approval of such
development project will be cause for rescinding the approval of the
same. Upon notice given by the Zoning Administrator/Building
Inspector, the owner then shall be required to appear before the Site
Review Committee at its next meeting to explain any such failure to
comply. The Site Review Committee, at such public hearing, may set a
time limit for compliance and/or recommend specific steps to be taken
prior to rescinding the approval of the project, including the
termination of the construction of any buildings on such site upon 30
days' notice, in writing, to the owner at his last-known address.
Continued failure to comply shall result in the rescinding of plan
approvals by the Site Review Committee.
G. Garbage and refuse containment. All containers, garbage cans,
dumpsters or other garbage and refuse receptacles shall be contained
in a structure surrounded by walls on four sides. The Site Review
Committee may approve decorative fencing to satisfy this requirement
if the fencing meets all other requirements of this section. Complete
enclosure of garbage collection areas is strongly encouraged. Colors,
materials and other aesthetic features of structures that house garbage
and refuse containers shall match the style and aesthetics of the
principal structure(s) of the site.
H. Open/green space requirements. The minimum requirement for green/
open space as an aspect of an individual site plan shall range from 10%
to 25% of the overall aggregate square footage of the lot depending on
the type of land use, specific site configurations and as deemed
appropriate by Village planning staff and the Site Review Committee.
I. Bicycle and pedestrian connectivity. To enable and encourage people to
walk and bicycle to, from, and within Centennial Centre, the Village
shall require street patterns within new developments that have
connections to the existing street system. If streets cannot be
connected due to physical or environmental barriers, the Village shall
require the designation of public rights-of-way at or near the end of culde-
sacs, horseshoe roads, and other streets for multi-use paths that
§ 295-122 HOBART CODE § 295-122
1:624
§ 295-123. Prohibited land uses.
To provide controls on type, use, economic and environmental impact, and
to uphold the health, safety, general welfare and morals of the Village, the
following land uses are prohibited throughout the District:
§ 295-124. Permitted and conditional land use designations.
connect to neighboring subdivisions, schools, parks, and other
destinations.
A. Automobiles: automobile dismantling, selling of used automobile parts
or used car lots, with the exception of minor service and repair stations;
B. Boardinghouse or other places of accommodation that charge on more
than a nightly basis and do not provide an individual, self-contained unit
including a full bath with each sleeping room;
C. Contractor's plant or storage yard;
D. Live poultry or fowl market or poultry killing except in a designated
farmer's market or flea market area and as regulated by hours of
operations, frequency and use limitations as established by the Village;
E. Miniature golf courses or driving ranges;
F. Pawn shops;
G. External storage of iron, bottles, rags or junk, except for materials
temporarily stored in a municipal recycling program, or storage of any
materials except those used for retail uses or office uses on site;
H. The keeping of nondomestic animals in buildings other than in the large
commercial and retail (LCR) uses as outlined in this article;
I. The storage or parking of trucks, except those in a building lawfully
erected for such purposes unless in the Limited Industrial (LI) land use
classification within the District;
J. Trailer lots;
K. Trucking contractor's garage or storage yard;
L. All prohibitions, not otherwise outlined elsewhere in this chapter,
pursuant to Article XXV, Entertainment Overlay District, of this chapter.
M. All other uses expressly prohibited, or not expressly permitted, in the
entire Village pursuant to this chapter.
A. The following land uses are permitted within the District. The spirit and
intent of the District is to allow flexibility in types of land uses,
minimum lot dimensions and bulk standards, and all site-specific
criteria. After a development plan satisfies the standards set forth in
§ 295-122 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-124
1:625
§ 295-125. Single-Family and Two-Family Residential (SFR).
Residential dwelling units comprised of single-family, duplex, townhouse,
row house or condominium where the owner occupies the dwelling unit.
Single-family residences are limited to two stories.
this section, the Master Plan shall be consulted to ensure cohesive
design themes and standards are satisfied and consistent.
B. For all property within the District that is not subjected to the
restrictive covenants, all permitted uses set forth in this chapter shall
be conditional uses subject to the approvals set forth herein.
A. Permitted uses. All uses outlined under "Permitted Uses" within the R-1
Residential (Article VI of this chapter), R-2 Residential (Article VII of
this chapter), R-3 Residential (Article VIII of this chapter) and R-4
Single and Two-Family Residential zoning classifications (Article IX of
this chapter) are permitted in the District.
B. Lot requirements.
(1) Lot area and lot frontage. No single-family lot is to be less than 60
feet in width.
(2) Density. Lots shall have a minimum density of 7,200 square feet,
unless otherwise specified in the Master Plan document.
C. Height regulations. All structures must be designed so as to ensure
adequate air, light and privacy for all residents. Maximum height
restrictions are 35 feet, unless otherwise approved by the Site Review
Committee.
D. Building setbacks. All structures must meet the minimum setback
requirements of 23 feet for front yards, five feet for each side yard, 15
feet for rear yards, driveways four feet off property lines, maximum
curb cut of 30 feet with 22 feet at the right-of-way, and no accessory
buildings and no outside storage.
E. Building size.
(1) Minimum size of a one-story dwelling shall be 1,200 square feet for
a building in the single-family designation.
(2) Minimum size of a two-story dwelling shall be 800 square feet on
the ground floor and a total minimum of 1,400 square feet.
F. Parking. [Added 1-8-2016 by Ord. No. 01-2016]
(1) All dwellings shall provide a minimum of two enclosed parking
stalls meeting the building setback requirements.
(2) Enclosed parking stalls shall be accessed by a paved driveway
which shall be limited to a direct path between the public right-ofway
and the enclosed parking stalls.
§ 295-124 HOBART CODE § 295-125
1:626
(3) There shall be no off-street parking or storage in any yard except
for within the paved driveway.
(4) Parking shall not extend into the public right-of-way.
(5) Open off-street parking facilities shall be solely for parking of
passenger vehicles, which shall be regulated as follows:
(a) All vehicles shall be in condition for safe and legal performance
on public rights-of-way and shall be registered, displaying
current license plates.
(b) There shall be no exterior parking or storage of nonpassenger
vehicles and equipment except as follows:
[1] A maximum of one commercial vehicle, licensed and
registered for operation on public rights-of-way, per
dwelling unit may be parked outdoors if:
[a] Used by a resident of the dwelling unit.
[b] It has a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of
10,000 pounds or less and is less than 21 feet in
length.
[2] Nonpassenger vehicles and equipment associated with
and customary to residential uses may be parked for a
maximum of 24 consecutive hours.
[a] Nonpassenger vehicles and equipment normally
associated with and customary to a residential use
include, but are not limited to:
[i] Boats.
[ii] Motor homes.
[iii] Travel trailers.
[iv] Campers.
[v] Snowmobiles, ATVs, UTV and personal
watercraft, all of which must be housed or stored
on or within a trailer.
[vi] Utility trailers.
[b] Vehicles and/or equipment not normally associated
with or customary to a residential use specifically
prohibited from being parked or stored outdoors on
residential property include, but are not limited to:
[i] Construction equipment, such as bulldozers,
backhoes, skid steers, and forklifts.
§ 295-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-125
1:627
§ 295-126. Multifamily Residential District (MFR).
The multifamily residential land use classification refers to apartment
buildings that house multiple families or households. The multifamily
designation may consist of traditional apartments, community-based
retirement facilities, or condominium dwelling units. Multifamily land use
applications shall consist of not less than three dwelling units.
[ii] Dump and stake-body-style trucks.
[iii] Cube-type vans and trucks.
[iv] Landscaping business equipment, such as
tractors, tree spades, graders and scrapers.
[v] Semi-trailers and -tractors.
[vi] Concession, vending and catering trailers.
[vii] Commercial/industrial equipment trailers and
lifts.
[viii] Tow trucks, wreckers or car carriers.
[c] "Twenty-four consecutive hours," for the purposes of
this section, shall be defined as a time frame which is
inclusive of all time in which a regulated
nonpassenger vehicle is not removed from the
premises for more than 72 consecutive hours.
A. Permitted uses. All uses outlined under "permitted uses" within the R-6
Multifamily Residential (Article XI of this chapter), providing an
exception within the District to allow for multifamily dwellings to
exceed the maximum of 12 units.
B. Lot requirements. Lot requirements will vary based on the number of
proposed units to be constructed on the site, green space requirements,
parking and stormwater management requirements. All lots shall meet
the approval of the Site Review Committee.
C. Building height. No principal building or parts of a principal building
shall exceed 35 feet in height except as provided by § 295-13, Height
regulations. Building must be designed so as to ensure adequate air,
light and privacy for all residents.
D. Building setbacks. All principal structures must meet the minimum
setback requirements of 30 feet for front yards, 15 feet for side yards,
25 feet for rear yards, driveways 10 feet off property lines, maximum
curb cut of 35 feet with 25 feet at the right-of-way, and no unenclosed
storage. Accessory buildings will only be acceptable for the enclosed
storage of automobiles, administrative offices, or enclosed storage for
maintenance vehicles and/or equipment. Garages and accessory
buildings must meet minimum setback requirements of 30 feet for front
§ 295-125 HOBART CODE § 295-126
1:628
§ 295-127. Large commercial and retail uses (LCR).
yard and 10 feet for rear and side yards. [Amended 1-8-2016 by Ord.
No. 04-2016]
E. Building size. There shall be at least 600 square feet minimum per
residential dwelling unit.
A. Permitted uses. All uses outlined under "permitted uses," (and not
otherwise prohibited in this article) within the B-1 Community Business
District (Article XX of this chapter), B-2 Limited Community Business
District (Article XXI of this chapter), C-1 Limited Commercial District
(Article XXII of this chapter) and I-1 Limited Industrial District (Article
XXIII of this chapter). Additional permitted uses under large
commercial and retail (LCR) shall include the following:
(1) Art shops or galleries;
(2) Grocery stores;
(3) Department stores;
(4) Large boutique stores;
(5) Hotels;
(6) Bowling alleys;
(7) Cinemas or theaters;
(8) Clubs and lodges, non-fraternal or fraternal;
(9) Business schools;
(10) Eating and drinking establishments;
(11) Meeting halls;
(12) Museums, auditoriums and arenas;
(13) Monument shops with restricted outside storage;
(14) Schools, commercial and trade;
(15) Shopping centers;
(16) Pet shops operating in a completely enclosed facility;
(17) Nursing and personal care facilities (community-based retirement
facilities);
(18) Research institutions;
(19) Other retail and commercial uses similar in character when
determined by the Site Review Committee to be in accordance with
§ 295-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-127
1:629
§ 295-128. Small commercial and retail uses (SCR).
the stated goals, objectives and design themes and guidelines of
the Master Plan document.
B. Lot requirements. Lot requirements will vary based on the number of
proposed units to be constructed on the site, green space requirements,
parking and stormwater management requirements. All lots shall meet
the approval of the Site Review Committee. All outlots must maintain a
minimum of one acre.
C. Height regulations. All structures within the LCR designation shall
conform to a maximum height of 55 feet; except as provided by
§ 295-13, Height regulations.
D. Building setbacks. Minimum setbacks shall be established per the
design and use of the structure.
E. Building size. Buildings should maintain a minimum of 25,000 square
feet.
F. Other requirements. Structures and buildings allowed in the large
commercial and retail use classification shall meet the regulations of
this District and the other articles of this chapter, as determined by the
Village Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector and approved by the
Site Review Committee.
(1) All business, services, and storage (except for motor vehicles in
operable condition) shall be conducted within a completely
enclosed structure.
(2) Any use found and determined by the Site Review Committee to be
incompatible with the purpose of the large commercial and retail
designation within the District may be prohibited.
(3) A detailed landscaping plan, showing placement of shrubbery, trees
and other vegetative plantings shall be submitted in accordance
with § 295-140 to the Site Review Committee for approval prior to
the issuance of a building permit, to ensure appropriateness and
compatibility with adjoining development.
A. Permitted uses. All uses outlined under "permitted uses" (and not
otherwise prohibited in this article hereto) within the B-1 Community
Business District (Article XX of this chapter), B-2 Limited Community
Business District (Article XXI of this chapter), and C-1 Limited
Commercial District (Article XXII of this chapter). Additional permitted
uses under small commercial and retail may be included in the SCR
classification upon a determination of the Site Review Committee that
such a use is in conformance with the intent of PDD #1 and if such use
is demonstrated to be consistent with the design goals, guidelines and
standards set forth in the Master Plan document.
§ 295-127 HOBART CODE § 295-128
1:630
§ 295-129. Limited Industrial (LI).
Limited industrial uses in the District are uses that can create jobs and
promote residential growth of the planned development district. Stringent
guidelines shall cover all land uses pertaining to limited industrial or light
manufacturing site proposals.
B. Lot requirements. Lot requirements will vary based on the number of
proposed units to be constructed on the site, green space requirements,
parking and stormwater management requirements. All lots shall meet
the approval of the Site Review Committee.
C. Height regulations. Minimum and/or maximum building heights will be
established per the design and use of the structure.
D. Building setbacks. Minimum setbacks will be established per the design
and use of the structure.
E. Building size. Buildings should maintain a minimum of 500 square feet
and shall not exceed a maximum of 25,000 square feet.
A. Lot requirements. Lot requirements will vary based on the number of
proposed units to be constructed on the site, green space requirements,
parking and stormwater management requirements. All lots shall meet
the approval of the Site Review Committee.
B. Height regulations. Principal structures: 35 feet maximum except as
provided by § 295-13, Height regulations.
C. Building setbacks. All structures must meet the minimum setback
requirements of 30 feet for front yards, 15 feet for side yards, 25 feet
for rear yards, driveways six feet off property lines, maximum curb cut
of 35 feet at the curbline and 25 feet at the right-of-way, and no outside
storage is permitted. Building, lot and associated infrastructure layout
shall meet all ingress and egress requirements for fire safety.
[Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
D. Other requirements.
(1) Structures and buildings allowed in the LI designation shall meet
the regulations of this District and the other articles of this chapter,
as determined by the Village staff and approved by the Site Review
Committee.
(2) All business, services, and storage (except for motor vehicles in
operable condition) will be conducted within a completely enclosed
structure.
(3) Berming, natural landscaping features, and/or buffers of dense
vegetation shall be utilized to separate light industrial uses from
surrounding and adjacent land uses. The use of fences shall not be
used as an exclusive means of separating uses but may be used in
addition to natural berms or vegetation buffers.
§ 295-128 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-129
1:631
§ 295-130. Mixed use (MU).
Within the District, a combination of different zoning district land uses
within one development or plan application may exist and is encouraged.
Mixed uses can include a combination of any of the following land use
designation: commercial, residential, civic, research and institutional,
business/office/professional, parks, open space, retail, and hospitality.
§ 295-131. Village Centre District (VC). [Amended 8-27-2014 by
Ord. No. 02-2014]
Within the VC District, a single land use or combination of different land
uses within one development or plan application may exist. The VC area
provides for consideration of any of the following land use classifications:
commercial, multifamily residential, civic, research and institutional,
business/office/professional, parks, open space, retail, and hospitality. A
conceptual plan document for the VC District shall be incorporated as
an amendment/appendix to the Centennial Centre at Hobart Master Plan
document. The conceptual plan will serve only as a guide for potential
placement of future development, not a stringent development blueprint;
however, site plan review and approval for proposed projects within area
denoted as the VC District shall be governed by this ordinance section.
(4) Any use found and determined by the Site Review Committee to be
incompatible with the purpose of the limited industrial designation
or not in conformance with stated goals, objectives and design
themes of the Master Plan may be prohibited by the Village Board.
A. Permitted uses. All land uses outlined hereto and herein this section will
apply to the mixed use land designation with the exception of the
limited industrial land use designation. The targeted mixture of land
uses in the MU categories includes SCR, LCR, MFR, or uses pertaining
to civic, governmental or research-oriented enterprises or endeavors.
Quotas or dictates on the makeup of area of a building shall not be
outlined in this section so as to allow the greatest amount of flexibility
to the developer on a site- or project-specific basis.
B. Lot requirements. Lot requirements will vary based on the number of
proposed units to be constructed on the site, green space requirements,
parking and stormwater management requirements. All lots shall meet
the approval of the Site Review Committee.
C. Height regulations. No minimum or maximum height restrictions exist
in the MU land designation. Generally, buildings will not be greater
than four stories in height.
D. Building setbacks. The District zoning allows for zero lot lines based on
type of project, land use and specific details of the development
proposal, provided that they are in accordance with the design themes
and guidelines of the Master Plan document.
§ 295-129 HOBART CODE § 295-131
1:632
§ 295-132. Research and institutional uses (RIU).
Research and institutional uses are allowed as long as they meet the
requirements of not being hazardous, harmful, offensive, or otherwise
adverse to the environment. Research and institutional uses include health
care facilities, college, university or vocational training buildings, civic
and governmental land uses, large research planned development projects,
religious institutions and all other uses intended for research, technology,
academic or medical training facilities.
A. Permitted uses. All land uses outlined in this chapter, with the exception
of the limited industrial land use designation and single-family
residential, may be considered in the VC land use designation with the
approval of the Site Review Committee and Village Board. Quotas or
dictates on the makeup or area of a building shall not be outlined in this
section so as to allow the greatest amount of flexibility to the developer
on a site- or project-specific basis.
B. Lot requirements. Lot requirements will vary based on the number of
proposed units to be constructed on the site, green space requirements,
parking and storm water management requirements. All lots shall meet
the approval of the Site Review Committee.
C. Height regulations. No minimum or maximum height restrictions exist
in the VC District. Generally, buildings will not be greater than four
stories in height.
D. Building setbacks. The VC District allows for zero lot lines based on
type of project, land use and specific details of the development
proposal, provided that they are in accordance with the design themes
and guidelines of the Master Plan document and its amendments/
appendices.
A. Lot requirements. Lot requirements will vary based on the number of
proposed units to be constructed on the site, green space requirements,
parking and stormwater management requirements. All lots shall meet
the approval of the Site Review Committee.
B. Height regulations. No minimum or maximum height restrictions exist
in the RIU land use designation. Generally, buildings will not be greater
than four stories in height.
C. Building setbacks. All structures must meet the minimum setback
requirements of 30 feet for front yards, 15 feet for side yards, 25 feet
for rear yards, driveways six feet off property lines, maximum curb cut
of 30 feet, and no outside storage is permitted. Shall meet all ingress
and egress requirements for firesafety. The Site Review Committee
shall grant exceptions to the building setback requirements per the
design and use of the building and upon its determination that the
building and lot layout conform to the standards, goals and guidelines
of the Master Plan document.
§ 295-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-133
1:633
§ 295-133. Business/professional/office (BPO).
The Business/Professional/Office (BPO) land designation refers to services
that are provided in typical community or central business districts.
Business/professional/office uses are specific to, although not stringently
so, normal operating hours of Monday through Saturday between 6:00
a.m. and 12:00 a.m. Services included health care, professional lawyers,
accountants, educators, engineers/architects, and the work of other
professional practitioners who provide specialized skills and services.
A. Permitted uses. All uses outlined under "Permitted Uses" within the B-1
Community Business District (Article XX of this chapter) and C-1
Limited Commercial District (Article XXII of this chapter) are permitted
uses in this land use classification.
B. Lot requirements. Lot requirements will vary based on the number of
proposed units to be constructed on the site, green space requirements,
parking and stormwater management requirements. All lots shall meet
the approval of the Site Review Committee.
C. Height regulations. No minimum or maximum height restrictions exist
in the BPO land use designation. Generally, buildings will not be greater
than four stories in height.
D. Building setbacks. All structure must meet the minimum setback
requirements of 30 feet for front yards, 15 feet for side yards, 25 feet
for rear yards, driveways six feet off property lines, maximum curb cut
of 30 feet, and no outside storage is permitted. Shall meet all ingress
and egress requirements for firesafety. The Site Review Committee
shall grant exceptions to the building setback requirements per the
design and use of the building and upon its determination that the
building and lot layout conform to the standards, goals and guidelines
of the Master Plan document.
E. Building size. Buildings should maintain a minimum of 1,000 square
feet.
F. Other requirements.
(1) Structures and buildings allowed in the business/office/
professional land use designation shall meet the regulations of this
district and the other articles of this section, as determined by the
Village Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector and approved by
the Site Review Committee.
(2) All business, services, and storage (except for motor vehicles in
operable condition) will be conducted within a completely enclosed
structure.
(3) The parking or storage of operable motor vehicles, if not within an
enclosed building structure, shall be effectively screened by
§ 295-133 HOBART CODE § 295-133
1:634
§ 295-134. Parks and open/public space (POS).
Preservation of open space and other natural features, such as woodlands,
floodplains, and wetlands shall apply to land areas designated for such use
in the Master Plan document. Except as otherwise regulated in this article,
parks and open space shall be public space for recreation and enjoyment
of the environment. Builders and developers will be encouraged to promote
additional green space and open areas in the individual site plan.
§ 295-135. Hospitality (H).
The hospitality land use designation refers to uses such as hotels, motels,
convention centers, bed-and-breakfast establishments and other uses
designed specifically for entertainment, food and lodging.
shrubbery, a solid wall or opaque fence. Walls and fences may not
exceed eight feet in height.
(4) Any use found and determined by the Site Review Committee to be
incompatible with the purpose, goals and design guidelines of the
Master Plan may be prohibited by the Village Board.
(5) A detailed landscaping plan, showing placement of shrubbery, trees
and other vegetative plantings shall be submitted to the Site
Review Committee for approval prior to the issuance of a building
permit, to ensure appropriateness and compatibility with adjoining
development.
A. In the case of roadways and other rights-of-way which are not dedicated
to the public, there shall be granted to the Village such easements over
the same as may be necessary to enable the Village to provide suitable
and adequate fire protection, sanitary and storm sewer, water and other
required municipal services to the project area.
B. The care and maintenance of such open space reservations and rightsof-
way shall be assured either by the establishment of an appropriate
management organization for the project or by agreement with the
Village for establishment of a special service district for the project
area on the basis of which the Village shall provide the necessary
maintenance service and levy the cost thereof as a special fee on the
property tax bills of properties with the project area.
C. Ownership and tax liability of private open space reservation and
rights-of-way shall be established in a manner acceptable to the Village
and made part of conditions of the plan approval.
A. Lot requirements. Lot requirements will vary based on the number of
proposed units to be constructed on the site, green space requirements,
parking and stormwater management requirements. All lots shall meet
the approval of the Site Review Committee.
§ 295-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-135
1:635
§ 295-136. Site review/development and design standards.
B. Height regulations. No minimum or maximum height restrictions exist
in the hospitality (H) land use designation.
C. Building setbacks. All structures must meet the minimum setback
requirements of 30 feet for front yards, 15 feet for side yards, 25 feet
for rear yards, driveways six feet off property lines, maximum curb cut
of 30 feet, and no outside storage is permitted. All site details shall
meet all ingress and egress requirements for firesafety. The Site Review
Committee shall grant exceptions to the building setback requirements
per the design and use of the building and upon its determination that
the building and lot layout conform to the standards, goals and
guidelines of the Master Plan document.
A. Introduction. This section is designed to provide for the future growth
and development of those residences, businesses, and industries that
seek an aesthetically attractive working environment. The intent and
purpose of this section is to promote and maintain desirable economic
development within the District that is practical, feasible, and an asset
to owners, neighbors, and the Village of Hobart while maintaining an
attractive environment. To maintain flexibility and a timely review
procedure, the following site review procedures will be utilized for
review of potential developments within the District. All other zoning
classifications remain subject to site review procedures as outlined in
Article XXXIII of this chapter.
B. Objectives. The purpose of this section is to establish rules, regulations,
standards, and procedures for approval of all new development
proposals and the expansion of existing businesses and light industry
and to comply with the stated goals, objectives and aesthetics outline in
the Master Plan document.
C. Standard requirements. The interpretation and application of the
provisions of these standards shall be held as minimum requirements
for the promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare.
D. Master plan conformity. No structure shall be erected, converted,
enlarged, reconstructed or altered, and no structure or land shall be
used for any purpose nor in any manner which is not in conformity with
the provisions of this section and the Master Plan document.
E. Character and intensity of land use. The uses proposed and their
intensity and arrangement on the site shall be of a visual and
operational character which:
(1) Are compatible to the physical nature of the site with particular
concern for preservation of natural features, tree growth and open
space.
(2) That, to the maximum extent practicable, would produce an
attractive environment of sustained aesthetic and ecological
§ 295-135 HOBART CODE § 295-136
1:636
desirability, economic stability and functional practicality
compatible with the general development plans for the area as
established by the community.
(3) Would not adversely affect the anticipated provision for school or
other municipal services.
(4) Would not create traffic or parking demand incompatible with the
existing or proposed facilities to serve it.
(5) Would not limit, lessen or not conform to the design guidelines,
themes and principal goals for development and aesthetic as stated
in the Master Plan as may be amended from time to time.
F. Economic feasibility and impact. The proponents of a Site Plan
application shall provide evidence satisfactory to the Village staff and to
the Site Review Committee of its economic feasibility, of available
adequate financing, and that it would not adversely affect the economic
prosperity of the Village or the values of surrounding properties.
G. Engineering design standards. The width of street right-of-way, width of
paving, width of location of street or other paving, outdoor lighting,
location of sewer, electrical, gas, cable, telephone, and water lines,
provision for stormwater drainage or other similar environmental
engineering considerations shall be based on standards necessary to
implement the specific function in the specific situation; provided,
however, in no case shall standards be less than those necessary to
ensure the public safety and welfare as determined by the Villagedesignated
engineer.
H. Implementation schedule. The proponents of a plan within the District
shall submit a reasonable schedule for the implementation of the
development to the satisfaction of the Village planning staff and Site
Review Committee, including suitable provisions for assurance that
each phase could be brought to completion in a manner which would
not result in an adverse effect upon the community as a result of
termination at that point.
I. Administration. The administration of this section shall be vested in the
following: Village Administrator, Community Development Director, the
Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector and Site Review Committee.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Village Administrator and/or Community
Development Director to be in charge of the day-to-day
administration and interpretation of the development and design
standards. Enforcement of this section and the Master Plan
document is charged to the Hobart Zoning Administrator/Building
Inspector in accordance with § 62.23(7), Wisconsin Statutes.
(2) All proposed site plans shall be forwarded to Village planning and
public safety staff, beginning with the Zoning Administrator/
Building Inspector, for staff review and recommendation.
§ 295-136 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-136
1:637
§ 295-137. General building and performance standards.
(3) After staff review, all proposed plans shall be submitted to the Site
Review Committee, which shall consist of seven members
appointed by the Village President and subject to confirmation by
the Village Board. There shall be no residency requirement. The
Committee shall consist of at least one Village Board member and
the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector.
(4) From time to time the design criteria may be amended, changed or
deleted. Such action will require review by the Site Review
Committee and shall follow the procedures of § 62.23(7), Wisconsin
Statutes.
(5) Appeals. Unless otherwise provided herein, appeals to the
requirements contained in these standards shall be heard by the
Board of Appeals.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish general
development performance standards, in accordance with the Village of
Hobart zoning ordinances, the Comprehensive Plan and the Master
Plan document. These standards are intended and designed to assure
compatibility of uses; to prevent urban blight, deterioration, and decay;
and to enhance the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents
of the community.
B. Building. The Master Plan encourages a variety of architectural styles.
However, basic harmony is intended to prevail so that no one structure
detracts from the attractiveness of the overall environment or the
design themes and guidelines contained in the Master Plan. The Site
Review Committee shall review building design in order to ensure
architectural compatibility and integrity.
C. Building exterior. Within the district, all colors, materials, finishes, and
building form shall be coordinated in a manner consistent with general
guidelines of the Master Plan for each of the front, side, and rear
exterior walls. Materials, color and texture may vary so long as the
integrity of the design guidelines of the Master Plan document are
upheld. The Master Plan document outlines appropriate materials,
colors and texture and proponents of a plan should, to the maximum
extent practicable, follow the guidelines for suggested building
exteriors.
D. Front building wall and building walls facing an adjacent street. Any
exterior building wall (front, side or rear) facing an adjacent street shall
be constructed with materials consistent with the surrounding and
adjacent buildings to uphold the general design theme within the
District.
§ 295-136 HOBART CODE § 295-137
1:638
E. Mechanical equipment. All mechanical equipment shall be enclosed or
screened. Roof-mounted equipment shall be integrated into the design
of the structure, enclosed or screened to the maximum extent possible.
F. Construction. Construction shall commence within one year of plan
approval or in accordance with a development agreement with the
Village. No site plan approval by the Site Review Committee shall be
valid for more than 12 months from the date of such approval unless a
building permit is obtained and development in accordance with such
site plan is commenced within such period. The provisions of this
section shall apply unless otherwise agreed to by the Site Review
Committee.
G. Maintenance. The exterior walls and roof of buildings shall be
maintained in a clean, orderly and attractive condition; free of cracks,
dents, punctures, breakage and other forms of visible marring.
Materials that become excessively faded, chalked, cracked, chipped,
damaged or otherwise deteriorated shall be replaced, refinished,
repaired or repainted in accordance with the reasonable determination
and order of the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector within 60
days' notice of such defect.
H. No right to divide property. After a site plan has been approved, the
property subject to the approved site plan shall not be further divided
without a review and consent of the Village.
I. Fences.
(1) Construction and maintenance. Every fence shall be constructed in
a substantial, workmanlike manner and of material reasonably
suited for the purpose for which the fence is proposed to be used.
Every fence shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair
and shall not be allowed to become and remain in a condition of
disrepair or constitute a nuisance, public or private. Any such fence
which is, or has become, dangerous to the public safety, health or
welfare, is a public nuisance and shall be repaired. Chain-linked or
barbed fences of any kind shall be prohibited throughout the
Centennial Centre at Hobart District. Fence colors, aesthetics and
construction materials must conform to the Master Plan document
and shall be consistent and/or complementary to the surrounding
built environment.
(2) Location/height. On corner lots in all districts, no fence or planting
in excess of 36 inches above the street center line grade will be
permitted within a triangular area defined as follows: beginning at
the intersection of the projected curbing lines of two intersecting
streets; thence 30 feet along one property line; thence diagonally to
a point 30 feet from the point of beginning on the other property
line; thence to the point of beginning.
(a) In those instances where a fence exists as an enclosure which
restricts access from the front to the rear yard, a gate,
§ 295-137 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-137
1:639
§ 295-138. Lighting and standards.
To provide for the basic needs of safety and security, appropriate lighting
shall be provided in order to delineate roads, drives, parking areas,
pedestrianways, buildings, and other organizational points. Lighting shall
be an integral part of the overall architectural design of Centennial Centre
at Hobart; therefore, proposed lighting, whether freestanding or buildingmounted,
shall complement the architectural character of the principal
use. Lighting design shall correlate energy conservation with aesthetic,
architectural, and safety factors.
identifiable as a collapsible section, or other such means of
recognizable ingress, shall be unobstructed and a minimum of
three feet in width. The location of such ingress points shall be
positioned at any point paralleling the front lot line between
the side lot property line and the principal structure.
(b) Fences in all districts shall not exceed eight feet in height.
(c) No fencing shall be allowed between the front setback line and
the principal structure.
J. Site plan review. No fence shall be constructed, moved or altered
without site plan review.
A. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking, loading and service
areas, shall be shaded, diffused, or arranged to reflect light away from
adjacent parcels. Glare, whether direct or reflected, as differentiated
from general illumination, shall not be visible beyond the limits of the
site from which it originates. Parking lot lights may be used in either a
single or multi-format. Characteristics include: 27,000 metal halide,
spaced approximately 100 to 120 feet off center, consisting of sharp,
cutoff-type luminaries, maximum height for pole not to exceed 30 feet,
to be an approved pole. Poles must be uniform in style, per the Master
Plan document, and height. The use of wooden poles is prohibited.
B. Walkway lighting should be of the same family as mentioned above,
height to be 10 feet to 14 feet above grade. Bollard lighting can be used
as low-level walkway illumination on private property.
C. Building lighting should occur as part of the overall design concept
using recessed lighting in overhangs and at the entrance. Well-designed
soft lighting of the building exterior is allowed provided it does not
impact on the surrounding properties, complements the architecture,
and the light source is concealed.
D. The use of building-mounted floodlights and tall "freeway type" fixtures
is prohibited. Ground-mounted floodlights used to accent principal
buildings are permitted.
E. Flag directional lighting is permitted with approval of terms and
conditions of use of such lighting by the Site Review Committee.
§ 295-137 HOBART CODE § 295-139
1:640
§ 295-139. Site plan review.
A. Site plan approval required.
(1) No property within the district shall be improved without first
obtaining an approved site plan as provided in this section.
(2) No construction or improvements may be made except in strict
compliance with a site plan that has been approved as provided in
this section.
B. Design objectives. The following objectives will be considered in
reviewing any application for a site plan approval: [Amended
3-17-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-02]
(1) To encourage harmonious development;
(2) To encourage the provision of open space and recreational facilities
throughout the district;
(3) To encourage owners to use creative and imaginative approaches
in their projects;
(4) To provide an enjoyable living environment by preserving existing
topography, stands of trees, ponds, floodplains, and similar natural
assets;
(5) To encourage a variety of living environments and an agreeable
mixture of housing types, where shown on the Master Plan;
(6) To require architectural plans that are consistent with design
guidelines and principal aesthetic goals for development as set
forth in the Master Plan;
(7) To enable and encourage people to easily and safely travel to, from,
and within Centennial Centre on foot, by bicycle, and by vehicle.
C. Site plan approval. The following procedure shall be followed for the
submittal of site plans. Where procedures and requirements imposed by
this section are either more restrictive or less restrictive than
comparable procedures and requirements imposed by any other
provision of this chapter or any other law, ordinance, resolution rule or
regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or
impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. For purposes of
this section, all applications must be executed by all owners and the
party or parties that will be responsible for the development of the site,
all of whom shall be collectively referred to in this section as the
"applicant."
(1) Preliminary consultation. Prior to the submittal of a site plan, it is
recommended that the developer meet with the Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector and other appropriate Village
planning staff to discuss the District zoning, site plan and
§ 295-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-139
1:641
landscaping plan requirements. Such meeting should occur prior to
any extensive outlay of funds on the part of the developer since it
is intended to identify potential problems and methods to alleviate
them and to encourage a cooperative effort between the developer/
owner and the Village.
(a) Statements or recommendations made at the consultation are
not legally binding. The meeting is intended to ensure that the
owner is aware of the District and Master Plan criteria.
(b) In order to obtain information, each owner shall confer with
the Village staff and appropriate consultants at the call of the
Village in connection with the preparation of the District site
plan application. Of primary importance are policy issues such
as density, external and internal land uses, traffic circulation,
parking requirements, signage, lighting consistency with
standards set forth in this chapter and in the Master Plan
document, open space quantity and maintenance, general
spatial characteristics such as setbacks and architectural
renderings of buildings. The owner or interested party shall
also provide a conceptual sketch or site rendering at the time
of the preapplication consultation. Village staff will offer advice
to the applicant regarding his proposal and aid in
understanding this chapter.
(2) Filing prerequisite. Prior to the submittal of a site plan within the
District, the owner must be current on all real estate taxes,
assessments or other municipal charges, whether relating to the
real estate subject to the site plan application or otherwise located
within the Village.
(3) Plan submittal. Ten copies of all site plans requiring approval of the
Site Review Committee shall be submitted to the Village Clerk-
Treasurer.
(4) Staff review. Upon receipt, the Clerk-Treasurer shall forward the
plans to the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector for staff
review. The Village planning and public safety staff, and any
appropriate consultants, shall all review the plans and make
recommendations regarding their particular expertise to the Site
Review Committee.
(5) Time of Site Plan Committee review. If the site plan is filed less than
10 days before the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Site
Review Committee, Village staff will attempt to review the site plan
and forward it to the Site Review Committee for consideration at
the next regular meeting. If the site plan is not timely filed, or if
staff cannot make timely review, the site plan shall be placed on the
next subsequent regular meeting of the Site Review Committee.
Nothing in this provision shall limit the Site Plan Review
Committee's ability to schedule special meetings to consider site
§ 295-139 HOBART CODE § 295-139
1:642
plans, upon proper notice to the owner/developer, at the sole
discretion of the Site Review Committee.
(6) Site Review Committee decision. The Site Review Committee shall
review and either approve, conditionally approve, or deny approval
of the site plan. Site plan approval and continuance of project
planning and construction shall be granted by the Site Review
Committee upon a determination that all phases, details, materials,
aesthetics, land uses, etc., are consistent with the Master Plan
standards and guidelines, as may be amended from time to time,
and confirmation that the owner is current on all taxes,
assessments and other municipal charges.
(7) Site Review Committee special exceptions. The Site Review
Committee may grant special exception to the dimensional
standards applicable in the District upon a finding that such
exception is consistent with the Master Plan and contemplated or
existing development in the area of the exception. A special
exception shall not be valid until reviewed and accepted by the
Village Board under the same standard.
(8) Site plan contents and specifications. All plans shall be drawn to an
engineering scale no greater than one inch equals 100 feet plus one
complete set of such plans reduced in size to 11 inches by 17 inches
and include the following information:
(a) Name of project/development;
(b) Location of project/development by street address or CSM;
(c) Name and mailing address of developer/owner;
(d) Name and mailing address of engineer/architect;
(e) A written statement describing how the development will be
consistent with the land use and design guidelines as identified
in the Centennial Centre Master Plan.
(f) A written statement from the owner acknowledging the
Village's restrictive covenants for the District set forth on
Appendix A167 and agreeing:
[1] To subject the real estate that is subject to the site to the
restrictive covenants if said property has not been
previously subjected to the restricted covenants; and
[2] To be individually bound by the terms of the restrictive
covenants, including the waiver of sovereign immunity set
forth therein.
(g) North point indicator;
167. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Village office.
§ 295-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-139
1:643
(h) Scale;
(i) Boundary lines of property, with dimensions;
(j) Location identification and dimensions of existing and
proposed:
[1] Topographic contours at a minimum interval of two feet
and key spot elevations;
[2] Adjacent streets and street rights-of-way, respective to the
elevation of building first floor;
[3] On-site streets and street rights-of-way and fire lanes;
[4] Utilities and any easements, including but not limited to
the following types:
[a] Electric.
[b] Natural gas.
[c] Telephone.
[d] Water.
[e] Sewer (sanitary and storm).
[f] Fiber optic lines.
[g] Other transmission lines.
[h] Ingress-egress easements.
[5] All buildings and structures, existing and proposed, to
consider maximum development of the parcel if more than
one structure could be located on the parcel;
(k) A statement of the total acreage of the property to be
developed;
(l) Significant physical features within the tract, watercourses,
ponds, lakes, rain gardens, and wetlands, and proposed major
changes in those features;
(m) All contemplated land uses;
(n) An indicator of the contemplated intensity of use: i.e., gross
density in residential development; number of prospective
tenants in office, commercial, and industrial development or
recreational development;
(o) Existing buildings that will be removed and the proposed
location of all principal structures and associated parking
areas;
§ 295-139 HOBART CODE § 295-139
1:644
(p) Proposed circulation systems (pedestrian, bicycle, auto) by
type, their connection to the existing network outside the site;
(q) Existing rights-of-way and easements that may affect the
project;
(r) The location of sanitary and storm sewer lines and water
mains;
(s) The location of recreational and open space areas;
(t) Description of proposed system for drainage and a stormwater
plan showing existing and final grades.
[1] Parking facilities;
[2] Water bodies and wetlands;
[3] Surface water holding ponds, drainage ditches, and
drainage patterns, location and size of culverts and any
drainage sewers servicing the site.
(u) Sidewalks, walkways, and driveways;
(v) Off-street loading areas and docks;
(w) Fences and retaining walls;
(x) All signs;
(y) Exterior refuse collection areas and the required enclosure(s);
(z) Exterior lighting;
(aa) Traffic flow on and off site.
(bb) Location of open space/green space;
(cc) Site statistics, including:
[1] Site square footage;
[2] Percent site coverage;
[3] Percent open space and green space;
[4] Floor area ratio.
(dd) Location and dimensions of proposed outdoor display areas;
(ee) Architectural rendering of the proposed structures and
buildings, including:
[1] All dimensions;
[2] Gross square footage of existing and proposed buildings
and structures; and
§ 295-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-139
1:645
[3] Description of all exterior finish materials.
(ff) Erosion control plans;
(gg) Landscaping plan as provided herein.
(9) Staged development. In the case of plans which call for
development in stages:
(a) A general development plan shall be submitted that will
include:
[1] A map at an appropriate scale, showing the successive
stages and a development schedule indicating:
[a] The approximate date when construction of the
project can be expected to begin;
[b] The stages in which the project will be built and the
approximate date when construction of each stage can
be expected to begin;
[c] The anticipated rate of development;
[d] The approximate date when the development of each
of the stages will be completed; and
[e] Other information considered pertinent by Site
Review Committee and/or the developers/owners.
[2] The general development plan must be approved by the
Site Plan Review Committee in the same manner as a site
plan.
(b) Prior to any construction in a staged development, the
developer/owner shall submit a site plan for each stage of
development to be subject to review and approval as provided
in this article.
(10) Records and amendments.
(a) Site Plan Committee records. The Site Review Committee shall
retain and file all application forms and exhibits related to the
application and shall indicate on such forms its approval,
approval with modification, or denial. Modifications to the site
plan as prescribed by the Site Review Committee shall be
thoroughly described and documented as to the purpose of
modification.
(b) Site plan amendments. Any material change in the approved
site plan shall be submitted to the Village staff for referral to
and prior approval by the Site Review Committee. All site plan
amendments require approval in the same manner as final
approval.
§ 295-139 HOBART CODE § 295-139
1:646
§ 295-140. Landscaping.
(11) Development contract. Before any building permit shall be issued,
the applicant and the owner shall enter into an appropriate
contract with the Village to guarantee the implementation of the
development according to the terms and conditions established as
a part of the site plan. The Village shall have the right, if deemed
appropriate, to require the inclusion of a performance bond or
other security satisfactory to the Village's Attorney. Such contract,
or a memorandum thereof shall be recorded by the owner in the
County Register of Deed's office within 10 days after its execution.
(12) Change of plan. Any subsequent change of use of any lot or parcel
of land or addition or modification of the site plan shall first be
submitted for approval to the Site Review Committee and if, in the
opinion of the Site Review Committee, such change or modification
constitutes a substantial alteration of the original plans, a new site
plan approval shall be required before the use is changed or the
plans modified. If, in the opinion of the Site Review Committee,
such change or modification does not constitute a substantial
alteration of the original plans, such change or modification can be
granted by the Site Review Committee.
(13) Appeals. Appeals of a Site Review Committee decision may be
made to the Appeals Board.
A. General statement. The Village finds that it is in the public interest for
all developments within the District to provide landscape improvements
for the purposes of complementing the natural environment; improving
the general appearance of the District and enhancing its aesthetic
appeal; preserving the economic base; improving quality of life;
delineating and separating use areas; increasing the safety, efficiency,
and aesthetics of use areas and open space; screening and enhancing
privacy; mitigating the diverse impact of climate; conserving energy;
abating erosion and stabilizing slopes; deadening sound; and
preserving the quality of our air and water.
B. Landscape plan. All applicants for building permits within the District
shall submit a landscape plan, prepared pursuant to Subsection C
below, for review and approval as required herein prior to the request
for a building permit.
C. Procedure. The following procedure shall be followed for the submittal
of landscape plans:
(1) Preliminary consultation. Prior to the submittal of a landscape plan,
it is recommended that the developer/owner meet with the Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector and/or other appropriate Village
planning staff to discuss the design standards set forth in the
Master Plan, the applicant site plan, and landscaping plan
requirements. Such meeting should occur prior to any extensive
§ 295-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-140
1:647
outlay of funds on the part of the developer since it is intended to
identify potential problems and methods to alleviate them and to
encourage a cooperative effort between the developer/owner and
the Village.
(2) Plan submittal. Ten copies of all landscape plans requiring approval
by the Site Review Committee must be submitted to the Village
Clerk-Treasurer 10 days prior to the third Tuesday of the month.
Landscaping plans may be submitted separately, but it is strongly
encouraged that they are included in the site plan. All plans shall be
drawn to an engineering scale no greater than one inch equals 100
feet plus one complete set of such plans reduced in size to 11
inches by 17 inches and contain the following information:
(a) The location and dimensions of all proposed open space/green
space areas;
(b) Identification of all proposed vegetation:
[1] Symbols, quantities, common names, and size of all plant
materials;
[2] Showing all species to scale of mature crown diameter or
spread;
[3] All existing vegetation to be saved; and
[4] Typical sections of berms, fences, retaining walls, planter
boxes, etc.
(3) Reviews. Review of landscape plans should be conducted
concurrently with and follow the same procedure as site plan
review.
(4) Appeals. Appeals of Site Review Committee decisions may be made
to the Appeals Board.
D. Specific requirements.
(1) Ground cover. Open space areas shall, at a minimum, be seeded six
months after completion of building. The following exceptions may
be granted by Village staff during the review process:
(a) The use of mulch material for shrubs and foundation plantings;
(b) The seeding of future expansion areas delineated on site plan;
(c) Areas maintained in a natural state that are undisturbed
during construction; or
(d) Other landscape elements such as decks, patios, stepping
stones or landscape stones may be incorporated therein.
§ 295-140 HOBART CODE § 295-140
1:648
(2) Minimum size of plantings. Required vegetation shall be of the
following minimum planting size:
(a) Evergreen shrubs used for screening purposes, including those
used in conjunction with berms, shall be a minimum of 24
inches in height.
(b) Tree size, spacing and frequency requirements shall be
determined per land use, site plan configurations and as
deemed appropriate by Village staff and the Site Review
Committee during the site review procedure.
(3) Species.
(a) All trees used in site development should be indigenous to the
appropriate hardiness zone and physical characteristics of the
site.
(b) All plant material should conform to "American Standards for
Nursery Stock," latest edition; sponsored by the American
Association of Nurserymen, Inc. All vegetation shall be planted
in accordance with accepted planting procedures.
(c) All proposed vegetation included in the landscape plan shall be
reviewed by the Site Review Committee to assure compliance
with the requirements contained herein.
(4) Buffers. That portion of any land use allowable within the District
that is abutting property designated for single-family or multifamily
residential shall have a landscaped area at least six feet wide
extending the full length of the land use designation and meet the
following minimum requirements:
(a) One tree per 30 lineal feet, or fraction thereof, of lot line
bordering single family and multifamily districts.
(b) A shrub, border, hedge, wall, earthen berm, or other durable
landscape barrier, or combination thereof, at least four feet
high, but not exceeding eight feet high, which is 90%
impervious to sight placed along the perimeter of such
landscaped strip, except in the front yard setback.
(5) Implementation/replacement.
(a) All approved landscaping is to be installed in accordance with a
compliance timetable.
(b) Any vegetation included on an approved landscape plan that
dies must be replaced by the owner/developer within one
planting season. Vegetation replaced shall conform to the
approved landscape plan and the requirements contained
herein.
§ 295-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-140
1:649
§ 295-141. Compliance and penalties.
(6) Maintenance. It shall be the joint responsibility of the owner and/or
lessee of the principal use, uses, or building to maintain in a neat
and adequate manner all landscaping materials, vegetation,
screening, and fences contained in the approved landscape and site
plans.
(7) Compliance timetable. All landscape plans shall include a timetable
for construction, installation or planting within a period not to
exceed one year from the date of commencement of construction.
Any person who is, or has been, required to landscape any part of a
zoning lot and who has not complied with that requirement shall,
within 60 days of receipt of written notice from the Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector that a violation of this chapter
exists, comply with all requirements.
A. Intent. It is the intent of the Hobart Village Board that the procedures
set forth in this article shall enable a prompt but thorough review of
development proposals in the District. However, given the importance
of the District to the ordered growth and development of the Village,
derivations or failures to follow approved site plans, proceeding with
unapproved plans, implementing uses not permitted or approved or
other violations of this article will be promptly and thoroughly
addressed.
B. Forfeitures. Any violation of this article or a site plan approved
hereunder shall be subject to forfeiture up to the maximum penalty
allowable per Municipal Code and State Statute as may be amended,
with each twenty-four-hour period constituting a separate violation.
C. Non-exclusive remedy. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
limit the Village's ability to pursue all remedies available to it to enforce
this article, the Master Plan document, compliance with a site plan or to
enforce a development agreement required hereby contemporaneously
with forfeiture or other legal action.
§ 295-140 HOBART CODE § 295-141
1:650
ARTICLE XIV
PDD #2: Orlando/Packerland Planned Development District
§ 295-142. Title and purpose.
This article applies only to the Orlando/Packerland Planned Development
District (OPPDD) which is a mixed-use development district (hereinafter
referred to as the "District").
§ 295-143. Legal description.
All of Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11 and 12, Section 25, T23N, R19E, Village
of Hobart, Brown County, Wisconsin.
§ 295-144. Purpose.
The Orlando/Packerland Planned Development District is intended to
provide a blueprint and design guidelines for a mixed-use district that
attracts and facilitates an expanding, diverse and stable tax base. The
District is intended to be a recognizable and cohesive mixed-use district
where limited industrial and commercial businesses will be located, with
nearby residential areas available to workforces. Other complementary
activities will provide support to both the residential and commercial
feature and bring a strong economic base to the District. Specifically, this
District's purpose is to:
A. Described as follows:
Beginning at the Northwest corner of said Section 25;
Thence S00°13'28"W, 1,916.22 feet along the west line of said Section
25 to the westerly extension of the north line of lands described in
Jacket 22505 Image 04;
Thence N85°01'07"E, 685.01 feet along said north line to the east line
of said lands;
Thence SOO°13'30"W, 53.27 feet along said east line to the north line
of said lands;
Thence S86°05'26"E, 584.56 feet along said north line to the west line
of said Lot 11, Section 24;
Thence S00°31'53"W, 575.89 feet along said west line to the south line
of said Lot 11;
Thence N85°01'07"E, 1,304.50 feet along said south line and the south
line of said Lot 12, Section 24;
Thence N30°26'27"E, 3,221.19 feet along said easterly line to the
north line of said Section 25;
Thence S85°01'07"W, 4,200.01 feet along said north line to the Point
of beginning.
B. Said description contains 184 acres of land, more or less.
§ 295-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-144
1:651
§ 295-145. Definitions. [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
Words, terms and phrases used in this article shall have the same meanings
as found in §§ 295-8 and 295-120 of this chapter.
§ 295-146. General provisions.
A. Assure that planned growth accomplishes goals set forth in the Village's
Comprehensive (Smart Growth) Plan;
B. Promotes flexibility in design and the efficient use of land to facilitate a
more economic arrangement of buildings, uses, circulation systems and
utilities;
C. Provide for the accomplishment of external architectural unity so as to
promote cohesiveness of design aesthetics throughout the entire
district;
D. Provide more usable and suitably located common and open space
areas than would otherwise be provided under conventional land
development procedures.
A. Engineering design standards. Normal standards or operational policy
regarding right-of-way widths, provision for sidewalks, streetlighting
and similar environmental design criteria shall not be mandatory in the
District, but precise standards satisfactory to the Village, pursuant to
the criteria as set forth in §§ 295-153 through 295-157 hereof shall be
made a part of the approved plan and shall be enforceable as a part of
this chapter. Building, lot and associated infrastructure layout shall
meet all ingress and egress requirements for firesafety.
B. Contractual requirements and guarantees. The owner shall enter into
an appropriate contract or agreement with the Village to guarantee the
development and operation in accordance with the terms and
conditions established between the Village and the owner of the
development project and to provide the Village with sufficient
assurances that the owner will abide by the Village's zoning, taxing and
other municipal authority. Any changes or additions to the original
approved development site, structures or plans of operation shall
require resubmittal and approval by the Site Review Committee.
C. Parking. Parking shall conform to the requirements as set forth in
Article XXVIII, Off-Street Parking Requirements, of the Village of
Hobart Code of Ordinances to the maximum extent practicable in
addition to any requirements set forth in this article. The Site Review
Committee may require shared parking, or require other parking
strategies that promote an open/green space concept set forth in the
Master Plan or strategies to otherwise mitigate the promotion of
impervious parking surfaces. Parking availability in residential land
uses shall be calculated per dwelling unit and shall match the number
of bedrooms in such unit, and at least one of the parking arrangements
§ 295-144 HOBART CODE § 295-146
1:652
§ 295-147. Prohibited land uses.
To provide controls on type, use, economic and environmental impact, and
to uphold the health, safety, general welfare and morals of the Village, the
following land uses are prohibited throughout the District:
must be garage parking. All other parking must be off-street.
Throughout the district, parking spaces shall be provided on the basis
required for each individual use as determined by first, the Village
Engineer and second, ultimate approval of the Site Review Committee.
Loading docks for semitrailer or delivery trucks shall be rear- or sideloaded,
or otherwise not visible from the roadway. In the Limited
Industrial (LI), Large Commercial and Retail (LCR), and Small
Commercial and Retail (SCR) land use designations, no overnight
parking, storage or idling of vehicles shall be allowed on site without
prior approval from the Village Board. [Amended 1-8-2016 by Ord.
No. 01-2016]
D. Signs. Private signs shall be regulated as set forth in § 295-361,
Regulation of signs. All public signs within the District shall be
aesthetically cohesive and follow the regulations set forth in § 295-361,
Regulation of signs. The Site Review Committee may approve signs that
may not comply with the ordinances referenced herein, provided such
sign(s) promotes or adheres to the general design aesthetics, themes
and guidelines of the municipal sign ordinance.
E. Stormwater and erosion control. The intent of this District ordinance
encourages project plans that are compatible with a regional approach
to stormwater detention and management. Throughout the District,
stormwater management and erosion control requirements shall be in
accordance with applicable rules and regulations. Easements for
stormwater management facilities shall also be required, and granted,
upon request from the Village.
F. Failure to comply. Failure to comply with the conditions, commitments,
guarantees or the recommendations established in the approval of such
development project will be cause for rescinding the approval of the
same. Upon notice given by the Zoning Administrator/Building
Inspector, the owner then shall be required to appear before the Site
Review Committee at its next meeting to explain any such failure to
comply. The Site Review Committee at such public hearing may set a
time limit for compliance and/or recommend specific steps to be taken
prior to rescinding the approval of the project, including the
termination of the construction of any buildings on such site upon 30
days' notice in writing to the owner at his last-known address.
Continued failure to comply shall result in the rescinding of plan
approvals by the Site Review Committee.
A. Automobiles: automobile dismantling, selling of used automobile parts
or used car lots with the exception of minor service and repair stations;
§ 295-146 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-147
1:653
§ 295-148. Permitted and conditional land use designations.
The following land uses are permitted within the District. The spirit and
intent of the District is to allow flexibility in types of land uses, minimum lot
dimensions and bulk standards, and all site-specific criteria. A development
plan must satisfy the standards set forth in this article.
§ 295-149. Single-family and two-family residential (SFR).
Residential dwelling units comprised of single family, duplex, townhouse,
row house or condominium where the owner occupies the dwelling unit.
Single-family residences are limited to two stories.
B. Boardinghouse or other places of accommodation that charge on more
than a nightly basis and do not provide an individual, self-contained
unit, including a full bath with each sleeping room;
C. Contractor's plant or storage yard;
D. Live poultry or fowl market or poultry killing except in a designated
farmer's market or flea market area and as regulated by hours of
operations, frequency and use limitations as established by the Village;
E. Pawn shops;
F. Sale of firearm or weapons of any kind unless the sale is part-in-parcel
of a large sporting goods or other large retail store,
G. External storage of iron, bottles, rags or junk, except for materials
temporarily stored in a municipal recycling program, or storage of any
materials, except those used for retail uses or office uses on site;
H. The keeping of nondomestic animals in buildings other than in the
commercial and retail (CR) uses as outlined in this chapter;
I. The storage or parking of trucks, except those associated with a
building lawfully erected for such purposes unless in the limited
industrial (LI) land use classification within the District;
J. Trailer lots unless in the limited industrial (LI) land use classification
within the District;
K. Trucking contractor's garage or storage yard unless in the limited
industrial (LI) land use classification within the District;
L. All prohibitions, not otherwise outlined elsewhere in this chapter,
pursuant to Article XXV, Entertainment Overlay District, of this
chapter;
M. All other uses expressly prohibited, or not expressly permitted, in the
entire Village pursuant to this chapter.
A. Permitted uses. All uses outlined under "Permitted Uses" within the R-1
Residential (Article VI of this chapter), R-2 Residential (Article VII of
§ 295-147 HOBART CODE § 295-149
1:654
this chapter), R-3 Residential (Article VIII of this chapter), and R-4
Single and Two-Family Residential zoning classifications (Article IX of
this chapter) are permitted in the District.
B. Lot requirements.
(1) Lot area and lot frontage. No single-family lot is to be less than 70
feet in width; no duplex lot is to be less than 80 feet in width.
(2) Density. Single-family lots shall have a minimum density of 8,400
square feet, unless otherwise specified herein; duplex lots shall
have a minimum density of 9,600 square feet.
C. Height regulations. All structures must be designed so as to ensure
adequate air, light and privacy for all residents. Maximum height
restrictions are 35 feet, unless otherwise approved by the Site Review
Committee.
D. Building setbacks. All structures must meet the minimum setback
requirements of 25 feet for front yards, seven feet for each side yard, 25
feet for rear yards, driveways four feet off property lines, maximum
curb cut of 30 feet with 22 feet at the right-of-way, and no accessory
buildings and no outside storage.
E. Building size.
(1) Minimum size of a one-story dwelling shall be 1,400 square feet for
a building in the single-family designation.
(2) Minimum size of a two-story dwelling shall be 1,000 square feet on
the ground floor and a total minimum of 1,600 square feet.
F. Parking. [Added 1-8-2016 by Ord. No. 01-2016]
(1) All dwellings shall provide a minimum of two enclosed parking
stalls meeting the building setback requirements.
(2) Enclosed parking stalls shall be accessed by a paved driveway
which shall be limited to a direct path between the public right-ofway
and the enclosed parking stalls.
(3) There shall be no off-street parking or storage in any yard except
for within the paved driveway.
(4) Parking shall not extend into the public right-of-way.
(5) Open off-street parking facilities shall be solely for parking of
passenger vehicles, which shall be regulated as follows:
(a) All vehicles shall be in condition for safe and legal performance
on public rights-of-way and shall be registered, displaying
current license plates.
§ 295-149 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-149
1:655
(b) There shall be no exterior parking or storage of nonpassenger
vehicles and equipment except as follows:
[1] A maximum of one commercial vehicle, licensed and
registered for operation on public rights-of-way, per
dwelling unit may be parked outdoors if:
[a] Used by a resident of the dwelling unit.
[b] It has a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of
10,000 pounds or less and is less than 21 feet in
length.
[2] Nonpassenger vehicles and equipment associated with
and customary to residential uses may be parked for a
maximum of 24 consecutive hours.
[a] Nonpassenger vehicles and equipment normally
associated with and customary to a residential use
include, but are not limited to:
[i] Boats.
[ii] Motor homes.
[iii] Travel trailers.
[iv] Campers.
[v] Snowmobiles, ATVs, UTV and personal
watercraft, all of which must be housed or stored
on or within a trailer.
[vi] Utility trailers.
[b] Vehicles and/or equipment not normally associated
with or customary to a residential use specifically
prohibited from being parked or stored outdoors on
residential property include, but are not limited to:
[i] Construction equipment, such as bulldozers,
backhoes, skid steers, and forklifts.
[ii] Dump and stake-body-style trucks.
[iii] Cube-type vans and trucks.
[iv] Landscaping business equipment, such as
tractors, tree spades, graders and scrapers.
[v] Semi-trailers and -tractors.
[vi] Concession, vending and catering trailers.
§ 295-149 HOBART CODE § 295-149
1:656
§ 295-150. Multifamily residential district (MFR).
The multifamily residential land use classification refers to apartment
buildings that house multiple families or households. The multifamily
designation may consist of traditional apartments, community-based
retirement facilities, townhouses or row houses, or condominium dwelling
units. Multifamily land use applications shall consist of not less than three
dwelling units.
[vii] Commercial/industrial equipment trailers and
lifts.
[viii] Tow trucks, wreckers or car carriers.
[c] "Twenty-four consecutive hours," for the purposes of
this section, shall be defined as a time frame which is
inclusive of all time in which a regulated
nonpassenger vehicle is not removed from the
premises for more than 72 consecutive hours.
A. Permitted uses. All uses outlined under "Permitted Uses" within the R-6
Multifamily Residential (Article XI of this chapter) providing an
exception within the District to allow for multifamily dwellings to
exceed the maximum of 12 units.
B. Lot requirements. Lot requirements will vary based on the number of
proposed units to be constructed on the site, green space requirements,
parking and stormwater management requirements. All lots shall meet
the approval of the Site Review Committee.
C. Building height. No principal building or parts of a principal building
shall exceed 45 feet in height except as provided by § 295-13, Height
regulations. Building must be designed so as to ensure adequate air,
light and privacy for all residents.
D. Building size. There shall be at least 600 square feet minimum per onebedroom
residential dwelling unit; there shall be at least 800 square
feet per two-bedroom residential unit.
E. Green space. Twenty-five percent of the total lot area must remain open
green space in the multifamily land use designation.
F. Building setbacks. All structures must meet the minimum setback
requirements of 30 feet for front yards, 15 feet for side yards, 25 feet
for rear yards, driveways 10 feet off property lines, maximum curb cut
of 35 feet with 25 feet at the right-of-way, and no unenclosed storage.
Accessory buildings will only be acceptable for the enclosed storage of
automobiles, administrative offices, refuse storage, or enclosed storage
for maintenance vehicles and/or equipment. Garages and accessory
buildings must meet minimum setback requirements of 30 feet for front
yard and 10 feet for rear and side yards. [Amended 1-8-2016 by Ord.
No. 04-2016]
§ 295-149 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-151
1:657
§ 295-151. Commercial and retail uses (CR).
A. Permitted uses: all uses outlined under "Permitted Uses," and not
otherwise prohibited in the District within the B-1 Community Business
District (Article XX of this chapter), B-2 Limited Community Business
District (Article XXI of this chapter), C-1 Limited Commercial District
(Article XXII of this chapter) and I-1 Limited Industrial District (Article
XXIII of this chapter). Additional permitted uses under commercial and
retail (CR) shall include the following:
(1) Art shops or galleries;
(2) Grocery stores;
(3) Department stores;
(4) Large boutique stores;
(5) Hotels;
(6) Bowling alleys;
(7) Cinemas or theaters;
(8) Clubs and lodges, nonfraternal or fraternal;
(9) Business schools;
(10) Eating and drinking establishments;
(11) Meeting halls;
(12) Museums, auditoriums and arenas;
(13) Monument shops with restricted outside storage;
(14) Schools, commercial and trade;
(15) Shopping centers;
(16) Pet shops operating in a completely enclosed facility;
(17) Nursing and personal care facilities (community-based retirement
facilities);
(18) Post offices;
(19) Municipal or other governmental facilities;
(20) Parks and open space;
(21) Research institutions;
(22) Other retail and commercial uses similar in character when
determined by the Site Review Committee to be in accordance with
the intent and purpose of this chapter.
§ 295-151 HOBART CODE § 295-151
1:658
§ 295-152. Limited industrial (LI).
Limited industrial uses in the District are uses that can create jobs, diversify
the Village's tax base and provide a targeted area in the Village where
limited industrial site proposals may be considered.
B. Lot requirements. Lot requirements will vary based upon the proposed
square footage of the project to be constructed on the site, green space
requirements, parking and stormwater management requirements. All
lots shall meet the approval of the Site Review Committee. All outlots
must meet the requirements of the Site Review Committee.
C. Height regulations. All structures within the CR designation shall
conform to a maximum height of 50 feet; except as provided by
§ 295-13, Height regulations. See § 295-154I of this article.
D. Building setbacks. Minimum setbacks shall be established per the
design and use of the structure.
E. Other requirements. Structures and buildings allowed in the
commercial and retail use classification shall meet the regulations of
this District and the other articles of this chapter, as determined by the
Village Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector and approved by the
Site Review Committee.
(1) All business, services, and storage (except for motor vehicles in
operable condition) shall be conducted within a completely
enclosed structure.
(2) The parking or storage of operable motor vehicles, if not within an
enclosed building or structure, shall be effectively screened by
shrubbery, or solid wall or an opaque fence. Walls and fences shall
not exceed eight feet in height.
(3) Any use found and determined by the Site Review Committee to be
incompatible with the purpose of the large commercial and retail
designation within the District may be prohibited by the Village
Board.
(4) A detailed landscaping plan, showing placement of shrubbery, trees
and other vegetative plantings shall be submitted in accordance
with § 295-157 to the Site Review Committee for approval prior to
the issuance of a building permit, to ensure appropriateness and
compatibility with adjoining development.
A. Lot requirements. Lot requirements will vary based on the number of
proposed units to be constructed on the site, green space requirements,
parking and stormwater management requirements. All lots shall meet
the approval of the Site Review Committee. Minimum lot frontage must
be 100 feet.
§ 295-151 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-152
1:659
§ 295-153. Site review/development and design standards.
B. Height regulations. Principal structures: 45 feet maximum except as
provided by § 295-13, Height regulations. See § 295-154I of this article.
C. Building setbacks.
(1) All structures must meet the minimum setback requirements of 40
feet for front yards, 25 feet for side yards, 30 feet for rear yards,
driveways six feet off property lines, maximum curb cut of 35 feet
at the curbline and 25 feet at the right-of-way. Accessory buildings
will be: completely enclosed; constructed of the same materials as
the primary building; and conform to setback requirements noted
above. Building lot and associated infrastructure layout shall meet
all ingress and egress requirements for firesafety.
(2) Transitional yards. Where a side or rear lot line in a L-I District
coincides with a side or rear lot line in an adjacent single-family or
multifamily property, a yard shall be provided along such side or
rear lot line not less than 50 feet in depth and shall contain
landscaping and planting suitable to provide an effective screen.
D. Other requirements.
(1) Structures and buildings allowed in the LI designation shall meet
the regulations of this district and the other articles of this chapter,
as determined by the Village staff and approved by the Site Review
Committee.
(2) All business, services, and storage (except for motor vehicles in
operable condition) will be conducted within a completely enclosed
structure.
(3) The parking or storage of operable motor vehicles, if not within an
enclosed building or structure, shall be effectively screened by
shrubbery, or solid wall or an opaque fence. Walls and fences, if
determined to be appropriate by the Village, shall not exceed eight
feet in height.
(4) Berming, natural landscaping features, and/or buffers of dense
vegetation shall be utilized to separate light industrial uses from
surrounding and adjacent land uses. The use of fences shall not be
used as an exclusive means of separating uses, but may be used in
addition to natural berms or vegetation buffers.
(5) Any use found and determined by the Site Review Committee to be
incompatible with the purpose of the limited industrial designation
or not in conformance with stated goals and objectives of this
article will not be allowed. The Village reserves the right to remain
flexible in the type of limited industrial uses it allows in the District.
§ 295-152 HOBART CODE § 295-153
1:660
A. Introduction. This section is designed to provide for the future growth
and development of those residences and commercial businesses that
seek an aesthetically attractive working environment. The intent and
purpose of this section is to promote and maintain desirable economic
development within the District that is practical, feasible, and an asset
to owners, neighbors, and the Village of Hobart while maintaining an
attractive environment. To maintain flexibility and a timely review
procedure, the following site review procedures will be utilized for
review of potential developments within the District. All other zoning
classifications remain subject to site review procedures as outlined in
Article XXXIII of this chapter.
B. Objectives. The purpose of this section is to establish rules, regulations,
standards, and procedures for approval of all new development
proposals and the expansion of existing businesses and light
manufacturing to comply with the stated goals, objectives and
aesthetics outline within this article.
C. Standard requirements. The interpretation and application of the
provisions of these standards shall be held as minimum requirements
for the promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare. Projects that
are light industrial, research or institutional in nature shall provide the
Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector with a scoping description
that definitively identifies the intended use and scope of a proposed
facility.
D. Character and intensity of land use. The uses proposed and their
intensity and arrangement on the site shall be of a visual and
operational character which:
(1) Are compatible to the physical nature of the site with particular
concern for preservation of natural features, tree growth and open
space.
(2) That, to the maximum extent practicable, would produce an
attractive environment of sustained aesthetic and ecological
desirability, economic stability and functional practicality
compatible with the general development plans for the area as
established by the community.
(3) Would not adversely affect the anticipated provision for school or
other municipal services.
(4) Would not create traffic or parking demand incompatible with the
existing or proposed facilities to serve it.
(5) Would not limit, lessen or not conform to the design guidelines,
themes and principal goals for development and aesthetics as
stated within this article that may be amended from time to time.
E. Economic feasibility and impact. The proponents of a site plan
application shall provide evidence satisfactory to the Village staff and to
§ 295-153 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-153
1:661
the Site Review Committee of its economic feasibility, of available
adequate financing, and that it would not adversely affect the economic
prosperity of the Village or the values of surrounding properties.
F. Engineering design standards. The width of street right-of-way, width of
paving, width of location of street or other paving, outdoor lighting,
location of sewer, electrical, gas, cable, telephone, and water lines,
provision for stormwater drainage or other similar environmental
engineering considerations shall be based on standards necessary to
implement the specific function in the specific situation; provided,
however, in no case shall standards be less than those necessary to
ensure the public safety and welfare as determined by the Villagedesignated
engineer.
G. Implementation schedule. The proponents of a plan within the District
shall submit a reasonable schedule for the implementation of the
development to the satisfaction of the Village planning staff and Site
Review Committee, including suitable provisions for assurance that
each phase could be brought to completion in a manner which would
not result in an adverse effect upon the community as a result of
termination at that point.
H. Administration. The administration of this section shall be vested in the
following: Village Administrator, Community Development Director, the
Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector and Site Review Committee.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Village Administrator and/or Community
Development Director to be in charge of the day-to-day
administration and interpretation of the development and design
standards. Enforcement of this article is charged to the Hobart
Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector in accordance with
§ 62.23(7), Wisconsin Statutes.
(2) All proposed site plans shall be forwarded to Village planning and
public safety staff, beginning with the Zoning Administrator/
Building Inspector, for staff review and recommendation.
(3) After staff review, all proposed plans shall be submitted to the Site
Review Committee which consists of seven members appointed by
the Village President and subject to confirmation by the Village
Board. There shall be no residency requirement. The Committee
shall consist of at least one Village Board member, and the Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector will serve ex officio.
(4) From time to time, the design criteria may be amended, changed or
deleted. Such action will require review by the Site Review
Committee and shall follow the procedures of § 62.23(7), Wisconsin
Statutes.
(5) Appeals. Unless otherwise provided herein, appeals to the
requirements contained in these standards shall be heard by the
Board of Appeals.
§ 295-153 HOBART CODE § 295-154
1:662
§ 295-154. General building and performance standards.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish general
development performance standards, in accordance with this chapter
and the Village Comprehensive (Smart Growth) Plan. These standards
are intended and designed to assure compatibility of uses; to prevent
urban blight, deterioration, and decay; and to enhance the health,
safety, and general welfare of the residents of the community.
B. Building. The District ordinance encourages a variety of architectural
styles. However, basic harmony is intended to prevail to promote
aesthetic and visual compatibility so that no one structure detracts
from the attractiveness of the overall environment. The Site Review
Committee shall review building design in order to ensure architectural
compatibility and integrity.
C. Building exterior. Within the District, all colors, materials, finishes, and
building form shall be coordinated in a manner consistent with general
guidelines of Article XXXIII, Site Review/Development and Design
Standards, § 295-357, for each of the front, side, and rear exterior
walls. Materials, color and texture may vary so long as the principle of
aesthetic and visual compatibility stated herein is upheld. Section
295-357 outlines appropriate materials, colors, texture and proponents
that a plan should, to the maximum extent practicable, follow as the
guidelines for suggested building exteriors.
D. Front building wall and building walls facing an adjacent street. Any
exterior building wall (front, side or rear) facing an adjacent street shall
be constructed with materials consistent with the surrounding and
adjacent buildings to uphold the general design theme within the
District.
E. Mechanical equipment. All mechanical equipment shall be enclosed or
screened. Roof-mounted equipment shall be integrated into the design
of the structure, enclosed or screened to the maximum extent possible.
F. Construction. Construction shall commence within one year of plan
approval or in accordance with a development agreement with the
Village. No site plan approval by the Site Review Committee shall be
valid for more than 12 months from the date of such approval unless a
building permit is obtained and development in accordance with such
site plan is commenced within such period. The provisions of this
section shall apply unless otherwise agreed to by the Site Review
Committee.
G. Maintenance. The exterior walls and roof of buildings shall be
maintained in a clean, orderly, and attractive condition; free of cracks,
dents, punctures, breakage, and other forms of visible marring.
Materials that become excessively faded, chalked, cracked, chipped,
damaged or otherwise deteriorated shall be replaced, refinished,
repaired or repainted in accordance with the reasonable determination
§ 295-154 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-154
1:663
§ 295-155. Lighting and standards.
To provide for the basic needs of safety and security, appropriate lighting
shall be provided in order to delineate roads, drives, parking areas,
pedestrianways, buildings, and other organizational points. Lighting shall
be an integral part of the overall architectural design; therefore, proposed
lighting, whether freestanding or building-mounted, shall complement the
architectural character of the principal use. Lighting design shall correlate
energy conservation with aesthetic, architectural, and safety factors.
§ 295-156. Site plan review.
and order of the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector within 60
days notice of such defect.
H. Fences. All fencing within this District shall meet the requirements of
this chapter.
I. Brown County Airport Zoning District. Applicable permits and
approvals specific to Brown County Chapter 24, Airport Zoning
Districts, must be provided prior to any Village permit issuance.
A. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking, loading and service
areas shall be shaded, diffused, or arranged to reflect light away from
adjacent parcels and directed toward public streets. Glare, whether
direct or reflected, as differentiated from general illumination, shall not
be visible beyond the limits of the site from which it originates. Parking
lot lights may be used in either a single or multi-format. Characteristics
include 27,000 metal halide, spaced approximately 100 feet to 120 feet
off center, consisting of sharp, cutoff-type luminaries, maximum height
for pole not to exceed 30 feet, to be an approved pole. Poles must be
uniform in style and height. The use of wooden poles is prohibited.
B. Walkway lighting should be of the same family as mentioned above,
height to be 10 feet to 14 feet above grade. Bollard lighting can be used
as low-level walkway illumination on private property.
C. Building lighting should occur as part of the overall design concept
using recessed lighting in overhangs and at the entrance. Well designed
soft lighting of the building exterior is allowed, provided it does not
impact on the surrounding properties, complements the architecture,
and the light source is concealed.
D. The use of building-mounted floodlights and tall "freeway-type" fixtures
is prohibited. Ground-mounted floodlights used to accent principal
buildings are permitted.
E. Flag directional lighting is permitted with approval of terms and
conditions of use of such lighting by the Site Review Committee.
A. Site plan approval required.
§ 295-154 HOBART CODE § 295-156
1:664
(1) No property within the District shall be improved without first
obtaining an approved site plan as provided in this section.
(2) No construction or improvements may be made except in strict
compliance with a site plan that has been approved as provided in
this section.
B. Design objectives. The following objectives will be considered in
reviewing any application for a site plan approval:
(1) To encourage harmonious development;
(2) To encourage the provision of open space;
(3) To encourage Owners to use creative and imaginative approaches
in their projects;
(4) To provide an enjoyable living environment by preserving existing
topography, stands of trees, ponds, floodplains, and similar natural
assets.
(5) To encourage a variety of living environments and an agreeable
mixture of housing types;
(6) To require architectural plans that are consistent with design
guidelines and principal aesthetic goals for development as set
forth herein;
C. Site plan approval. The following procedure shall be followed for the
submittal of site plans. Where procedures and requirements imposed by
this section of the ordinance are either more restrictive or less
restrictive than comparable procedures and requirements imposed by
any other provision of this chapter or any other law, ordinance,
resolution rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are
more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements shall
govern. For purposes of this section, all applications must be executed
by all owners and the party or parties that will be responsible for the
development of the site, all of whom shall be collectively referred to in
this section as the "applicant."
(1) Preliminary consultation. Prior to the submittal of a site plan, it is
recommended that the developer meet with the Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector and other appropriate Village
planning staff to discuss the District zoning, site plan and
landscaping plan requirements. Such meeting should occur prior to
any extensive outlay of funds on the part of the developer since it is
intended to identify potential problems and methods to alleviate
them and to encourage a cooperative effort between the developer/
owner and the Village.
(a) Statements or recommendations made at the consultation are
not legally binding. The meeting is intended to ensure that the
owner is aware of the intent and purpose of this article.
§ 295-156 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-156
1:665
(b) In order to obtain information, each owner shall confer with
the Village staff and appropriate consultants at the call of the
Village in connection with the preparation of the District site
plan application. Of primary importance are policy issues such
as density, external and internal land uses, traffic circulation,
parking requirements, signage, lighting consistency with
standards set forth in this chapter, open space quantity and
maintenance, general spatial characteristics such as setbacks
and architectural renderings of buildings. The owner or
interested party shall also provide a conceptual sketch or site
rendering at the time of the preapplication consultation.
Village staff will offer advice to the applicant regarding his
proposal and aid in understanding this article.
(2) Filing prerequisite. Prior to the submittal of a site plan within the
District, the owner must be current on all real estate taxes,
assessments or other municipal charges, whether relating to the
real estate subject to the site plan application or otherwise located
within the Village.
(3) Plan submittal. Ten copies of all site plans requiring approval of the
Site Review Committee shall be submitted to the Village Clerk-
Treasurer.
(4) Staff review. Upon receipt, the Clerk-Treasurer shall forward the
plans to the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector for staff
review. The Village planning and public safety staff, and any
appropriate consultants, shall all review the plans and make
recommendations regarding their particular expertise to the Site
Review Committee.
(5) Time of Site Plan Committee review. If the site plan is filed less than
10 days before the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Site
Review Committee, Village staff will attempt to review the site plan
and forward it to the Site Review Committee for consideration at
the next regularly scheduled meeting. If the site plan is not timely
filed, or if staff cannot make timely review, the site plan shall be
placed on the next subsequent regular meeting of the Site Review
Committee. Nothing in this provision shall limit the Site Plan
Review Committee's ability to schedule special meetings to
consider site plans, upon proper notice to the owner/developer, at
the sole discretion of the Site Review Committee.
(6) Site Review Committee decision. The Site Review Committee shall
review and either approve, conditionally approve, or deny approval
of the site plan. Site plan approval and continuance of project
planning and construction shall be granted by the Site Review
Committee upon a determination that all phases, details, materials,
aesthetics, land uses, etc., are consistent with standards and
guidelines herein, as may be amended from time to time, and
§ 295-156 HOBART CODE § 295-156
1:666
confirmation that the owner is current on all taxes, assessments
and other municipal charges.
(7) Site Review Committee special exceptions. The Site Review
Committee may grant special exception to the dimensional
standards applicable in the District upon a finding that such
exception is consistent with the intent and purpose of this article
and contemplated or existing development in the area of the
exception. A special exception shall not be valid until reviewed and
accepted by the Village Board under the same standard.
(8) Site plan contents and specifications. All plans shall be drawn to an
engineering scale no greater than one inch equals 100 feet plus one
complete set of such plans reduced in size to 11 inches by 17 inches
and include the following information:
(a) Name of project/development;
(b) Location of project/development by street address or CSM;
(c) Name and mailing address of developer/owner;
(d) Name and mailing address of engineer/architect;
(e) A written statement describing how the development will be
consistent with the land use and design guidelines as identified
in the PDD zoning ordinance;
(f) North point indicator;
(g) Scale;
(h) Boundary lines of property, with dimensions;
(i) Location identification, and dimensions of existing and
proposed:
[1] Topographic contours at a minimum interval of two feet,
and key spot elevations;
[2] Adjacent streets and street rights-of-way, respective to the
elevation of building first floor;
[3] On-site streets and street rights-of-way, and fire lanes;
[4] Utilities and any easements, including but not limited to
the following types:
[a] Electric.
[b] Natural gas.
[c] Telephone.
[d] Water.
§ 295-156 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-156
1:667
[e] Sewer (sanitary and storm).
[f] Fiber optic lines.
[g] Other transmission lines.
[h] Ingress-egress easements.
[5] All buildings and structures, existing and proposed, to
consider maximum development of the parcel if more than
one structure could be located on the parcel;
(j) A statement of the total acreage of the property to be
developed;
(k) Significant physical features within the tract, watercourses,
ponds, lakes, rain gardens, and wetlands; and proposed major
changes in those features;
(l) All contemplated land uses;
(m) An indicator of the contemplated intensity of use: i.e., gross
density in residential development; number of prospective
tenants in office, commercial, and industrial development or
recreational development;
(n) Existing buildings that will be removed and the proposed
location of all principal structures and associated parking
areas;
(o) Proposed circulation systems (pedestrian, bicycle, auto) by
type, their connection to the existing network outside the site;
(p) Existing rights-of-way and easements that may affect the
project;
(q) The location of sanitary and storm sewer lines and water
mains;
(r) The location of recreational and open space areas;
(s) Description of proposed system for drainage and a stormwater
plan showing existing and final grades:
[1] Parking facilities;
[2] Water bodies and wetlands;
[3] Surface water holding ponds, drainage ditches, and
drainage patterns, location and size of culverts and any
drainage sewers servicing the site.
(t) Sidewalks, walkways, and driveways;
(u) Off-street loading areas and docks;
§ 295-156 HOBART CODE § 295-156
1:668
(v) Fences and retaining walls;
(w) All signs;
(x) Exterior refuse collection areas and the required enclosure(s);
(y) Exterior lighting;
(z) Traffic flow on and off site;
(aa) Location of open space/green space;
(bb) Site statistics, including:
[1] Site square footage;
[2] Percent site coverage;
[3] Percent open space and green space;
[4] Floor area ratio.
(cc) Location and dimensions of proposed outdoor display areas;
(dd) Architectural rendering of the proposed structures and
buildings, including:
[1] All dimensions;
[2] Gross square footage of existing and proposed buildings
and structures; and
[3] Description of all exterior finish materials.
(ee) Erosion control plans;
(ff) Landscaping plan as provided herein.
(9) Staged development. In the case of plans which call for
development in stages:
(a) A general development plan shall be submitted that will
include:
[1] A map at an appropriate scale, showing the successive
stages and a development schedule indicating:
[a] The approximate date when construction of the
project can be expected to begin;
[b] The stages in which the project will be built and the
approximate date when construction of each stage can
be expected to begin;
[c] The anticipated rate of development;
§ 295-156 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-156
1:669
[d] The approximate date when the development of each
of the stages will be completed; and
[e] Other information considered pertinent by Site
Review Committee and/or the developers/owners.
[2] The general development plan must be approved by the
Site Plan Review Committee in the same manner as a site
plan.
(b) Prior to any construction in a staged development, the
developer/owner shall submit a site plan for each stage of
development to be subject to review and approval as provided
in this article.
(10) Records and amendments.
(a) Site Plan Committee records. The Site Review Committee shall
retain and file all application forms and exhibits related to the
application and shall indicate on such forms its approval,
approval with modification or denial. Modifications to the site
plan as prescribed by the Site Review Committee shall be
thoroughly described and documented as to the purpose of
modification.
(b) Site plan amendments. Any material change in the approved
site plan shall be submitted to the Village staff for referral to
and prior approval by the Site Review Committee. All site plan
amendments require approval in the same manner as final
approval.
(11) Development contract. Before any building permit shall be issued,
the applicant and the owner shall enter into an appropriate
contract with the Village to guarantee the implementation of the
development according to the terms and conditions established as
a part of the site plan. The Village shall have the right, if deemed
appropriate, to require the inclusion of a performance bond or
other security satisfactory to the Village's attorney. Such contract
or a memorandum thereof shall be recorded by the owner in the
County Register of Deed's office within 10 days after its execution.
(12) Change of plan. Any subsequent change of use of any lot or parcel
of land or addition or modification of the site plan shall first be
submitted for approval to the Site Review Committee and if, in the
opinion of the Site Review Committee, such change or modification
constitutes a substantial alteration of the original plans, a new site
plan approval shall be required before the use is changed or the
plans modified. If, in the opinion of the Site Review Committee,
such change or modification does not constitute a substantial
alteration of the original plans, such change or modification can be
granted by the Site Review Committee.
§ 295-156 HOBART CODE § 295-156
1:670
§ 295-157. Landscaping.
(13) Appeals. Appeals of a Site Review Committee decision may be
made to the Appeals Board.
A. General statement. The Village finds that it is in the public interest for
all developments within the District to provide landscape improvements
for the purposes of complementing the natural environment; improving
the general appearance of the District and enhancing its aesthetic
appeal; preserving the economic base; improving quality of life;
delineating and separating use areas; increasing the safety, efficiency,
and aesthetics of use areas and open space; screening and enhancing
privacy; mitigating the diverse impact of climate; conserving energy;
abating erosion and stabilizing slopes; deadening sound; and
preserving the quality of our air and water.
B. Landscape plan. All applicants for building permits within the District
shall submit a landscape plan, prepared pursuant to Subsection C,
below, for review and approval as required herein prior to the request
for a building permit.
C. Procedure. The following procedure shall be followed for the submittal
of landscape plans:
(1) Preliminary consultation. Prior to the submittal of a landscape plan,
it is recommended that the developer/owner meet with the Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector and/or other appropriate Village
planning staff to discuss the design standards, the applicant site
plan, and landscaping plan requirements. Such meeting should
occur prior to any extensive outlay of funds on the part of the
developer since it is intended to identify potential problems and
methods to alleviate them and to encourage a cooperative effort
between the developer/owner and the Village.
(2) Plan submittal. Ten copies of all landscape plans requiring approval
by the Site Review Committee must be submitted to the Village
Clerk-Treasurer 10 days prior to the third Tuesday of the month.
Landscaping plans may be submitted separately, but it is strongly
encouraged that they are included in the site plan. All plans shall be
drawn to an engineering scale no greater than one inch equals 100
feet plus one complete set of such plans reduced in size to 11
inches by 17 inches and contain the following information:
(a) The location and dimensions of all proposed open space/green
space areas;
(b) Identification of all proposed vegetation:
[1] Symbols, quantities, common names, and size of all plant
materials;
§ 295-156 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-157
1:671
[2] Showing all species to scale of mature crown diameter or
spread;
[3] All existing vegetation to be saved; and
[4] Typical sections of berms, fences, retaining walls, planter
boxes, etc.
(3) Reviews. Review of landscape plans should be conducted
concurrently with and follow the same procedure as site plan
review.
(4) Appeals. Appeals of Site Review Committee decisions may be made
to the Board of Appeals.
D. Specific requirements.
(1) Ground cover. Open space areas shall, at a minimum, be seeded six
months after completion of building. The following exceptions may
be granted by Village staff during the review process:
(a) The use of mulch material for shrubs and foundation plantings;
(b) The seeding of future expansion areas delineated on site plan;
(c) Areas maintained in a natural state that are undisturbed
during construction; or
(d) Other landscape elements such as decks, patios, stepping
stones or landscape stones may be incorporated therein.
(2) Minimum size of plantings. Required vegetation shall be of the
following minimum planting size. Plantings must be 17 feet from
the property line equally spaced, one tree every 30 feet of road
frontage.
(a) Deciduous trees. One per every 30 feet of road frontage is
required. Required size 1.5 inches diameter as measured six
inches above ground.
(b) Evergreen shrubs used for screening purposes, including those
used in conjunction with berms, shall be a minimum of 24
inches in height.
(3) Species.
(a) All trees used in site development should be indigenous to the
appropriate hardiness zone and physical characteristics of the
site.
(b) All plant material should conform to "American Standards for
Nursery Stock," latest edition; sponsored by the American
Association of Nurserymen, Inc. All vegetation shall be planted
in accordance with accepted planting procedures.
§ 295-157 HOBART CODE § 295-157
1:672
(c) All proposed vegetation included in the landscape plan shall be
reviewed by the Site Review Committee to assure compliance
with the requirements contained herein.
(4) Implementation/replacement.
(a) All approved landscaping is to be installed in accordance with
compliance timetable.
(b) Any vegetation included on an approved landscape plan that
dies must be replaced by the owner/developer within one
planting season. Vegetation replaced shall conform to the
approved landscape plan and the requirements contained
herein.
(5) Maintenance. It shall be the joint responsibility of the owner and/or
lessee of the principal use, uses, or building to maintain in a neat
and adequate manner all landscaping materials, vegetation,
screening, and fences contained in the approved landscape and site
plans.
(6) Compliance timetable. All landscape plans shall include a timetable
for construction, installation or planting within a period not to
exceed one year from the date of commencement of construction.
Any person who is, or has been, required to landscape any part of a
zoning lot and who has not complied with that requirement shall,
within 60 days of receipt of written notice from the Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector that a violation of this chapter
exists, comply with all requirements.
E. District requirements.
(1) Future development within the District shall meet the following
minimum requirements:
(a) One tree per 30 feet of road frontage.
(b) Twenty-five percent of total lot area must remain open/green
space.
(c) The Site Review Committee reserves the right to modify these
requirements as deemed appropriate.
(2) Buffers. That portion of any land use allowable within the District
that is abutting property designated for single-family or multifamily
residential shall have a landscaped area at least six feet wide
extending the full length of the land use designation and meet the
following minimum requirements:
(a) One tree per 30 lineal feet, or fraction thereof, of lot line
bordering single-family and multifamily districts.
§ 295-157 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-157
1:673
§ 295-158. Compliance, forfeitures and remedies.
(b) A shrub, border, hedge, wall, earthen berm, or other durable
landscape barrier, or combination thereof, at least four feet
high, but not exceeding eight feet high, which is 90%
impervious to sight placed along the perimeter of such
landscaped strip, except in the front yard setback.
A. Intent. It is the intent of the Hobart Village Board that the procedures
set forth in this article shall enable a prompt but thorough review of
development proposals in the District. However, given the importance
of the District to the orderly growth and development of the Village,
derivations or failures to follow approved site plans, proceeding with
unapproved plans, implementing uses not permitted or approved or
other violations of this article will be promptly and thoroughly
addressed.
B. Forfeitures. Any violation of this article or a site plan approved
hereunder shall be subject to a forfeiture to the maximum penalty
allowable per Village Code and state statute, as may be amended, with
each twenty-four-hour period constituting a separate violation.
C. Nonexclusive remedy. Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit
the Village's ability to pursue all remedies available to it to enforce this
article, or to enforce a development agreement required hereby
contemporaneously with forfeiture or other legal action.
§ 295-157 HOBART CODE § 295-158
1:674
ARTICLE XV
PDD #3 District
[Added 3-15-2012]
§ 295-159. Purpose and policy.
PDD #3 is intended to promote industrial and commercial uses in an
interactive relationship with each other for the economic sustainability of
the Village of Hobart, in an area least intrusive to the overall rural character
of the Village of Hobart. Primary characteristics of this article include:
§ 295-160. Permitted uses.
All permitted uses identified within articles covering B-1, B-2, C-1, I-1, and
I-2 Districts are generally permitted uses within PDD #3. The Site Review
Committee (SRC) reserves the authority to examine the interrelationships
of adjacent parcels for compatibility and overall promotion of industrial,
manufacturing and complementary commercial and/or retail development
goals established for this district. Any normally permitted use in the above
districts determined to be incompatible with the purpose and policy
statement for PDD #3, or otherwise contrary to or incompatible with
surrounding or adjacent land uses and/or buildings, may be prohibited by
the SRC.
§ 295-161. Conditional uses.
Any uses identified as conditional uses within articles covering B-1, B-2,
C-1, I-1, and I-2 Districts are generally conditional uses within PDD #3.
Any use normally allowed by a conditional use permit in the above districts
determined to be incompatible with the purpose and policy statement for
A. Industrial uses in the District are uses that can create jobs, diversify the
Village's tax base and provide interrelationships in a targeted area in
the Village where industrial site proposals may be considered;
B. Encouragement of industry having high employment ratios;
C. Facilitation of uses such as manufacturing, fabricating, assembly,
research and technology business offices and uses;
D. Accommodation of industrial uses while minimizing their impact on
adjacent lands;
E. Complementary land uses, such as related office space and
complementary business services shall be permitted through zoning;
F. Assurance that planned growth accomplishes goals set forth in the
Village's Comprehensive (Smart Growth) Plan;
G. Promotion of flexibility in design and the efficient use of land to
facilitate a more economic arrangement of buildings, uses, circulation
systems and utilities.
§ 295-159 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-161
1:675
PDD #3, or otherwise contrary to or incompatible with surrounding or
adjacent land uses and/or buildings, may be prohibited. For land uses in
this district related to I-1 and I-2 Districts, any outdoor storage requested/
required for operation of a business (except for motor vehicles in operable
condition) shall require a conditional use permit. All conditional use permits
require review and approval by the Village Planning and Zoning
Commission and the Village Board, not the SRC.
§ 295-162. Permitted accessory uses.
§ 295-163. Accessory buildings.
All accessory buildings hereinafter constructed in this district shall meet
the district requirements and those identified in § 295-11, Building and
uses.
§ 295-164. Lot requirements per use.
The following table represents minimum lot requirements per use in the
PDD #3. If, in the determination of the SRC, these requirements should
reasonably be reduced or flexed, given a specific land use or building
project, the SRC shall have the authority and flexibility to make that
determination. An applicant shall produce compelling evidence to the SRC
as to why a deviation from any minimum lot standard is required.
A. Uses incidental to and on the same zoning lot as the principal use as
determined by the Village staff and SRC;
B. Satellite dish antennas less than 38 inches in diameter;
C. Public and private utility installations as deemed required and
appropriate.
§ 295-161 HOBART CODE § 295-164
1:676
Uses
Consistent
With or
Similar to:
Minimum
Lot
Requirements
Building
Setbacks
(feet) Height
Driveway
Requirements
B-1, B-2 and C-1 Lot: 1 acre
minimum
Frontage:
100 feet
Front: 40
Side: 10
Rear: 15
Corner: 40
Maximum
allowable as
per the
Airport
zoning
overlay
Driveway
access curb
openings
shall not be
located less
than 40 feet
from one
another. One
two-way or
two one-way
driveways
shall be
allowed for
each 100 feet
of lot
frontage.
I-1 Limited
Industrial
District
Lot: 1 acre
minimum
Frontage:
100 feet
Front: 40
Side: 15
Rear: 20
Corner: 40
Maximum
allowable as
per the
Airport
zoning
overlay
Driveway
access curb
openings
shall not be
located less
than 40 feet
from one
another. One
two-way or
two one-way
driveways
shall be
allowed for
each 100 feet
of lot
frontage.
§ 295-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-164
1:677
Uses
Consistent
With or
Similar to:
Minimum
Lot
Requirements
Building
Setbacks
(feet) Height
Driveway
Requirements
I-2 Industrial
Park District
Lot: 1 acre
minimum
Frontage:
120 feet
Front: 40
Side: 15
Rear: 20
Corner: 40
Maximum
allowable as
per the
Airport
zoning
overlay
Driveway
access curb
openings
shall not be
located less
than 40 feet
from one
another. One
two-way or
two one-way
driveways
shall be
allowed for
each 100 feet
of lot
frontage.
Clarifying Note: The above table does not change any requirements or lot
characteristics of the B-1, B-2, C-1, I-1 or I-2 Zoning Districts language.
Rather, the PDD #3 references similar uses to B-1, B-2, C-1, I-1 or I-2
and incorporates new minimum lot requirements, setbacks, height and
driveway requirements for those similar uses that are contained in this
District.
§ 295-165. Parking.
Parking shall conform to off-street parking requirements identified
elsewhere in this chapter.
§ 295-166. Signs.
Signs shall be regulated as set forth in § 295-361, Regulations of signs.
§ 295-167. Lighting.
Lighting shall conform to the requirements as set forth in § 295-358,
Lighting standards in all districts requiring site plan review.
§ 295-168. Other requirements.
A. Adherence to article. Structures and buildings allowed in this district
shall meet the regulations of this district and other applicable articles
of this chapter, as determined by the Village Zoning Administrator/
Building Inspector and approved by the SRC. Where other articles of
this chapter conflict with this district, the language in this district shall
apply.
§ 295-164 HOBART CODE § 295-168
1:678
B. Outdoor storage. All business, services and storage in land uses related
to B-1, B-2 and C-1 (except for motor vehicles in operable condition)
shall be conducted within a completely enclosed structure that meets
the building standards contained herein. Outdoor storage of operable
motor vehicles is allowed, provided that such outdoor parking (storage)
areas shall be paved and shall be effectively screened by shrubbery or
solid wall or fence of not less than six feet. Walls and fences shall not
exceed eight feet in height. For land uses in this district related to I-1
and I-2, any outdoor storage requested/required for operation of the
business (except for motor vehicles in operable condition) shall require
a conditional use permit to ensure proper screening to the satisfaction
of the Village.
C. Incidental buildings; screening. All structures that are incidental to a
building's design, but necessary for its proper function, whether
electrical or mechanical, for the purpose of air circulation, temperature
regulation or other, regardless of location, be it on the roof or ground,
shall be concealed by proper positioning and screening material.
D. Roofs. All roof structures must be consistent and compatible to the
architecture of the principal structure. For land uses and buildings
where steel roofing may be appropriate, there shall be no exposed
fasteners.
E. Coordination of aesthetics. Colors, materials, finishes and building form
shall be coordinated in a consistent manner on the front, side and rear
exterior walls in accordance with Subsection E(1) through (8) below.
The SRC shall have the authority to approve different requirements as
long as selected building materials, finishes and form are consistent
with surrounding and adjacent properties. Materials shall be one, or a
combination, of the following:
(1) Hard-burned clay and brick, color and texture to be approved;
(2) Concrete masonry: units shall be those generally described by the
National Concrete Association as "customized architectural
concrete masonry units" or shall be broken-faced brick-type units
with marble aggregate or split-face or broke-off concrete block.
Any concrete masonry units that have a gray cement color will be
color-coated in some manner;
(3) Concrete may be poured-in-place, tilt-up or precast. Poured-inplace
and tilt-up walls shall have a finish of stone, a texture or a
coating. Precast units which are not uniform in color shall be
coated. Coating shall be an approved cement of epoxy type with a
ten-year minimum life expectancy;
(4) Natural stone;
(5) Glass curtain walls;
(6) Metal siding.
§ 295-168 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-168
1:679
(a) Metal siding may be used only in combination with one of the
approved materials and with approval of the SRC. For all I-1
and I-2-related uses in this district, metal siding may be
utilized only on the side and rear building walls, provided that
not less than 25% of the side and rear walls shall be
constructed of the materials listed under Subsection E(1)
through (5) above.
(b) For all land uses in this district, 100% of any walls fronting a
public street (excluding door, window or other openings) shall
be constructed of the materials listed under Subsection E(1)
through (5) above, unless otherwise expressly approved by the
SRC. Any metal siding proposed for use shall be entirely coated
with a colorfast, abrasion- and corrosion-resistant, long-life
(minimum of 20 years) finish that is resistant to chemicals,
withstands temperature extremes, and has a low permeability.
(c) Metal panel siding shall incorporate architectural designs such
as standing seams or other features to enhance aesthetics and
form of the metal material. As a general rule, corrugated (pole
building/agricultural-type) metal siding is prohibited unless
expressly approved by the SRC. Any material utilized to attach
the metal siding to the building shall be concealed.
(7) Metal siding shall not be permitted for land uses related to the B-1,
B-2 or C-1 categories unless expressly approved by the SRC;
(8) Any other building form, colors and/or materials approved by the
SRC.
F. Maintenance of building exteriors. Maintenance of the exterior walls
and roofs of the buildings shall be done at all times and is the
responsibility of the property owner(s). This includes cracks, dents,
punctures, breakage and other forms of visible marring. Materials that
become excessively faded, chalked, cracked, chipped, damaged or
otherwise deteriorated shall be replaced, refinished, repaired or
repainted in accordance with the reasonable determination of the
Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector or within 180 days of such
defect.
G. Mechanical equipment; aesthetics. All mechanical equipment shall be
enclosed or screened. Roof-mounted equipment shall be integrated into
the design of the structure, enclosed or screened to the maximum
extent possible as determined by the SRC.
H. Landscaping requirements.
(1) General requirements. The landscape design and planting plan is to
be an integral part of the site development. All landscape plans will
be reviewed by the SRC in conjunction with the overall site
development plan. All vegetation used to satisfy requirements of
this section shall be indigenous to the appropriate hardiness zone
§ 295-168 HOBART CODE § 295-168
1:680
and physical characteristics of the site. Landscape features should
be used so as to create a parklike appearance, while addressing
the considerations of visual screening, land cooling, drainage and
other environmental concerns.
(2) Naturalist design elements. Efforts should be made to integrate
each new landscape plan with existing trees and vegetation, the
natural conditions of the site and adjacent property's landscape
designs. For consistency, a naturalistic design theme is preferred.
Elements of naturalistic design include:
(a) Canopy trees distributed over the entire site;
(b) Meandering lawn spaces formed by masses of shrubs;
(c) Occasional accent plants used in conjunction with masses of
background plants to provide visual interest;
(d) Use of gentle berming to break up the horizontal ground plane;
(e) The use of landforms and masses of plant material to screen
visually obtrusive utilities;
(f) Appropriately sized and spaced foundation plantings to visually
soften the building and provide human scale;
(g) Excess excavation material shall be removed from the site by
the property owner or his designee within three months of
being issued an occupancy permit by the Village.
(3) Standards. All landscape designs shall meet the following
standards:
(a) The green space area shall be a minimum of 25% of the total lot
area.
(b) All existing trees shall be preserved whenever possible, with
necessary removal approved as part of the landscape plan. The
minimum number of trees planted shall be one coniferous and
one deciduous tree per 5,000 square feet of total lot area, or
fraction thereof.168
(c) The number of shrubs shall not be less than three per 1,000
square feet of total lot area or fraction thereof, or equivalent
landscape plan as approved by the SRC.
(d) Minimum sizes of plantings shall be as follows:
[1] Deciduous trees with three-inch diameter as measured six
inches from the ground;
168. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 295-168 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-168
1:681
[2] Coniferous trees a minimum of six feet in height;
[3] Evergreen shrubs a minimum of 24 inches in height.
(e) All other green areas shall at least be seeded with appropriate
seed mix. The following exceptions may be granted:
[1] The use of mulch materials for shrubs and foundation
plantings;
[2] The seeding of future expansion areas as shown on sitedevelopment
plans.
(f) All approved landscaping is to be installed within one planting
season per the landscape/site development plan approval. Any
vegetation which is shown on the approved landscape/site
development plan that dies shall be replaced within one
planting season per approved landscape/development plan
unless extended by the SRC upon petition;
(g) The Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector and/or the SRC
can require landscaping in addition to the minimum standard
in Subsection H(3)(a) through (f) above if such landscaping is
deemed desirable for buffering of land uses or overall
aesthetics of the building or the district.
I. Loading area requirements. All warehousing, manufacturing plants or
any other building where large amounts of goods are received or
shipped shall provide adequate loading and unloading berths.
(1) All required loading berths shall be off street and located on the
same lot as the building or use to be served;
(2) Loading berths shall not occupy the front yard;
(3) Loading berths located at the side of a building on a corner lot shall
observe the following requirements:
(a) Loading berths shall not conflict with pedestrian movement;
(b) Loading berths shall not obstruct the view of the public rightof-
way from off-street parking access;
(c) Loading berths shall comply with all other requirements of the
site review plan.169
(4) Each loading berth shall be located with appropriate means of
vehicular access to a street in a manner which will cause the least
interference with traffic;
(5) All off-street loading facilities shall be effectively screened.
169. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 295-168 HOBART CODE § 295-168
1:682
§ 295-169. Site plan review and approval process.
Site plan review and approval process shall conform to the requirements
set forth in §§ 295-359 through 295-364 in Article XXXIII, Site Review/
Development and Design Standards, unless otherwise specifically
addressed in the language of this district. Construction shall commence
within one year of plan approval or in accordance with a development
agreement with the Village. No site plan approval by the Site Review
Committee shall be valid for more than 12 months from the date of such
approval unless a building permit is obtained and development in
J. Utilities; underground. All service utility lines shall be placed
underground whenever possible.
K. Nuisance, safety and environmental controls.
(1) All vacant or open areas shall be kept in a tidy manner. If after 15
days' written notification to the owner or lessee needed
landscaping or vacant parcel maintenance or upkeep has not been
completed, the Village shall contract for the completion of the
work. If after 30 days' written notification to the owner or lessee
the needed maintenance or upkeep on buildings, structures, paved
areas and the like has not been completed, the Village shall
contract for the completion of the work. The Village shall bill the
owner or lessee for such costs, plus 10% for administrative costs.
To avoid Village action in the latter case, the minimum action
required on the part of the owner or lessee is presentation of a
written order, accepted in writing by a licensed contractor, to
complete the work within a reasonable time period, but not to
exceed six months.
(2) No rubbish shall be burned on the premises. Dust, dirt and fly ash
shall not exceed 3/10 of a grain per cubic foot of flue gas at 60° F.,
14.7 psi absolute and 10% CO2 and shall in no manner be unclean,
destructive, unhealthful or hazardous to humans or vegetation, nor
shall visibility be impaired.
(3) Vibrations originating within the property which are discernible to
the human sense of feeling at the property line shall not be
permitted at any time. Emission of gaseous pollutants is not to
cause air pollution or public nuisance as defined in the State
Department of Natural Resources Air Pollution Control Rules. No
person shall emit into the ambient air malodorous substances or
liquid pollutants in the form of mist at levels which cause air
pollution or a public nuisance.
(4) Right of entry. During reasonable hours, representatives of the
Village shall have the right to enter upon and inspect any building,
site or parcel and the improvements thereon for the purpose of
ascertaining whether compliance exists with the provisions of the
design and development standards.
§ 295-168 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-169
1:683
accordance with such site plan is commenced within such period. The
provisions of this section shall apply unless otherwise agreed to by the SRC.
§ 295-169 HOBART CODE § 295-169
1:684
ARTICLE XVI
ER Estate Residential
§ 295-170. Applicability.
The following regulations shall apply in ER Districts.
§ 295-171. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in the ER District:
§ 295-172. Prohibited uses.
The following uses are prohibited in the ER District:
§ 295-173. Permitted accessory uses.
The following are permitted accessory uses in the ER District:
A. Single-family dwellings.
B. Parks, playgrounds, athletic fields, golf course.
C. Hobby farms, nonretail greenhouses and nurseries, forestry, orchards,
wildlife sanctuaries.
D. Satellite dish antennas less than 38 inches.
E. Up to five animal units (example, dogs are one unit, see chart in
§ 295-182G).
A. Corporate retreats.
B. Outdoor wood burners/solid-fuel heating devices.
C. More than 10 animal units.
D. Inoperable vehicles (unless stored in building).
A. Additional accessory structures, tool houses, sheds and other similar
buildings used for the storage of common supplies and to support the
permitted uses.
B. Home occupations.
C. Private garages, carports, and driveways.
D. Private swimming pools.
E. Water gardens (covering up to 800 square feet of surface) per Article
XXIX.
F. Telephone, public utility installations, and cable television installations.
§ 295-170 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-174
1:685
§ 295-174. Conditional uses.
The following are conditional uses in the ER District:
§ 295-175. Lot requirements.
A. Up to 10 animal units.
B. Artificial lakes, ponds per Article XXIX.
C. Retail landscape and retail tree farms.
D. Schools.
E. Satellite dishes larger than 38 inches.
F. Religious institutions.
G. Riding academies and stables.
H. Bed-and-breakfasts.
I. Any animal not listed in this article.
J. Lot frontage less than 150 feet.
K. Public utility and service uses, and civic buildings as follows:
(1) Substations.
(2) Fire stations.
(3) Gas regulator stations.
(4) Police stations, public works facilities.
(5) Railroad right-of-way, but not including railroad yards and shops,
other than for passenger purposes.
(6) Telephone exchanges, transmission equipment buildings and
microwave relay towers.
L. Other business types may be approved by the Village Board, after
receiving approval from the Planning and Zoning Commission. This
conditional use may be removed if declared a nuisance to surrounding
area.
M. Accessory structures and fences which do not conform to the
requirements identified elsewhere in this chapter, but which are
designed, constructed and maintained so as to be harmonious and
appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of
the general vicinity or use and will not change the essential character of
the same area. [Amended 1-15-2013]
A. Area: 2.5 acres minimum.
§ 295-174 HOBART CODE § 295-175
1:686
§ 295-176. Height regulations.
Residential dwelling and accessory buildings: 35 feet maximum.
§ 295-177. Building setbacks.
Principal Structure
Accessory
Building Driveways
Front yard 40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
40 feet
minimum from
right-of-way
10 feet from
property line
Side yard 25 feet minimum 10 feet
minimum
10 feet from
property line
Rear yard 25 feet minimum 10 feet
minimum
10 feet from
property line
Corner lot 40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
40 feet
minimum from
right-of-way
125 feet from
center line of
intersection
§ 295-178. Building size and facades.
§ 295-179. Accessory buildings and utility buildings.
B. Lot frontage: 150 feet minimum as measured along the street right-ofway
line. An exception shall be made for culs-de-sac or curvilinear
streets, in which case, the minimum of 150 feet shall be measured along
the lot's building setback line.
A. Minimum size of residential dwelling shall be 1,200 square feet.
B. All single- and two-family dwellings and attached/detached accessory
and utility buildings shall have faces constructed of or faced with finish
materials which are intended for that use by the manufacturer for
purposes of preservation and appearance, are aesthetically compatible
with other dwelling facades in the general area, and presents an
attractive appearance to the public and to surrounding properties.
Acceptable materials include, but are not limited to, weatherproof
materials such as wood, decorative masonry, decorative concrete,
stucco, exterior insulation and finish systems (EFIS), Masonite, "hardie"
board and vinyl, aluminum or steel lap siding, or other materials of a
similar character, providing said materials or combination of materials
meet the intent of this section. This regulation has been established to
enhance the aesthetic compatibility with the surrounding area and
neighborhood. [Added 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
A. All exterior finish material shall be approved for exterior use.
B. Shall not exceed 2,500 square feet per building, and 5,000 square feet
total for all accessory and utility buildings.
§ 295-175 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-179
1:687
§ 295-180. Parking.
Shall conform to requirements in Article XXVIII, Off-Street Parking
Requirements.
§ 295-181. Signs.
Shall meet the requirements of § 295-361, Regulation of signs.
§ 295-182. Other requirements.
C. Accessory and utility building roof pitch minimum is four inches/12
inches.
D. Accessory buildings located closer to a street right-of-way than the rear
plane of the principal structure shall conform to the requirements of
§ 295-11D(2)(d), (e) and (f). [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No.
01-2015]
E. Utility buildings shall not be located closer to a street right-of-way than
the front plane of the principal structure.
F. Attached and detached accessory and utility buildings shall conform to
district requirements and those set forth in § 295-11, Building and uses.
[Added 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
A. Drainage must be per Village of Hobart ordinances.
B. Well and mound system must be located away from pastured animals.
C. All fences shall comply with Article IV, except livestock fencing shall be
a minimum of five feet from side and rear property lines, and fence in
the front yard shall be 40 feet from the right away. The height of the
fence shall not exceed five feet. The property owner is required to
maintain the yard/lawn between fence and property line.
D. Animal waste storage shall be per Chapter 185, Article II, Animal Waste
Management, of this Code.
E. District uses shall conform to Chapter 127, Burning, Open.
F. Absent a permit for a special occasion, businesses may not be open to
the public between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. This provision
does not apply to emergency type facilities.
G. Chart of Animal Unit Equivalents:
Bovine 2 animal units
Heifer 2 animal units
Full-size horse 2 animal units
Miniature horse 1 animal unit
Swine 1 animal unit
§ 295-179 HOBART CODE § 295-182
1:688
Goat 1 animal unit
Llamas/alpacas 2 animal units
Dog/cat 1 animal unit
Turkey 1 animal unit
Chicken 0.4 animal unit
Any other animals not listed shall be approved through the conditional
use process.
§ 295-182 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-182
1:689

ARTICLE XVII
R-2-R Rural Residential District
§ 295-183. Applicability of regulations.
The following regulations shall apply in R-2-R Districts.
§ 295-184. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in the R-2-R District:
§ 295-185. Prohibited uses.
The following uses are prohibited in the R-2-R District:
§ 295-186. Permitted accessory uses.
The following are permitted accessory uses in the R-2-R District:
§ 295-187. Conditional uses.
The following are conditional uses in the R-2-R District:
A. Parks, playgrounds, and athletic fields.
B. Public recreational and community center buildings and grounds.
C. Single-family dwellings.
A. Corporate retreats.
A. Home occupations.
B. Private garages, carports, and driveways.
C. Private swimming pools.
D. Tool houses, sheds and other similar buildings used for the storage of
common supplies.
E. Satellite dish antennas less than 38 inches in diameter.
F. Telephone and public utility installations, and cable television
installations.
G. The keeping or maintaining of no more than six chickens (hens or
pullets) when licensed in compliance with Chapter 102. [Added
6-7-2016 by Ord. No. 06-2016]
A. Satellite dish antennas larger than 38 inches and less than 12 feet in
diameter.
B. Public utility and service uses, and civic buildings, as follows:
(1) Substations.
§ 295-183 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-187
1:691
§ 295-188. Lot requirements.
(2) Fire stations.
(3) Gas regulator stations.
(4) Police stations, public works facilities.
(5) Railroad right-of-way but not including railroad yards and shops,
other than for passenger purposes.
(6) Telephone exchanges, transmission equipment buildings and
microwave relay towers.
C. Accessory structures and fences which do not conform to the
requirements identified elsewhere in this chapter, but which are
designed, constructed and maintained so as to be harmonious and
appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of
the general vicinity or use and will not change the essential character of
the same area. [Amended 1-15-2013]
D. Parcels that do not meet any one of the zoning requirements regarding
building setbacks, lot frontage, lot size, accessory building size and
number of buildings per parcel, provided that the remaining zoning
requirements are all met.
A. Area: one acre minimum.
(1) The lot shall be no less than one acre in size where said area is
measured from the right-of-way line.
(2) All lots shall have one acre buildable including setbacks, where
land use permits are required.
B. Lot frontage: 150 feet minimum:
(1) Exception. On corner lots and culs-de-sac upon the approval of the
Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector, lot frontage requirements
for a platted area may be reduced so long as the following
requirements are maintained: lots remain one acre minimum
including setbacks.
C. Lot layout.
(1) Show in detail the measurements on a plot plan of the following
items: house, septic system, accessory building and well.170
170. Editor's Note: Original Subsection 3.b, Only approved community systems shall be
allowed, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 1-6-2015 by Ord. No.
01-2015.
§ 295-187 HOBART CODE § 295-189
1:692
§ 295-189. Height regulations.
Residential dwellings: 35 feet maximum, except as provided by § 295-13,
Height regulations.
§ 295-190. Building setbacks.
Principal Structure
Accessory
Building Driveways
Front yard 40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
40 feet
minimum from
right-of-way
6 feet from
property line
Side yard 25 feet minimum 10 feet
minimum
6 feet from
property line
Rear yard 25 feet minimum 10 feet
minimum
6 feet from
property line
Corner lot 40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
40 feet
minimum from
right-of-way
125 feet from
center line of
intersection
§ 295-191. Building size and facades.
§ 295-192. Accessory building.172
A. Minimum size of residential dwelling shall be 1,200 square feet for a
single-family dwelling.
B. All single- and two-family dwellings and attached/detached accessory
and utility buildings shall have faces constructed of or faced with finish
materials which are intended for that use by the manufacturer for
purposes of preservation and appearance, are aesthetically compatible
with other dwelling facades in the general area, and presents an
attractive appearance to the public and to surrounding properties.
Acceptable materials include, but are not limited to, weatherproof
materials such as wood, decorative masonry, decorative concrete,
stucco, exterior insulation and finish systems (EFIS), Masonite, "hardie"
board and vinyl, aluminum or steel lap siding, or other materials of a
similar character, providing said materials or combination of materials
meet the intent of this section. This regulation has been established to
enhance the aesthetic compatibility with the surrounding area and
neighborhood.171
A. Accessory uses shall conform to district requirements and those set
forth in § 295-11, Building and uses.
171. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
172. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 295-189 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-192
1:693
§ 295-193. Parking.
Parking shall conform to the requirements as set forth in Article XXVIII, Off-
Street Parking Requirements.
§ 295-194. Signs.
Signs shall be regulated as set forth in § 295-361, Regulation of signs.
§ 295-195. Other requirements.
B. Attached and detached accessory and utility buildings shall conform to
district requirements and those set forth in § 295-11, Building and uses.
A. Other structures or buildings allowed within the R-2-R District shall
meet the requirements of the district and remaining articles of this
chapter, as determined by the Village Zoning Administrator/Building
Inspector.
B. The Village Board shall require the certification of the Brown County
Building Inspector's office stating that adequate area exists on each lot
for an on-site sanitary soil absorption system or alternative system
conforming to state and county sanitary regulations and that sufficient
area also exists for a replacement absorption system.
§ 295-192 HOBART CODE § 295-195
1:694
ARTICLE XVIII
A-1 Agricultural District
§ 295-196. Purpose.
Lawful uses which are pursuant to the preservation of prime agricultural
land for continual farming and which are performed in a manner consistent
with the requirements of this article shall be permitted in all A-1 Districts.
§ 295-197. Applicability.
The following regulations shall apply in A-1 Districts.
§ 295-198. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in the A-1 District:
§ 295-199. Permitted accessory uses.
The following are permitted accessory uses in the A-1 District:
A. Agriculture, dairying, floriculture, forestry, general farming, grazing,
nonretail greenhouses, hatcheries, horticulture, livestock raising other
than those listed in § 295-201G, nurseries, orchards, paddocks,
pasturage, poultry raising, riding academics and stables, truck farming,
game farms, wildlife sanctuaries and game preserves.
B. Agricultural warehouses.
C. Commercial feedlots and stock farms.
D. Parks, recreation sites and golf courses.
E. Satellite dish antennas less than 38 inches in diameter.
F. Single-family dwellings.
A. Additional accessory structures necessary for the continuance of the
farming operation.
B. Home occupations.
C. Private garages, carports, and driveways.
D. Private swimming pools.
E. Tool houses, sheds and other similar buildings used for the storage of
common supplies.
F. Telephone and public utility installations, and cable television
installations.
§ 295-196 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-200
1:695
§ 295-200. Conditional uses.
The following are conditional uses in the A-1 District:
A. Airfields, airports, and heliports.
B. Artificial lakes, ponds, farm ponds.
C. Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
D. Cable television installations.
E. Cemeteries.
F. Colleges, universities.
G. Commercial raising of dogs, foxes, goats, hogs, mink, and rabbits.
H. Landscape, tree farms.
I. Public, parochial and private, elementary, junior high and senior high
schools.
J. Quarries, sand and gravel pits.
K. Religious institutions in the form of convents, seminaries, monasteries,
churches, chapels, temples, synagogues, rectories, parsonages, and
parish houses.
L. Roadside stands, provided the structure does not cover more than 300
square feet in ground area and does not exceed 10 feet in height.
M. Satellite dish antennas larger than 38 inches and less than 12 feet in
diameter.
N. Stockyards and fur farms.
O. Solid-fuel-fired heating devices.
P. Public utility and service uses, and civic buildings, as follows:
(1) Substations.
(2) Fire stations.
(3) Gas regulator stations.
(4) Police stations, public works facilities.
(5) Railroad right-of-way, but not including railroad yards and shops,
other than for passenger purposes.
(6) Telephone exchanges, transmission equipment buildings and
microwave relay towers.
§ 295-200 HOBART CODE § 295-200
1:696
§ 295-201. Lot requirements.
§ 295-202. Height regulations.
§ 295-203. Building setbacks.
Principal
Structure
Accessory
Building Driveways
Front yard 40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
10 feet from
property line
Side yard 25 feet minimum 25 feet minimum 10 feet from
property line
Rear yard 25 feet minimum 25 feet minimum 10 feet from
property line
Corner lot 40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
150 feet from
center line of
intersection
§ 295-204. Building size.
Minimum size of residential dwelling shall be 1,200 square feet for a single
family.
§ 295-205. Accessory buildings.
Accessory uses shall conform to district requirements and those set forth in
§ 295-11, Building and uses.
§ 295-206. Parking.
Parking shall conform to the requirements as set forth in Article XXVIII, Off-
Street Parking Requirements.
Q. Other business types that may be approved by the Village Board after
receiving a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
A. Area: five acres minimum.
B. Zoning lot frontage: 200 feet minimum.
A. Farm structures: 60 feet maximum.173
(1) Silos may exceed 60 feet upon Zoning Administrator/Building
Inspector approval.
B. Residential dwellings: 35 feet maximum.174
173. Note: Except as provided by § 295-13, Height regulations.
174. Note: Except as provided by § 295-13, Height regulations.
§ 295-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-207
1:697
§ 295-207. Signs.
Signs shall be regulated as set forth in § 295-361, Regulation of signs.
§ 295-208. Other requirements.
Other structures or buildings allowed within the A-1 District shall meet
the requirements of the district and remaining articles of this chapter as
determined by the Village Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector.
A. Absent a permit for a special occasion, businesses may not be open to
the public between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. This provision
does not apply to emergency type facilities.
§ 295-207 HOBART CODE § 295-208
1:698
ARTICLE XIX
A-2 Exclusive Agricultural District
[Amended 12-16-2014]
§ 295-209. Purpose.
This district provides for the preservation of prime agricultural land for
continual farming and other agricultural uses in compliance with Wisconsin
Statutes Chapter 91, Farmland Preservation.
§ 295-210. Definitions.
The following definitions are limited in application to the Exclusive
Agricultural Zoning District:
AGRICULTURAL ACCESSORY USE — Any of the following land uses on a
farm:
AGRICULTURAL USE — Any of the following activities conducted for the
purpose of producing an income or livelihood:
AGRICULTURE-RELATED USE — A facility, whether or not located on a
farm, that has at least one of the following as a primary and not merely
incidental purpose:
A building, structure, or improvement that is an integral part of, or
incidental to, an agricultural use.
A.
An activity or business operation that is an integral part of, or incidental
to, an agricultural use.
B.
C. A farm residence, including normal residential appurtenances.
A. Crop or forage production.
B. Keeping livestock.
C. Beekeeping.
D. Nursery, sod, or Christmas tree production.
E. Floriculture.
F. Aquaculture.
G. Fur farming.
H. Forest management.
Enrolling land in a federal agricultural commodity payment program or
a federal or state agricultural land conservation payment program.
I.
Providing agricultural supplies, agricultural equipment, agricultural
inputs or agricultural services directly to farms, including farms in the
Farmland Preservation Zoning District.
A.
§ 295-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-210
1:699
COMMON OWNERSHIP — For purposes of the Farmland Preservation
Ordinance, means ownership by the same person or persons. "Common
ownership" includes land owned by the same individual, married couple,
joint tenants, tenants in common, corporation, LLC, partnership, estate or
trust. Solely for purposes of this definition, a parcel owned by one member
of a married couple is deemed to be owned by the married couple.
CONTIGUOUS — Adjacent to or sharing a common boundary. "Contiguous"
land includes land that is separated only by a river, stream, section line,
public road, private road, railroad, pipeline, transmission line, or
transportation or transmission right-of-way. Parcels are not "contiguous" if
they meet only at a single point.
FARM — All land under common ownership that is primarily devoted to
agricultural use. For purposes of this definition, land is deemed to be
primarily devoted to agricultural use if any of the following apply:
FARM RESIDENCE — A single-family residence that is the only residential
structure on the farm.
GROSS FARM REVENUE — Gross receipts from agricultural uses, less the
cost or other basis of livestock or other agricultural items purchased for
resale which are sold or otherwise disposed of during the taxable year.
"Gross farm revenue" includes receipts accruing to a renter, but does not
include rent paid to the landowner.
HOME OCCUPATION, EXCLUSIVE AGRICULTURAL — An occupation or
profession conducted by the farm operator and/or farm operator's family
members who shall also be residents of the farm residence, provided all of
the following are met:
Storing, processing or handling raw agricultural commodities obtained
directly from farms, including farms in the Farmland Preservation
Zoning District.
B.
Slaughtering livestock, including livestock from farms in the Farmland
Preservation Zoning District.
C.
Marketing livestock to or from farms, including farms in the Farmland
Preservation Zoning District.
D.
Processing agricultural by-products or wastes received directly from
farms, including farms in the Farmland Preservation Zoning District.
E.
The land produces at least $6,000 in annual gross farm revenues to its
owner or renter, regardless of whether a majority of the land area is in
agricultural use.
A.
B. A majority of the land area is in agricultural use.
There is no sign or display that will indicate from the exterior that the
building is being utilized in whole or in part for any purpose other than
that of a dwelling;
A.
B. There is no commodity sold upon the premises;
§ 295-210 HOBART CODE § 295-210
1:700
LIVESTOCK — Bovine animals, equine animals, goats, poultry, sheep, swine,
farm-raised deer, farm-raised game birds, camelids, ratites and farm-raised
fish.
OPEN SPACE PARCEL — A parcel on which no buildings, other than hunting
blinds or small sheds, have been constructed or approved for construction.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, limited liability
company (LLC), trust, estate or other legal entity.
PRIME FARMLAND — Includes all of the following:
PRIOR NONCONFORMING USE — A land use that does not comply with
these Farmland Preservation Zoning provisions, but which lawfully existed
prior to the application of this article.
PROTECTED FARMLAND — Land that is any of the following:
No person is employed on site other than a member of the immediate
family residing on the premises;
C.
No mechanical or electrical equipment is used, except such as is
permissible for purely domestic or household purposes;
D.
The occupation or profession is only conducted within the farm
residence;
E.
Exterior alterations or modifications that change the residential
character or appearance of the dwelling, accessory structures or the
property itself are prohibited;
F.
There shall be no noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odor, electrical
interference, or other such condition created by the home occupation
that has any observable impact upon any location outside the principal
structure where the home occupation is conducted.
G.
The current or future agricultural use of the farm or of any other
protected farmland is not impaired or limited.
H.
An area with a Class I or Class II land capability classification as
identified by the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United
States Department of Agriculture.
A.
Land, other than land described in Subsection A of this definition,
which is identified as prime farmland in the county's certified Farmland
Preservation Plan.
B.
Located in a Farmland Preservation Zoning District certified under Ch.
91, Wis. Stats.
A.
Covered by a farmland preservation agreement under Ch. 91, Wis.
Stats.
B.
Covered by an agricultural conservation easement under § 93.73, Wis.
Stats.
C.
§ 295-210 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-210
1:701
§ 295-211. Land use in Farmland Preservation Zoning District;
general.
Only the following land uses are allowed in a Farmland Preservation Zoning
District:
§ 295-212. Permitted uses.
The following land uses are allowed without a conditional use permit in a
Farmland Preservation Zoning District:
§ 295-213. Conditional uses.
D. Otherwise legally protected from nonagricultural development.
A. Uses allowed under § 295-12 without a conditional use permit.
B. Uses allowed under § 295-13 with a conditional use permit.
C. Prior nonconforming uses, subject to § 62.23(7)(h), Wis. Stats.
A. Agricultural uses.
B. Undeveloped natural resource and open space areas.
C. Transportation, utility, communication, or other uses that are required
under state or federal law to be located in a specific place, or that are
authorized to be located in a specific place under a state or federal law
that preempts the requirement of a conditional use permit for that use.
D. Agricultural accessory uses, except those identified as conditional uses
in § 295-213B(2)(a).
E. Home occupation, exclusive agricultural.
A. General.
(1) The Village Board may issue a conditional use permit for a
proposed land use identified in this section if the proposed land use
meets applicable conditions under this section. The procedures
described in § 295-342 shall be followed.
(2) Before issuing a conditional use permit under Subsection A, the
Village Board shall determine in writing that the proposed use
meets applicable conditions under this section. The Village Board
may issue the permit subject to any additional conditions which the
Village Board deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this
article.
B. Certain conditional uses.
(1) The Village Board may issue a conditional use permit for uses
under Subsection B(2) if all of the following apply:
§ 295-210 HOBART CODE § 295-213
1:702
(a) The use supports agricultural uses in the Farmland
Preservation Zoning District in direct and significant ways, and
is more suited to a Farmland Preservation Zoning District than
to an industrial or commercial zoning district.
(b) The use and its location in the Farmland Preservation Zoning
District are consistent with the purposes of the Farmland
Preservation Zoning District.
(c) The use and its location in the Farmland Preservation Zoning
District are reasonable and appropriate, considering
alternative locations, or are specifically approved under state
or federal law.
(d) The use is reasonably designed to minimize conversion of land,
at and around the use site, from agricultural use or open space
use.
(e) The use does not substantially impair or limit the current or
future agricultural use of other protected farmland.
(f) Construction damage to land remaining in agricultural use is
minimized and repaired to the extent feasible.
(g) Nonmetallic mining operations must also be subject to the
standards identified in Wis. Stats. § 91.46(a) and (f).
(2) Conditional uses enumerated.
(a) Conditional uses include:
[1] A grain warehouse, potato warehouse, or other warehouse
that stores raw agricultural commodities received from
farms.
[2] A dairy plant that processes or handles milk from farms.
[3] A meat slaughter establishment.
[4] A food processing plant that processes raw agricultural
commodities received from farms.
[5] A feed mill or rendering plant that processes raw
agricultural commodities or agricultural by-products
received directly from farms, or supplies animal feed
directly to farms.
[6] An ethanol plant, biodiesel plant, communal manure
digester, pelletizing plant or other facility that processes
raw agricultural commodities, agricultural by-products or
agricultural wastes (received directly from farms) to
produce bulk fuel or other bulk products.
§ 295-213 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-213
1:703
[7] A sawmill or other facility that processes wood or other
forest products received directly from farms.
[8] A facility that provides farm inputs such as fertilizer,
pesticides, seed or feed directly to farms.
[9] A facility that is primarily engaged in the sale and
servicing of farm vehicles or other farm equipment.
[10] A facility that is primarily engaged in providing agronomic
or veterinary services to farms.
[11] Nonmetallic mining operations which are incidental to an
active principal agricultural use.
[12] Recreation trail: A thoroughfare or track across land used
for recreational purposes such as:
[a] Pedestrian activities, including wheelchair use;
[b] Skating, skateboarding or longboarding;
[c] Equestrian activities, including carriage driving;
[d] Nonmotorized snow trail activities, including skiing;
[e] Bicycling or use of other human-powered vehicles;
[f] Aquatic or water activities;
[g] Motorized vehicular activities, including all-terrainvehicle
riding, motorcycling and snowmobiling;
[h] Use of off-road light trucks, or use of other off-road
motorized vehicles.
(b) The foregoing list is not intended to entitle the applicant to a
particular use of a trail. Each proposed trail shall be subject to
conditions that facilitate coexistence and harmony between
trails, residents, and neighborhoods from a design and
regulatory perspective.
C. Compatible nonfarm- or nonagricultural-related business or activity: a
business, activity, or enterprise, whether or not associated with an
agricultural use, which meets all of the following requirements:
(1) It is conducted on a farm by an owner or operator of that farm.
(2) It requires no buildings, structures, or improvements other than
those described in Subsection A or C of the definition of
"agricultural accessory use" in § 295-210.
(3) It employs no more than four full-time employees annually.
§ 295-213 HOBART CODE § 295-213
1:704
(4) It does not impair or limit the current or future agricultural use of
the farm or other protected farmland.
D. Compatible infrastructure.
(1) The Village Board may issue a conditional use permit for a
proposed use under Subsection D(2) if all of the following apply:
(a) The use and its location in the Farmland Preservation Zoning
District are consistent with the purposes of the Farmland
Preservation Zoning District.
(b) The use and its location in the Farmland Preservation Zoning
District are reasonable and appropriate, considering
alternative locations, or are specifically approved under state
or federal law.
(c) The use is reasonably designed to minimize conversion of land,
at and around the site of the use, from agricultural use or open
space use.
(d) The use does not substantially impair or limit the current or
future agricultural use of other protected farmland.
(e) Construction damage to land remaining in agricultural use is
minimized and repaired to the extent feasible.
(2) The Village Board may issue a conditional use permit for any of the
following compatible infrastructure uses if that use meets
applicable conditions under Subsection D(1):
(a) Transportation uses, including public airports, public airfields,
rail facilities, and agricultural aeronautic facilities.
(b) Communication uses, including cell towers, antennas and
broadcast towers.
E. Government and nonprofit community uses.
(1) The Village Board may issue a conditional use permit for a
government use, or for an institutional, religious or community use,
if the Village Board determines that all of the following apply:
(a) The use and its location in the Farmland Preservation Zoning
District are consistent with the purposes of the Farmland
Preservation Zoning District.
(b) The use and its location in the Farmland Preservation Zoning
District are reasonable and appropriate, considering
alternative locations, or are specifically approved under state
or federal law.
§ 295-213 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-213
1:705
§ 295-214. Rezoning land out of Farmland Preservation Zoning
Districts.
(c) The use is reasonably designed to minimize the conversion of
land, at and around the site of the use, from agricultural use or
open space use.
(d) The use does not substantially impair or limit the current or
future agricultural use of other protected farmland.
(e) Construction damage to land remaining in agricultural use is
minimized and repaired, to the extent feasible.
(f) Nonmetallic mining operations must also be subject the
standards identified in Wis. Stats. § 91.46(a) and (f).
(2) Government and nonprofit community conditional uses include:
(a) Fire stations, police stations, post offices, and other
government administration buildings;
(b) Schools, colleges, and universities;
(c) Religious institutions, including cemeteries and mausoleums;
(d) Public parks and recreation areas;
(e) Nonmetallic mining operations.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B, the Village Board may not rezone
land out of a Farmland Preservation Zoning District unless the Village
Board finds all of the following in writing, after public hearing, as part
of the official record of the rezoning, before granting the rezone:
(1) The rezoned land is better suited for a use not allowed in the
Farmland Preservation Zoning District.
(2) The rezoning is consistent with any comprehensive plan adopted by
the Village of Hobart which is in effect at the time of the rezoning.
(3) The rezoning is substantially consistent with the Brown County
Farmland Preservation Plan, certified under Ch. 91, Wis. Stats.,
which is in effect at the time of the rezoning.
(4) The rezoning will not substantially impair or limit current or future
agricultural use of other protected farmland.
B. Subsection A does not apply to any of the following:
(1) A rezoning that is affirmatively certified by the Wisconsin
Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection under
Ch. 91, Wis. Stats.
(2) A rezoning that makes the farmland preservation zoning ordinance
map more consistent with the Brown County Farmland
§ 295-213 HOBART CODE § 295-214
1:706
§ 295-215. Parcel requirements. [Amended 12-18-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-19]
§ 295-216. Height regulations.
§ 295-217. Building setbacks.
Building setbacks shall be as follows:
Principal
Structure
Accessory
Building Driveway
Front yard 40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
40 feet
minimum from
right-of-way
10 feet from
property line
Side yard 25 feet minimum 25 feet
minimum
10 feet from
property line
Rear yard 25 feet minimum 25 feet
minimum
10 feet from
property line
Preservation Plan Map, certified under Ch. 91, Wis. Stats., which is
in effect at the time of the rezoning.
C. The Village shall by March 1 of each year provide to the administering
department of the State of Wisconsin and to the administering
department of Brown County a report of the number of acres the Village
has rezoned out of the Exclusive Agricultural District during the
previous year and a map that clearly identifies said acres.
A. Area: Five acres minimum parcel size for a single-family dwelling.
(1) Exception: Farm operator, parents, children, and workers of the
farm operator may locate a single-family dwelling on a separate lot
containing a minimum of 2 1/2 acres and 200 feet of lot frontage. A
worker shall earn more than 50% of his or her gross income from
the operator's farm.
B. Zoning lot frontage: 200 feet minimum.
C. Those residential lots of record as of July 3, 1986, shall not be
considered nonconforming.
A. Farm structures: 60 feet maximum. (NOTE: Except as provided by
§ 295-13, Height regulations.)
(1) Silos may exceed 60 feet upon Zoning Administrator Building/
Administrator approval.
B. Residential dwellings: 35 feet maximum. (NOTE: Except as provided by
§ 295-13, Height regulations.)
§ 295-214 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-217
1:707
Principal
Structure
Accessory
Building Driveway
Corner lot 40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
40 feet
minimum from
right-of-way
150 feet from
center line of
intersection
§ 295-218. Building size.
Minimum size of a residential dwelling shall be 1,200 square feet for a
single-family dwelling.
§ 295-219. Accessory buildings.
Accessory uses shall conform to district requirements and those set forth in
§ 295-11, Building and uses.
§ 295-220. Parking.
Parking shall conform to the requirements as set forth in Article XXVIII, Off-
Street Parking Requirements.
§ 295-221. Signs.
Signs shall be regulated as set forth in § 295-361, Regulation of signs.
§ 295-221.1. Other requirements.
A. Absent a permit for a special occasion, businesses may not be open to
the public between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. This provision
does not apply to emergency type facilities.
§ 295-217 HOBART CODE § 295-221.1
1:708
ARTICLE XX
B-1 Community Business District
§ 295-222. Purpose.
The Community Business District is intended to serve the retail and service
needs of nearby residential areas with a wide range of products and
services for both daily and occasional shopping. The following regulations
shall apply in the B-1 Districts:
§ 295-223. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in the B-1 District:
Antique shops
Art and school supply stores
Automobile accessory stores
Bakeries - retail
Banks and financial institutions
Barber shops
Beauty parlors
Bicycle sales, rental, and repair stores
Blueprinting and photostating
Boat showrooms and sales
Book and stationery stores
Business machine sales and service
Camera and photographic supply stores
Candy and ice cream stores
Carpet, rug, and drapery stores - retail sales only
Catering establishments
Child day-care centers
China and glassware stores
Clinics - doctor and dentist offices
Clothing and costume rental stores
Coin and stamp stores
Computer and data processing services
Custom dressmaking
Department stores
Drugstores and pharmacies
Dry-cleaning establishments - not engaged in wholesale processing
Dry goods stores
§ 295-222 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-223
1:709
Eating and drinking places - excluding drive-ins and establishments
primarily engaged in carry-out service
Electrical and household appliance stores - including radio and television
sales
Electrical showrooms and shops
Electrical sales
Electronics shops
Employment agencies
Florist shops
Food stores, grocery stores, meat markets, bakeries, and delicatessens -
retail sales only
Frozen food stores - including locker rental in conjunction therewith
Furniture stores - including upholstering when conducted as part of the
retail operations and secondary to the principal use
Furrier shops, including the incidental storage and conditioning of furs
Garden supply, tool, and seed stores
Gift shops
Hardware stores
Hobby shops for retail of items to be assembled or used away from the
premises
Household appliances, office equipment, and other small machine sales
and service
Interior decorating shops, including upholstering and making of
draperies, slip covers, and other similar articles, when conducted as part
of the retail operations and secondary to the principal use
Insurance agencies
Jewelry stores, including watch and clock repair
Launderettes
Leather goods and luggage stores
Liquor stores, packaged goods
Locksmith shops
Mail order houses
Millinery shops
Miscellaneous personal services
Miscellaneous repair services
Miscellaneous shopping goods stores
Motor vehicle and automotive parts and supplies
Musical instrument sales and repair
Newspaper distribution agencies for home delivery and retail trade
§ 295-223 HOBART CODE § 295-223
1:710
Nursing and personal care facilities
Office machine sales and servicing
Offices, business and professional
Office supply stores
Optician sales, retail
Orthopedic and medical appliance stores
Paint and wallpaper stores
Pet shops
Phonograph record and sheet music stores
Photography studios, including the development of film and pictures,
when conducted as part of the retail business on the premises
Picture framing, when conducted for retail trade on the premises only
Plumbing showrooms and shops
Post offices
Publishing and printing
Radio and television sales, servicing and repair shops
Radio and television stations and studios
Real estate offices
Recording studios
Residential care group homes
Restaurants, including the serving of alcoholic beverages
Retail fuel sales associated with convenience store or other similar
permitted uses
Security brokers
Sewing machine sales and service, household appliances only
Shoe, clothing, and hat repair stores
Shoe stores
Sporting goods stores
Studios, photography, dance, design, and artist-illustrator
Tailor shops
Taverns
Taxidermists
Telegraph offices
Telephone booths and coin telephones
Ticket agencies, amusement
Tobacco shops
Tool rental shops
§ 295-223 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-223
1:711
Toy shops
Travel bureaus and transportation ticket offices
Used merchandise stores
Variety stores
Video sales and rental
Wearing apparel shops and accessories
§ 295-224. Permitted accessory uses.
The following are permitted accessory uses in the B-1 District:
§ 295-225. Conditional uses.175
The following are conditional uses in the B-1 District:
Agricultural implement dealers
Amusement establishments, archery ranges, bowling alleys, shooting
galleries, game room, swimming pools, skating rinks, and other similar
amusement facilities
Animal hospital, veterinary services
Art shops or galleries, but not including auction rooms
Auction rooms
Automobile service stations
Automotive repair shops
Automotive rental and leasing
Automotive services
Bowling alleys
Building material product sales
Business schools
Car wash
Commercial parking lots, open and other than accessory
Contractor or construction offices
Dry-cleaning establishments employing more than four persons
Dwelling units and rooming units above the ground level
A. Uses incidental to and on the same zoning lot as the principal use.
B. Satellite dish antennas less than 38 inches in diameter.
C. Telephone and public utility installations, and cable television
installations.
175. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 295-223 HOBART CODE § 295-225
1:712
Eating and drinking establishments, primarily engaged in drive-in and
carry-out service
Express office and delivery stations
Greenhouses, commercial
Hotels, motels
Kennels
Mail-order houses
Manufactured home sales
Meeting halls
Museums, auditoriums and arenas
Monument shops
Motor vehicle sales
Nurseries, lawn and garden supply stores
Parking garages or structures, other than accessory for the storage of
private passenger automobiles only
Recreational and utility trailer dealers
Religious institutions in the form of convents, seminaries, monasteries,
churches, chapels, temples, synagogues, rectories, parsonages, and parish
houses
Schools, commercial, and trade
Shopping centers
Stadiums, auditoriums, and arenas
Theaters
Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors
Wholesale establishments
Wood cabinetmaking
Public utility and service uses, and civic buildings as follows:
Substations
Fire stations
Gas regulator stations
Police stations, public works facilities
Railroad right-of-way but not including railroad yards and shops,
other than for passenger purposes
Telephone exchanges, transmission equipment buildings and
microwave relay towers
Other retail uses similar in character and the manufacture or treatment of
products clearly incidental to the conduct of a retail business on the
premises when approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission
§ 295-225 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-226
1:713
§ 295-226. Lot requirements per use.
§ 295-227. Height regulations.
All structures 35 feet maximum; except as provided by § 295-13, Height
regulations.
§ 295-228. Building setbacks.
Principal
Structure
Accessory
Building Driveways
Front yard 40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
10 feet from
property line
Side yard 10 feet minimum 10 feet minimum 10 feet from
property line
Rear yard 15 feet minimum 15 feet minimum 10 feet from
property line
Corner lot 40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
75 feet from
center of
intersection
§ 295-229. Building size.
Building size minimum of 725 square feet.
§ 295-230. Accessory building.
All accessory buildings hereinafter constructed in the B-1 District shall
meet the district requirements and those identified in § 295-11, Building
and uses.
§ 295-231. Parking.
Parking shall conform to the requirements as set forth in Article XXVIII, Off-
Street Parking Requirements.
§ 295-232. Signs.
Signs shall be regulated as set forth in § 295-361, Regulation of signs.
A. With public sewer:
(1) Area: 15,000 square feet minimum.
(2) Zoning lot frontage: 100 feet minimum.
B. Without public sewer:
(1) Area: 40,000 square feet minimum.
(2) Zoning lot frontage: 100 feet minimum.
§ 295-226 HOBART CODE § 295-233
1:714
§ 295-233. Other requirements.
A. Structures and buildings allowed in the B-1 Community Business
District shall meet the regulations of this district and the other articles
of this chapter, as determined by the Village Zoning Administrator/
Building Inspector and approved by the Site Review Committee.
B. All business, services, and storage (except for motor vehicles in
operable condition) shall be conducted within a completely enclosed
structure.
C. The parking or storage of operable motor vehicles, if not within an
enclosed building structure, shall be effectively screened by shrubbery,
or solid wall or fence if not less than six feet. Walls and fences shall not
exceed eight feet in height.
D. Any use found and determined by the Village Planning and Zoning
Commission to be incompatible with the purpose of the B-1 District may
be prohibited by the Village Board, including but not limited to outdoor
wood burners/solid-fuel heating devices.176
E. A detailed landscaping plan, showing placement of shrubbery, trees and
other vegetative plantings shall be submitted to the Village Board for
approval prior to the issuance of a building permit, to insure
appropriateness and compatibility with adjoining development.
F. Absent a permit for a special occasion, businesses may not be open to
the public between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. This provision
does not apply to emergency type facilities.
176. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 295-233 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-233
1:715

ARTICLE XXI
B-2 Limited Community Business District
§ 295-234. Purpose.
The Limited Community Business District is intended to serve the retail and
service needs of nearby residential areas with a wide range of products and
services for both daily and occasional shopping. The following regulations
shall apply in B-2 Districts.
§ 295-235. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in the B-2 District:
Athletic clubs
Bakeries - retail
Barber shops, beauty parlors, tanning salons
Bicycle sales, rental, and repair stores
Book and stationery stores
Camera and photographic supply stores
Candy and ice cream stores
Day-care centers
Drugstores and pharmacies
Florist shops
Medical clinics, chiropractor, physical therapy, sports medicine, dental,
optometry, and similar uses
Paint and wallpaper stores
Phonograph record and sheet music stores
Photography studios, including the development of film and pictures,
when conducted as part of the retail business on the premises
Restaurants not serving alcoholic beverages
Studios, photography, dance, design and artist-illustrator
Tailor shops
Telephone booths and coin telephones
Tobacco shops
Tool rental shops
Video sales and rental.
§ 295-236. Permitted accessory uses.
The following are permitted accessory uses in the B-2 District:
A. Uses incidental to and on the same zoning lot as the principal use.
§ 295-234 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-236
1:717
§ 295-237. Conditional uses.
The following are conditional uses in the B-2 District:
Convenience stores
Car wash
Dry-cleaning establishments employing more than four persons
Food stores, grocery stores, meat markets, bakeries and delicatessens -
retail sales only
Hobby shops for retail of items to be assembled or used away from the
premises
Liquor stores, packaged goods
Neighborhood meeting facility
Nursing and personal care facilities; CBRF — community-based
residential facility
Pet shops
Public utility and service uses, and civic buildings as follows:
Substations
Fire stations
Gas regulator stations
Police stations, public works facilities
Railroad right-of-way but not including railroad yards and shops, other
than for passenger purposes
Telephone exchanges, transmission equipment buildings and
microwave relay towers
§ 295-238. Lot requirements per use.
B. Satellite dish antennas less than 38 inches in diameter.
C. Telephone and public utility installations, and cable television
installations.
A. With public sewer.
(1) Area: 15,000 square feet minimum.
(2) Zoning lot frontage: 100 feet minimum.
B. Without public sewer.
(1) Area: 40,000 square feet minimum.
(2) Zoning lot frontage: 100 feet minimum.
§ 295-236 HOBART CODE § 295-239
1:718
§ 295-239. Height regulations.
All structures: 35 feet maximum, except as provided by § 295-13, Height
regulations.
§ 295-240. Building setbacks.
Principal
Structure
Accessory
Building Driveways
Front yard 40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
10 feet from
property line
Side yard 10 feet minimum 10 feet minimum 10 feet from
property line
Rear yard 15 feet minimum 15 feet minimum 10 feet from
property line
Corner lot 40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
75 feet from
center of
intersection
§ 295-241. Building size.
Minimum of 725 square feet.
§ 295-242. Accessory building.
All accessory buildings hereinafter constructed in the B-2 District shall
meet the district requirements and those identified in § 295-11, Building
and uses.
§ 295-243. Parking.
Parking shall conform to the requirements as set forth in Article XXVIII, Off-
Street Parking Requirements.
§ 295-244. Signs.
Signs shall be regulated as set forth in § 295-361, Regulation of signs.
§ 295-245. Other requirements.
A. Accessory building shall not exceed 200 square feet.
A. Structures and buildings allowed in the B-2 Limited Community
Business District shall meet the regulations of this district and the other
articles of this chapter, as determined by the Village Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector and approved by the Site Review
Committee.
§ 295-239 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-245
1:719
B. All business, services, and storage (except for motor vehicles in
operable condition) shall be conducted within a completely enclosed
structure.
C. The parking or storage of operable motor vehicles, if not within an
enclosed building structure, shall be effectively screened by shrubbery,
or solid wall or fence if not less than six feet. Walls and fences shall not
exceed eight feet in height.
D. Any use found and determined by the Village Planning and Zoning
Commission to be incompatible with the purpose of the B-2 District the
Village Board may prohibit, including but not limited to outdoor wood
burners/solid-fuel heating devices.177
E. A detailed landscaping plan, showing placement of shrubbery, trees and
other vegetative plantings shall be submitted to the Village Board for
approval prior to the issuance of a building permit, to insure
appropriateness and compatibility with adjoining development.
F. Absent a permit for a special occasion, businesses may not be open to
the public between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. This provision
does not apply to emergency type facilities.
177. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 295-245 HOBART CODE § 295-245
1:720
ARTICLE XXII
C-1 Limited Commercial District
§ 295-246. Purpose.
The Limited Commercial District is intended to serve the office and
professional needs of nearby residential areas. The following regulations
shall apply in C-1 Districts.
§ 295-247. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in the C-1 District:
Accountants
Attorneys
Architects
Banks and financial institutions
Beauty salon — barber shop
Business consultants
Clinics — doctor and dentist offices
Computer and data processing services
Engineers, drafting, designers
Estate planners
Executive search consultants
Financial planning services
Insurance agencies
Medical clinics, chiropractor, physical therapy, sports medicine, dental,
optometry and similar uses
Offices, business and professional
Real estate offices
Security brokers
Title companies
Travel agencies
§ 295-248. Permitted accessory uses.
The following are permitted accessory uses in the C-1 District:
A. Uses incidental to and on the same zoning lot as the principal use.
B. Satellite dish antennas.
C. Telephone, cable television, and public utility installations.
§ 295-246 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-249
1:721
§ 295-249. Conditional uses.
The following are conditional uses in the C-1 District:
§ 295-250. Lot requirements per use.
§ 295-251. Height regulations.
All structures 35 feet maximum; except as provided by § 295-13, Height
regulations.
§ 295-252. Building setbacks.
Principal
Structure
Accessory
Building Driveways
Front yard 40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
10 feet from
property line
Side yard 10 feet minimum 10 feet minimum 10 feet from
property line
Rear yard 15 feet minimum 15 feet minimum 10 feet from
property line
A. Religious institutions in the form of convents, seminaries, monasteries,
churches, chapels, temples, synagogues, rectories, parsonages, and
parish houses.
B. Public utility and service uses, and civic buildings as follows:
(1) Substations.
(2) Fire stations.
(3) Gas regulator stations.
(4) Police stations, public works facilities.
(5) Railroad right-of-way, but not including railroad yards and shops,
other than for passenger purposes.
(6) Telephone exchanges, transmission equipment buildings and
microwave relay towers.
A. With public sewer.
(1) Area: 15,000 square feet minimum.
(2) Zoning lot frontage: 100 feet minimum.
B. Without public sewer.
(1) Area: 40,000 square feet minimum.
(2) Zoning lot frontage: 100 feet minimum.
§ 295-249 HOBART CODE § 295-252
1:722
Principal
Structure
Accessory
Building Driveways
Corner lot 40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
75 feet from
center line of
intersection
§ 295-253. Building size.
Minimum of 1,500 square feet.
§ 295-254. Accessory building.
All accessory buildings hereinafter constructed in the C-1 District shall
meet the district requirements and those identified in § 295-11, Building
and uses.
§ 295-255. Parking.
Parking shall conform to the requirements as set forth in Article XXVIII, Off-
Street Parking Requirements.
§ 295-256. Signs.
Signs shall be regulated as set forth in § 295-361, Regulation of signs.
§ 295-257. Site review requirements.
All structures and buildings allowed in the C-1 Limited Commercial District
shall meet the requirements of Article XXXIII, Site Review/Development and
Design Standards, of this chapter.
§ 295-258. Other requirements.
A. Structures and buildings allowed in the C-1 Limited Commercial
District shall meet the regulations of this district and the other articles
of this chapter, as determined by the Village Zoning Administrator/
Building Inspector and approved by the Site Review Committee.
B. All business, services, and storage (except for motor vehicles in
operable condition) shall be conducted within a completely enclosed
structure.
C. The parking or storage of operable motor vehicles, if not within an
enclosed building structure, shall be effectively screened by shrubbery,
or solid wall or fence if not less than six feet. Walls and fences shall not
exceed eight feet in height.
D. Any use found and determined by the Village Planning and Zoning
Commission to be incompatible with the purpose of the C-1 District may
be prohibited by the Village Board, including but not limited to outdoor
wood burners/solid-fuel heating devices.178
§ 295-252 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-258
1:723
E. A detailed landscaping plan, showing placement of shrubbery, trees and
other vegetative plantings, shall be submitted to the Village Board for
approval prior to the issuance of a building permit, to insure
appropriateness and compatibility with adjoining development.
F. Absent a permit for a special occasion, businesses may not be open to
the public between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. This provision
does not apply to emergency type facilities.
178. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 295-258 HOBART CODE § 295-258
1:724
ARTICLE XXIII
I-1 Limited Industrial District
§ 295-259. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in the I-1 District:
Air transport services
Automotive body repairs, upholstery, and cleaning establishments
Automotive service stations and garages
Building materials sales and storage
Cabinet shop
Commercial bakeries
Contractors, architects, and engineer offices, shops and yards
Cosmetic production
Electronic and scientific precision equipment
Feed and seed sales
Fuel and ice sales
Glass products production and sales
Hardware, plumbing and heating equipment trade
Office buildings, corporate, business, and professional
Printing and publishing establishments
Restaurants, drugstores, barber shops, located in an office building and
accessible to the public only through the lobby; no advertising or display
for the accessory use should be visible from outside the building
Upholstering shop
§ 295-260. Permitted accessory uses.
The following are permitted accessory uses in the I-1 District:
§ 295-261. Conditional uses.
The following are conditional uses in the I-1 District:
A. Satellite dish antennas less than 38 inches in diameter.
B. Uses incidental to and on the same zoning lot as the principal use.
C. Telephone and public utility installations, and cable television
installations.
A. Light machinery production - appliances, business machines, etc.
B. Machine shops.
C. Manufacturing and bottling of nonalcoholic beverages.
§ 295-259 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-261
1:725
§ 295-262. Lot requirements per use.
D. Miscellaneous textile goods and products manufacture.
E. Pet boarding facility.
F. Planned industrial unit development.
G. Recycling dropoff centers.
H. Religious institutions in the form of convents, seminaries, monasteries,
churches, chapels, temples, synagogues, rectories, parsonages, and
parish houses.
I. Sewage treatment plants.
J. Sign manufacture.
K. Stadiums, auditoriums, and arenas open or enclosed.
L. Stone products manufacture.
M. Toy and sporting goods equipment manufacture.
N. Warehousing, storage, and distribution facilities.
O. Woodworking and wood products.
P. Keeping of large domestic livestock, including horses, cows, goats,
sheep, fowl and llamas, but not including hogs, fur-bearing animals,
provided there is not more than one head of such livestock for each acre
of lot area unless otherwise approved by the Village Board. This
conditional uses is not intended to be used for intensive raising and
boarding of livestock. A barn to house the animals is not to exceed 864
square feet.
Q. Public utility and service uses, and civic buildings as follows:
(1) Substations.
(2) Fire stations.
(3) Gas regulator stations.
(4) Police stations, public works facilities.
(5) Railroad right-of-way but not including railroad yards and shops,
other than for passenger purposes.
(6) Telephone exchanges, transmission equipment buildings and
microwave relay towers.
R. Other manufacturing, processing, or storage uses as determined
acceptable by the Village Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector and
the Village Planning and Zoning Commission.
§ 295-261 HOBART CODE § 295-262
1:726
§ 295-263. Height regulations.
Principal structures: 60 feet maximum except as provided by § 295-13,
Height regulations.
§ 295-264. Building setbacks.
Principal
Structure
Accessory
Building Driveways
Front yard 40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
10 feet from
property line
Side yard 15 feet minimum 15 feet minimum 10 feet from
property line
Rear yard 20 feet minimum 20 feet minimum 10 feet from
property line
Corner lot 40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
75 feet from
center line of
intersection
§ 295-265. Accessory building.
All accessory buildings hereinafter constructed in the I-1 District shall meet
the district requirements and those identified in § 295-11, Building and
uses.
§ 295-266. Parking.
Parking shall conform to the requirements as set forth in Article XXVIII, Off-
Street Parking Requirements.
§ 295-267. Signs.
Signs shall be regulated as set forth in § 295-361, Regulation of signs.
§ 295-268. Other requirements.
A. With public sewer.
(1) Area: 40,000 square feet minimum.
(2) Zoning lot frontage: 100 feet minimum.
B. Without public sewer:
(1) Area: 40,000 square feet minimum.
(2) Zoning lot frontage: 100 feet minimum.
A. Structures and buildings allowed in the I-1 Limited Industrial District
shall meet the regulations of this district and the other articles of this
§ 295-262 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-268
1:727
chapter, as determined by the Village Zoning Administrator/Building
Inspector and approved by the Site Review Committee.
B. All business, services, and storage (except for motor vehicles in
operable condition) shall be conducted within a completely enclosed
structure.
C. The parking or storage of operable motor vehicles, if not within an
enclosed building structure, shall be effectively screened by shrubbery,
or solid wall or fence if not less than six feet. Walls and fences shall not
exceed eight feet in height.
D. Any use found and determined by the Village Planning and Zoning
Commission to be incompatible with the purpose of the I-1 District may
be prohibited by the Village Board, including but not limited to outdoor
wood burners/solid-fuel heating devices.179
E. A detailed landscaping plan, showing placement of shrubbery, trees and
other vegetative plantings, shall be submitted to the Village Board for
approval prior to the issuance of a building permit to insure
appropriateness and compatibility with adjoining development.
F. With respect to any warehousing, storage and distribution facilities
granted a conditional use permit, said permit shall be subject to the
following if at any time the property subject to the condition use permit
is subjected to the condominium form of ownership in accordance with
Chapter 703 of the Wisconsin Statutes:
(1) The condominium declaration and plat must be reviewed and
approved by the Village of Hobart. The review and approval shall
be limited to compliance with this chapter. The Village of Hobart
shall have 30 days from submission of the condominium declaration
and plat to conduct its review and notify the proposed declarant of
any objection or the declaration and plat shall be deemed
approved.
(2) The condominium declaration shall specifically provide that the
condominium association may be cited and/or fined for any
violation of this chapter by any unit owner.180
(3) Facilities used for business (non-personal) uses allowed by the
conditional use permit shall adhere to the restrictions identified in
Subsection F(3)(a) through (d) below, in addition to all other codes,
rules and regulations applicable to the business use, whichever are
more restrictive. Facilities used for personal (non-business) use
shall adhere to Subsection F(3)(a) through (d) as follows:181
179. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
180. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(3) and (4), regarding submission of site plan and
permits required, respectively, which immediately followed this subsection, were repealed
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 295-268 HOBART CODE § 295-268
1:728
(a) Outside storage of any equipment, materials, vehicles or other
personal property of any type shall not be allowed.
(b) Fertilizer storage shall not be allowed.
(c) No business shall be conducted from any unit which:
[1] Utilizes employees stationed at any unit for a majority of
the employee's workday;
[2] Is inconsistent with warehousing, storage and distribution
uses as provided by the approved conditional use permit
referenced in Subsection F.
(d) Storage of fuels shall adhere to the following:
[1] Fuel storage contained within fuel cells and storage tanks
installed as original or replacement equipment and
maintained in compliance with any vehicle, recreational
vehicle, camper, equipment, appliance or fuel tank and
delivery system or fuel cell and delivery system
manufacturer's specifications shall be allowed.
[2] There shall be no more than one thirty-pound maximum
propane tank stored on site in addition to those allowed by
Subsection F(3)(d)[1].
[3] There shall be no more than 15 gallons of other flammable
fuels stored in five-gallon-maximum ASTM-, ANSI- or
NFPA-approved containers, tanks or fuel cells on site
which are not addressed by Subsection F(3)(d)[1].
G. Absent a permit for a special occasion, businesses may not be open to
the public between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. This provision
does not apply to emergency-type facilities.
181. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 295-268 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-268
1:729

ARTICLE XXIV
I-2 Industrial Park District
[Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015; 3-17-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-04]
§ 295-269. Purpose.
The purpose of the Industrial Park District is to provide for the placement of
those industrial and commercial establishments in an attractive low-density
setting compatible with residential uses in adjoining areas.
§ 295-270. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in the I-2 District:
Bottling company
Brick and structural clay products manufacturing
Dairy processing plants for cheese and milk
Food processing establishments
Health and medical institutions
Hotels and motels
Sign manufacture
Stone products manufacture
Woodworking and wood products
§ 295-271. Permitted accessory uses.
The following are permitted accessory uses in the I-2 District:
§ 295-272. Conditional uses.
The following are conditional uses in the I-2 District:
A. Satellite dish antennas less than 38 inches in diameter.
B. Restaurants, drugstores, barbershops, located in an office building and
accessible to the public only through the lobby; no advertising or
display for the accessory use should be visible from outside the
building.
C. Uses incidental to and on the same zoning lot as the principal use.
D. Telephone and public utility installations, and cable television
installations.
A. Adult establishments, to include: adult book houses, adult body painting
studios, adult bookstores, adult cabarets, adult massage parlors, adult
mini-motion-picture theater, adult modeling studios, adult motion-
§ 295-269 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-272
1:731
§ 295-273. Lot requirements per use.
§ 295-274. Height regulations.
Principal structures: 60 feet maximum, except as provided by § 295-13,
Height regulations.
picture theater, adult motion-picture theater (outdoor), adult novelty
shops, and tattoo parlors and body piercing.
B. Air, motor, railroad, and water freight terminals.
C. Asphalt products manufacture.
D. Assembly plants.
E. Auto wrecking yards.
F. Freight yards, terminals, and transshipment depots (motor trucks).
G. Heavy machinery production.
H. Paint products manufacture.
I. Paper products manufacturing.
J. Petroleum products, storage, processing, and sales.
K. Planned industrial unit development.
L. Plastic manufacturing.
M. Recycling dropoff centers.
N. Sewage treatment plants.
O. Storage, warehousing and mini-warehousing.
P. Public utility and service uses, and civic buildings as follows:
(1) Substations.
(2) Fire stations.
(3) Gas regulator stations.
(4) Police stations, public works facilities.
(5) Railroad right-of-way, but not including railroad yards and shops,
other than for passenger purposes.
(6) Telephone exchanges, transmission equipment buildings and
microwave relay towers.
A. Area: 40,000 square feet minimum.
B. Zoning lot frontage: 120 feet minimum.
§ 295-272 HOBART CODE § 295-275
1:732
§ 295-275. Building setbacks.
Principal
Structure
Accessory
Building Driveways
Front yard 40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
10 feet from
property line
Side yard 15 feet minimum 15 feet minimum 10 feet from
property line
Rear yard 20 feet minimum 20 feet minimum 10 feet from
property line
Corner lot 40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
75 feet from
center line of
intersection
§ 295-276. Accessory buildings.
All accessory buildings hereinafter constructed in the I-2 District shall meet
the district requirements and those identified in § 295-11, Building and
uses.
§ 295-277. Parking.
Parking shall conform to the requirements as set forth in Article XXVIII, Off-
Street Parking Requirements.
§ 295-278. Signs.
Signs shall be regulated as set forth in § 295-361, Regulation of signs.
§ 295-279. Other requirements.
A. Structures and buildings allowed in the I-2 Industrial Park District shall
meet the regulations of this district and the other articles of this
chapter, as determined by the Village Zoning Administrator/Building
Inspector and approved by the Site Review Committee.
B. All business, services, and storage (except for motor vehicles in
operable condition) shall be conducted within a completely enclosed
structure.
C. The parking or storage of operable motor vehicles, if not within an
enclosed building structure, shall be effectively screened by shrubbery,
or solid wall or fence if not less than six feet. Walls and fence shall not
exceed eight feet in height.
D. Any use found and determined by the Village Planning and Zoning
Commission to be incompatible with the purpose of the I-2 District may
be prohibited by the Village Board, including, but not limited to,
outdoor wood burners/solid-fuel heating devices.
§ 295-275 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-279
1:733
E. A detailed landscaping plan, showing placement of shrubbery, trees and
other vegetative plantings, shall be submitted to the Village Board for
approval prior to the issuance of a building permit to ensure
appropriateness and compatibility with adjoining development.
F. Absent a permit for a special occasion, businesses may not be open to
the public between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. This provision
does not apply to emergency-type facilities.
§ 295-279 HOBART CODE § 295-279
1:734
ARTICLE XXIVA
I-3 Airport Industrial District
[Added 3-17-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-04]
§ 295-279.1. Purpose.
The purpose of the I-3 Airport Industrial District is to facilitate economic
development for airport-compatible uses of industrial and commercial
developments desiring locations in close proximity to air transportation
while protecting the health and property of the public in association with
the safe operation of the airport.
§ 295-279.2. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in the I-3 District:
Airport
Airport terminal
Aircraft hanger
Airport maintenance facility
Aircraft parts, sales, and maintenance
Flight training facilities and clubs (pilot training, skydiving)
Passenger terminal, surface transportation
Automobile rental
Gasoline filling station
Taxicab service
Carwash or auto detailing (full and self-service)
Hotel or motel
Government office
Post office
Business office
Data processing or storage center
Research and development facilities
Printing and publishing
Bottling facility
Dairy processing plants for cheese and milk
Food processing establishments
Health and medical institutions
Sign manufacturing facility
Cold-storage facility
Parcel services
§ 295-279.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-279.2
1:735
Truck or freight terminal
Warehousing and distribution facilities
Emergency services station (fire, EMS, police)
Government public works facilities
Parking lot
Parking structure
Crops
§ 295-279.3. Permitted accessory uses.
The following are permitted accessory uses in the I-3 District:
§ 295-279.4. Conditional uses.
The following are conditional uses in the I-3 District:
A. Satellite dish antennas less than 38 inches in diameter.
B. Restaurants, drugstores, barbershops, located in an office building and
accessible to the public only through the lobby; no advertising or
display for the accessory use should be visible from outside the
building.
C. Telephone and public utility installations, and cable television
installations.
A. Assembly plants.
B. Heavy machinery production.
C. Paint products manufacture.
D. Paper products manufacturing.
E. Petroleum products, storage, processing, and sales.
F. Planned industrial unit development.
G. Plastic manufacturing.
H. Self-storage and mini-warehousing.
I. Public utility and service uses, and civic buildings as follows:
(1) Substations.
(2) Gas regulator stations.
(3) Police stations, public works facilities.
(4) Railroad right-of-way, but not including railroad yards and shops,
other than for passenger purposes.
§ 295-279.2 HOBART CODE § 295-279.4
1:736
§ 295-279.5. Lot requirements per use.
§ 295-279.6. Height regulations.
Principal structures: 60 feet maximum, except as provided by § 295-13,
Height regulations.
§ 295-279.7. Building setbacks.
Principal
Structure
Accessory
Building Driveways
Front yard 40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
10 feet from
property line
Side yard 15 feet minimum 15 feet minimum 10 feet from
property line
Rear yard 20 feet minimum 20 feet minimum 10 feet from
property line
Corner lot 40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
40 feet minimum
from right-of-way
75 feet from
center line of
intersection
§ 295-279.8. Parking.
Parking shall conform to the requirements as set forth in Article XXVIII, Off-
Street Parking Requirements.
§ 295-279.9. Signs.
Signs shall be regulated as set forth in § 295-361, Regulation of signs.
§ 295-279.10. Other requirements.
(5) Telephone exchanges, transmission equipment buildings and
microwave relay towers.
A. Area: 40,000 square feet minimum.
B. Zoning lot frontage: 120 feet minimum.
A. Structures and buildings allowed in the I-3 Airport Industrial District
shall meet the regulations of this district and the other articles of this
chapter, as determined by the Village Zoning Administrator/Building
Inspector and approved by the Site Review Committee.
§ 295-279.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-279.10
1:737

ARTICLE XXV
AEO Adult Entertainment Overlay District
[Amended 12-16-2014]
§ 295-280. Intent.
Mindful of the fact that it is the intent of this article to protect the health,
safety and morals of the citizens of the Village of Hobart and to further
preserve the quality of family life and to preserve the rural and urban
characteristics of its neighborhoods in the Village of Hobart and prevent
adverse and deleterious effects contributing to the blight and downgrading
of neighborhoods, and also mindful of the effects of adult entertainment
upon minors and the violation of civil right of many persons partaking in
such entertainment and also mindful of the criminal activity and disruption
of public peace associated with such establishments, it is the intent of
this article to regulate the location of such establishments of adult
entertainment. By the enactment of this article of the chapter, the Village
Board of the Village of Hobart does not intend to give any explicit, implicit
or tacit approval or condone any activity relating to adult entertainment.
§ 295-281. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS — Includes bookstores, motion-picture
theaters, mini motion-picture theaters, bathhouses, massage parlors,
modeling studios, body painting studios, and cabarets, and are more
specifically defined as:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock and trade in books, magazines and other
periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis
on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein or an
establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display
of such material.
A.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with
a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" as defined herein for observation by patrons therein.
B.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER (OUTDOOR) — A parcel of land
from which individuals may view a motion picture presented out of
doors which presents material distinguishably characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified
sexual activity" or "specified anatomical areas."
C.
§ 295-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-281
1:739
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Less than completely and opaquely
covered: human genitals, pubic region; buttock; female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; and human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Is defined as:
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building
with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting materials
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" as defined herein for observation by patrons therein.
D.
ADULT BATHHOUSES — An establishment or business which provides
the services of baths of all kinds, including all forms and methods
of hydrotherapy, that is not operated by a medical practitioner or
a professional physical therapist licensed by the State of Wisconsin
and which establishment provides to its patrons an opportunity for
engaging in specified sexual activities as defined in this article.
E.
ADULT MASSAGE PARLORS — An establishment or business with or
without sleeping accommodations which provides the services of
massage and body manipulation, including exercises, heat and light
treatments of the body, and all forms and methods of physiotherapy, not
operated by a medical practitioner or professional physical therapist
licensed by the State of Wisconsin, and which establishment provides
for its patrons the opportunity to engage in "specified sexual activity"
as defined in this article.
F.
ADULT MODELING STUDIOS — An establishment or business which
provides the services of modeling for the purpose of reproducing the
human body wholly or partially in the nude by means of photography,
painting, sketching, drawing, or otherwise.
G.
ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIOS — An establishment or business
wherein patrons are afforded an opportunity to paint images on a body
which is wholly or partially nude. For purposes of this article, the adult
body painting studio shall not be deemed to include a tattoo parlor.
H.
ADULT CABARET — An establishment or business which features male
and/or female topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic
dancers, strippers, burlesque shows, male or female impersonators, or
similar entertainers.
I.
ADULT NOVELTY SHOP — An establishment or business having as a
substantial or significant portion of its stock and trade in novelty or
other items which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis
on, or designed for, specified sexual activity as defined herein or
simulating such activity.
J.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
§ 295-281 HOBART CODE § 295-281
1:740
§ 295-282. Adult Entertainment Overlay District.
So as to ensure a maximum benefit to the community and a minimum
impact upon existing and future uses of land, there is hereby created an
adult entertainment district which, subject to the standards set forth in the
article, may be used for an adult establishment as defined herein.
§ 295-283. General standards.
Adult bathhouses, body painting studios, bookstores, cabarets, massage
parlors, mini motion-picture theaters, modeling studios, motion-picture
theaters, motion-picture theaters (outdoor), and novelty shops in the Adult
Entertainment District.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breast.
C.
A. The Adult Entertainment Overlay district shall only be established by
conditional use permit in situations in which the underlying district is
an I-2 Industrial Park District. [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No.
01-2015]
B. No more than one of the above adult uses may be established on any
one parcel and the establishment of any of the above adult uses shall be
at least 1,500 feet from the establishment of any other adult use. No
adult use shall be permitted within 2,000 feet of any land zoned
residential or within 2,000 feet of a planned unit development, a
residential dwelling, school, or public park.
C. There shall be no sale of intoxicating beverages in the Adult
Entertainment District.
D. Signs advertising any of the aforementioned adult uses shall conform
with § 295-361 of this chapter, with the exception, however, that no
tower or portable signs or billboards shall be permitted on the
premises, and with the further exception that signs will not depict
specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas as defined
in the article, and provided further that there shall be no flashing or
traveling lights located outside the building.
E. Adequate parking shall be provided in a lighted area.
F. There shall be no display windows on the premises.
G. The owner and/or operator of the adult entertainment establishment
shall agree to comply with all State, Federal, and Local laws and
ordinances, including obscenity, liquor and cabaret laws, and shall
further insure that minors are not permitted on the premises.
Solicitation for purposes of prostitution shall be strictly prohibited.
§ 295-281 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-283
1:741
§ 295-284. Principal uses.
No principal uses shall be permitted as a matter of right in the Adult
Entertainment (Overlay) District. All uses shall be conditional uses.
§ 295-285. Conditional uses.
The following are conditional uses in the Adult Entertainment (Overlay)
District:
H. In the case of adult cabarets, the hours of operation for such
establishments shall be limited to the same hours of operation for bars
and taverns within the Village.
I. Outdoor adult motion-picture theaters shall confine their hours of
operation to those hours of operation established for bars and taverns
within the Village. Outdoor adult motion-picture theaters shall also
have the viewing screen located in such a fashion as to not be visible
from any road, street or highway or residence and the premises shall be
surrounded by solid fencing at least eight feet in height. All theaters
shall be in compliance with § 134.46 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
J. Prior to the establishment of an Adult Entertainment District, an
inventory of the surrounding area and population shall be made by a
Registered Land Surveyor or Planner, along with a study of the
proposed development and plans for the area so as to enable the
Planning and Zoning Commission to make appropriate findings relating
to the effect of the establishment of such a district in that area.
K. The owner of the parcel upon which the adult entertainment use is to be
established and the operator of the establishment and owner of the
establishment shall appear in person before the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
A. Adult bathhouses.
B. Adult body painting studios.
C. Adult bookstores.
D. Adult cabarets.
E. Adult massage parlors.
F. Adult mini motion-picture theaters.
G. Adult modeling studios.
H. Adult motion-picture theater.
I. Adult motion-picture theater (outdoor).
J. Adult novelty shops.
§ 295-283 HOBART CODE § 295-285
1:742
§ 295-286. Underlying district standards.
Lot area and width, building height and area, yard requirements, parking
requirements, and sign requirements required in the underlying district
shall be complied with in the Adult Entertainment Overlay District.
§ 295-287. Procedure for establishing Adult Entertainment District.
K. All accessory, conditional, and principal uses of the underlying district.
A. An application for the establishment of an Adult Entertainment District
petitioning for the issuance of a conditional use permit shall be made in
accordance with § 295-342 and this section.
B. No application for an Adult Entertainment District shall be approved by
the Village Board unless, however, the following findings have been
made:
(1) That all the standards and requirements in this article have been
met.
(2) That the proposed use will not be a detriment to the public welfare.
(3) That the proposed zoning change is consistent with the general
intent of a Comprehensive Plan in existence.
(4) That the existing streets and utility services are adequate for the
proposed use.
(5) That the establishment of an adult entertainment establishment
will in no way contribute to the deterioration of the surrounding
neighborhood.
(6) That the presence of the adult entertainment establishment will not
have a harmful influence on children residing in or frequenting the
area.
C. Approval of the application shall cause the Official Zoning Map to be
annotated as an Adult Entertainment District (AEO).
§ 295-285 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-287
1:743

ARTICLE XXVI
Gambling District Overlay
§ 295-288. Intent.
Mindful of the fact that it is the intent of this article to protect the health,
safety and morals of the citizens of the Village of Hobart and to further
preserve the quality of family life and to preserve the rural and urban
characteristics of its neighborhoods in the Village of Hobart and prevent
adverse and deleterious effects contributing to the blight and downgrading
of neighborhoods, and also mindful of the effects of gambling upon minors
and the rights of Indian tribes under Wisconsin law to conduct some forms
of gaming and the civil rights of many persons partaking in gaming and also
mindful of the criminal activity and disruption of public peace associated
with such gambling places, it is the intent of this article to regulate
gambling. By the enactment of this article of the chapter, the Village Board
of the Village of Hobart does not intend to give any explicit, implicit or tacit
approval or condone any activity relating to gambling.
§ 295-289. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated in this section:
GAMBLING — To play or game for money or other stake; hence to stake
money or other thing of value on an uncertain event and shall include a
"bet" as that term is defined in Wisconsin Statutes § 945.01(1) as may be
amended from time to time.
GAMBLING PLACE — Set forth in Wisconsin Statutes § 945.01(4), as may
be amended from time to time.
§ 295-290. Gambling district.
So as to ensure a maximum benefit to the community and a minimum impact
upon existing and future uses of land, there is hereby created a gambling
district which, subject to the standards set forth in the article, may be used
for gambling.
§ 295-291. General standards.
The following standards shall be applicable to any gambling place within a
Gambling District:
A. The Gambling District (Overlay) shall only be established by
Conditional Use Permit in all underlying districts.
(1) Exception. This overlay shall be prohibited in the Exclusive
Agricultural Zoning District. [Added 12-16-2014]
B. No more than one gambling place may be established on any one parcel
and the location of any gambling place shall be at least 1,500 feet from
§ 295-288 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-291
1:745
the location of any other gambling place. No gambling place shall be
permitted within 2,000 feet of any land zoned residential or within
2,000 feet of a planned unit development, a residential dwelling, school,
or public park.
C. There shall be no sale or consumption of intoxicating beverages in the
Gambling District without a valid liquor license issued by the Village.
D. Signs advertising any of the aforementioned gambling places shall
conform with Article XXV and § 295-361 of this chapter, with the
exception, however, that no tower or portable signs or billboards shall
be permitted on the premises, and with the further exception that there
shall be no flashing or traveling lights located outside the building.
E. Adequate parking shall be provided in a lighted area and per the
requirements of Article XXVIII and § 295-362.
F. There shall be no display windows on the premises.
G. The owner and/or operator of the gambling place shall agree in writing
to comply with all state, federal, and local laws and ordinances and
shall consent to the jurisdiction of the Village court for the purpose of
enforcement of Village laws and ordinances, the Brown County Circuit
Court for the purpose of enforcement of state laws and the Federal
District Court for the Eastern District of Wisconsin for the purpose of
enforcement of federal laws.
H. The hours of operation for such gambling places shall be established by
the Village Board and shall be set forth in the conditional use permit.
I. As part of the application process, the applicant must provide to the
Village an inventory of the surrounding area and population, both of
which shall be made by a Registered Land Surveyor or Planner, along
with a study of the proposed development and plans for the area so as
to enable the Planning and Zoning Commission to make appropriate
findings relating to the effect of the gambling place on such a district in
that area.
J. The owner of the parcel upon which the gambling place is to be
established, the operator of the gambling place and owner of the
gambling place shall appear in person before the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
K. Adequate security measures include but are not limited to:
(1) Primary jurisdiction of, and unrestricted access to the subject
property by Village Police;
(2) Lighting of all public areas, including parking lots; and
(3) Security and surveillance systems.
§ 295-291 HOBART CODE § 295-292
1:746
§ 295-292. Principal uses.
No principal uses shall be permitted as a matter of right in the Gambling
District (Overlay). All uses shall be conditional uses.
§ 295-293. Conditional uses.
The following are conditional uses in the Gambling District:
§ 295-294. Underlying district standards.
Lot area and width, building height and area, yard requirements, parking
requirements, and sign requirements required in the underlying district
shall be complied with in the Gambling District (overlay).
§ 295-295. Procedure for establishing Gambling District.
A. Gambling.
B. Gambling places.
C. All accessory, conditional, and principal uses of the underlying district.
A. An application for the establishment of a Gambling District and petition
for the issuance of a conditional use permit shall be made in accordance
with § 295-342 and this article.
B. No application for a Gambling District shall be approved by the Village
Board unless, however, the following findings have been made:
(1) That all the standards and requirements in this article have been
met.
(2) That the proposed use will not be a detriment to the public welfare.
(3) That the proposed zoning change is consistent with the general
intent of the Comprehensive Plan in existence.
(4) That the existing streets and utility services are adequate for the
proposed use.
(5) That the establishment of a gambling place will in no way
contribute to the deterioration of the surrounding neighborhood.
(6) That the presence of the gambling place will not have a harmful
influence on children residing in or frequenting the area.
C. Approval of the application shall cause the Official Zoning Map to be
annotated as a Gambling District (Overlay) (GDO).
§ 295-292 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-295
1:747

ARTICLE XXVII
Manufactured Home Parks
§ 295-296. Regulations.
§ 295-297. Definitions.
§ 295-298. Location outside of manufactured home park.
A. This article shall regulate the parking, location, and maintaining of all
manufactured homes and manufactured home parks within the Village
of Hobart.
B. Manufactured home parks shall be allowed as conditional uses in the
R-1 Residential District only.
C. Manufactured home parks shall be prohibited in all other zoning
districts within the Village of Hobart.
D. No manufactured home park space shall be rented or leased for a
period of less than 30 days.
A. The following definitions are in addition to Article III to further clarify
and explain word usage in conjunction with this article on
manufactured home parks.
B. Manufactured homes, manufactured home parks, and accessory use of
a building shall apply, as defined in Article III, Definitions.
C. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEPENDENT UNIT — A manufactured home lacking a bath or shower
and toilet facilities.
INDEPENDENT UNIT — A manufactured home that contains a kitchen,
toilet facilities, bath or shower, and fully equipped for living purposes.
PERSON — Shall be construed to include an individual, partnership,
firm, company, corporation, whether tenant, owner, lessee, licensee or
other agent, heir or assign.
SPACE — A plot of land, whether leased, sold, rented, or transferred,
which is intended for location of one manufactured home only.
UNIT — One manufactured home.
A. No person shall park or occupy a manufactured home outside of an
approved manufactured home park, except as provided for in § 295-299
of this article.
B. Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is permitted on any
street, alley or highway for not longer than one hour, subject to any
other and further prohibition imposed by the traffic and parking
regulation or ordinance for that street, alley, or highway.
§ 295-296 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-299
1:749
§ 295-299. Permit for location outside of manufactured home park.
(Permits issued under this section are nontransferable and will expire upon
change of occupancy.)
§ 295-300. Manufactured home park license.
A. Upon a showing of a hardship and/or immediate necessity for use, the
Village Board may issue special written permits allowing the location of
a manufactured home outside of a manufactured home park for a period
not to exceed 90 days for any one premises in any twelve-month period.
The permit shall be granted only upon the written consent of the owner,
legal agent of the owner, or the lessee of the location for which the
permit is issued. Not more than one manufactured home shall be
granted a permit to locate on any one premises outside a manufactured
home park. Any violation of this clause shall comply with the penalty as
set forth in Article XXXI, Administration and Enforcement, of this
chapter.
B. Application for the permit shall be made to the Village Clerk-Treasurer
and shall be accompanied by an inspection fee in an amount as set from
time to time by the Village Board, and shall state the name and
permanent addresses of the occupants of the manufactured home, the
license number of the manufactured home and towing vehicle, place of
last stay, intended purpose of stay at requested location, whether any
occupant is employed in state; the exact location of premises, and the
owner's and/or occupant's sanitary facilities, and the permission of the
occupant of the dwelling house for their uses; and a statement that all
wastes from manufactured home occupancy will be disposed of in a
sanitary manner. Application for location on a vacant lot or parcel of
land shall be accompanied by a statement of the nature and location of
sanitary facilities, which must include a safe water supply and toilet
within 200 feet of the proposed location of the manufactured home, and
a statement of permission from the owner for their use.182
C. Manufactured homes and dwellings in conjunction with an operating
farm in conformance with § 295-221D may be allowed as a conditional
use to be used solely by resident owner or laborer actively engaged in
the farming operation.
D. All occupied manufactured homes not located in a manufactured home
park shall be subject to the remaining regulations of this chapter.
A. No person shall establish, operate, or maintain, or permit to be
established, operated, or maintained upon any property owned, leased,
rented, or controlled by him/her a manufactured home park within the
Village of Hobart, without first securing a license from the Village
182. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 295-299 HOBART CODE § 295-300
1:750
§ 295-301. Manufactured home park plan.
Board. The license shall expire one year after issuance and must be
renewed annually.
B. An annual fee of $100 per 50 spaces, as stated in § 66.0435(3), Wis.
Stats., shall be charged for the manufactured home park license or the
renewal thereof.183
C. The application for a license or renewal thereof shall be made on forms
furnished by the Village Clerk-Treasurer, and shall include the name
and address of the owner in fee of the tract (if the fee is vested in some
person other than the applicant, a duly verified statement by that
person that the application is authorized by him/her to construct or
maintain the manufactured home park and make the application), and
such legal description of the premises upon which the manufactured
home park is or will be located as will readily identify and definitely
locate the premises.
D. The applicant shall further comply with manufactured home regulations
as set forth in the Wisconsin State Statutes.
A. Prior to the issuing of any license or permit for a manufactured home
park, the developer shall submit 10 copies of the manufactured home
park plan to the Village Planning and Zoning Commission of Hobart.
The plan shall be approved, in writing, by the Village Planning and
Zoning Commission/Site Review Committee prior to the start of
construction or development of the park.
B. Each Manufactured Home Park Plan submitted to the Village Planning
and Zoning Commission shall require the following information:
(1) Exact area and extent of the proposed park, accompanied by a legal
description or certified survey map. Plans shall be drawn at a scale
of one inch to 200 feet minimum.
(2) All roadways, driveways, and ingress and egress points, and
parking bays.
(3) Complete layout of storm, sanitary and water systems for the park.
(4) Plan for electrical distribution and lighting facilities.
(5) Method and plan of garbage removal.
(6) Plans for providing adequate fire protection for the park.
(7) Meet Article XXXIII, Site Review/Development and Design
Standards, requirements.
183. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 295-300 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-301
1:751
§ 295-302. Driveways, roadways, and parking.
§ 295-303. Site and yard requirements.
The following regulations shall apply to all manufactured home spaces that
are sold, rented, leased, or transferred in an approved manufactured home
park.
C. All manufactured home parks shall further comply with the sanitation
and health regulations as set forth by the State Department of Safety
and Professional Services.184
D. Electrical service to manufactured home spaces shall conform to the
regulations as set forth in the Wisconsin State Electrical Code.
E. An adequate supply of pure water, furnished through a pipe distribution
system with supply faucets shall be furnished for drinking and domestic
purposes.
F. All manufactured homes shall be independent units.
A. All drives, parking areas, and walkways shall be hard surfaced.
B. Within the manufactured home parks, a minimum roadway width of 30
feet shall be established.
C. The manufactured home park shall have direct access to a state
highway, county highway, or Village road. There shall be sufficient
points of ingress and egress to provide proper traffic movement, as
determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
D. There shall be two hard-surfaced off-street automobile parking spaces
for each manufactured home unit. Minimum area of parking space shall
be 360 square feet.185
A. Manufactured homes within manufactured home parks shall be a
conditional use in the Residential R-1 District.
B. The minimum size of a manufactured home park shall be five acres in
sewered area.
C. Space size.
(1) Unsewered locations: (hardship sites only). Each manufactured
home space.
(a) Area: 1 1/2 acre minimum.
(b) Width: 100 feet minimum.
184. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
185. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 295-301 HOBART CODE § 295-303
1:752
§ 295-304. Parking fee and assessment.
The Village Board of Hobart shall have the authority to impose a parking
fee on manufactured homes within an approved manufactured home park
or outside of an approved park, as provided for in Wisconsin State Statutes.
The parking fee shall be based on the following regulations:
(2) Sewered locations. Each manufactured home space.
(a) Area: 5,000 square feet minimum.
(b) Width: 50 feet minimum.
D. A concrete or bituminous pad shall be constructed on each
manufactured home space. The minimum size of this pad shall be 10
feet wide by 15 feet in length. The minimum thickness of the surfacing
shall be four inches. The pad shall enclose all utility connections for the
manufactured home.
E. Each manufactured home space shall provide a front yard setback of 10
feet and a rear yard setback of 20 feet. Side yards shall have a minimum
setback of five feet each.
F. The yard setbacks shall be seeded and landscaped and in no case shall
they be used for off-street parking or be occupied by a manufactured
home and/or its accessory buildings, except for the following
conditions:
(1) Structures for utility outlets and garages serving more than one
manufactured home space may be located within the side or rear
yard setback of a common lot line.
(2) The hitch transportation devices used for pulling the manufactured
home must be removed prior to occupancy.
(3) Unit must sit on approved frost wall with concrete block skirting.
(4) Roof pitch must be minimum 5:12. Eave ends must be 18 inches
with eave trough.
A. There is hereby imposed on each owner or operator of a manufactured
home park licensed hereunder a parking permit fee on each occupied
manufactured home unit which shall have been parked in such
manufactured home park. The parking fee shall also apply to
manufactured home units located outside of an approved manufactured
home park. The amount of the parking fee shall be determined by the
Village Board of Hobart and the local Village Assessor in accordance
with Wisconsin State Statute, § 66.0435, and as amended. No
manufactured home space shall be rented for a period of less than 30
days.
B. The local Assessor shall determine the total fair market value of each
occupied manufactured home, minus the tax exempt household
§ 295-303 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-304
1:753
§ 295-305. Management.
furnishings, and then equalized to the general level of assessment on
other real and personal property in the Village of Hobart.
C. The value of each occupied manufactured home thus determined shall
be multiplied by the tax rate established on the preceding May 1
assessment of general property.
D. Total annual parking permit fee shall be divided by 12 to determine
monthly fee.
E. A new fee rate and a new valuation shall be established each January
and shall continue for that calendar year.
F. Said parking fee shall be collected by the owner or operator of the
manufactured home park and paid to the local taxing authority on or
before the 10th day of the month following the period for which such
parking permit is due.
G. No fee shall be imposed on a manufactured home from another state
unless said unit has been placed within the Village of Hobart for a sixtyday
period.
H. The Village of Hobart may retain 10% of the parking fee for
administration costs.
I. The Village of Hobart shall pay to the school district in which park is
located, within 20 days after the end of each period, such proportion of
the remainder of the fees collected in the preceding month as the ratio
of the most recent property tax levy for school purposes bears to the
total tax levy for all purposes in the municipality.
A. In every manufactured home park there shall be located the office of
the attendant or person in charge of said park. A copy of the park
license and of this article shall be kept in said office.
B. It is hereby made the duty of the attendant or person in charge,
together with the licensee, to:
(1) Keep a register of all occupants, to be open at all times to
inspection by state, federal, and local officials, which shall show for
all occupants of the manufactured home park the following:
(a) Names and addresses.
(b) Number and ages of all children.
(c) Number of public elementary school children.
(d) Number of public secondary school children.
(e) State of legal residence.
§ 295-304 HOBART CODE § 295-305
1:754
§ 295-306. Violations and penalties.
Violation of this article shall result in a penalty imposed upon the violator
as regulated in Article XXXI, Administration and Enforcement, § 295-344,
Violations and penalties.
(f) Dates of entrance and departure.
(g) License numbers of all manufactured homes and towing or
other vehicles.
(h) State issuing such license.
(i) Purpose of stay in park.
(j) Place of last location and length of stay.
(k) Place of employment of each occupant.
(2) Maintain the park in a clean, orderly, and sanitary condition at all
times.
(3) Insure that the provisions of this article are complied with and
enforced and report promptly to the proper authorities any
violations of this article or any other violations of law which may
come to his/her attention.
(4) Report to the Village Clerk-Treasurer all cases of person or animals
affected or suspected of being affected with any communicable
diseases.186
(5) Maintain in convenient places, approved by the Hobart Fire
Inspector, hand fire extinguishers in the ratio of one for each eight
manufactured home spaces.
(6) Collect the monthly parking permit fee provided for in § 295-304 of
this article. A book shall be kept showing the names of persons
paying said service charges and the amount paid.
(7) Submit with the total monthly parking permit fee payment to the
Village Clerk-Treasurer, a monthly report showing the names of
persons paying said fees, and the amount paid if less than for a full
month. The report to also indicate departure time for current
tenants, and arrival time for new tenants, including departure time
if occurring the same month.
186. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 295-305 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-306
1:755

ARTICLE XXVIII
Off-Street Parking Requirements
§ 295-307. Applicability.
The following regulations shall apply to all zoning districts within the
Village of Hobart.
§ 295-308. General.
§ 295-309. Parking standards.
A. All parking spaces required to serve buildings or uses erected or
established after the effective date of this chapter shall conform to the
requirements herein.
B. Any application for a building permit or for an occupancy certificate,
whereon building permit is required, shall include therewith a plat plan,
drawn to scale, and fully dimensional, showing any off-street parking or
loading facilities to be provided in compliance with this chapter.
C. All off-street parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate
means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will
least interfere with traffic movement.
A. All angle parking shall conform to the requirements as set forth below:
Angle Stall Depth
Width of Aisles
(feet)
30° 17 12
45° 19 15
60° 20 18
90° 18 28
B. Except for residential uses, the design of parking lots or areas shall be
subject to the approval of the Village Planning and Zoning Commission
in accordance with standards herein required.
C. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be directed
away from residential properties and public streets in such a way as to
not create a nuisance.
D. All off-street parking lots shall adhere to Wisconsin Statutes § 346.503
and 346.56 as to requiring handicapped parking.
E. All driveways are means by which vehicles travel between the street
and approved parking spaces and are not to be considered for approved
parking spaces.
§ 295-307 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-309
1:757
F. Location. All parking spaces required to serve employees and visitors of
buildings erected or established after the effective date of this chapter
shall be located on the same zoning lot as the building or use served.
Off-street parking areas may be located in the front of the buildings in
any district, with a minimum of 25 feet of green space/open space from
the property line. However, uninterrupted walkways shall be provided
between the buildings and adjacent sidewalks or trails to allow
pedestrians to safely access the buildings without crossing the parking
areas. [Amended 3-17-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-02]
G. Each parking space shall not be less than 180 square feet exclusive of
the space required for ingress and egress. Minimum width of the
parking space shall be nine feet. [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No.
01-2015]
H. Where parking facilities are permitted on land other than the zoning lot
on which the building or use served is located, such facilities shall be in
the same possession as the zoning lot occupied by the building or use to
which the parking facilities are accessory.
I. All off-street parking areas for more than 10 vehicles shall be graded
and surfaced so as to be dust-free and properly drained, and shall have
the aisles and spaces clearly marked.
J. All parking areas and appurtenant passageways and driveways serving
commercial uses shall be illuminated adequately from the hours of
sunset to sunrise when the use is in operation. Adequate shielding shall
be provided by commercial uses to protect adjacent residential zones
from the glare of such illumination and from that of automobile
headlights.
K. Where a building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of
this chapter and, provided that construction is begun within six months
of such effective date and diligently prosecuted to completion, parking
and loading facilities in the amounts required for the issuance of said
building permit may be provided in lieu of any different amounts
required by this chapter.
L. When the intensity of use of any building, structure, or premises shall
be increased through the addition of dwelling units, gross floor area,
seating capacity or other units of measurement specified herein for the
required parking or loading facilities, then parking and loading
facilities as required herein shall be provided for such increase in
intensity of use and for at least 50% of any existing deficiency in
parking or loading facilities.
M. When determination of the number of off-street parking spaces
required by this chapter results in a requirement of a fractional space,
any fraction in excess of 1/2 shall be counted as one parking space.
Parking spaces required on an employee basis shall be based on the
§ 295-309 HOBART CODE § 295-309
1:758
§ 295-310. Specific requirements for off-street parking.
maximum number of employees on duty or residing, or both, on the
premises at any one time.
N. None of the off-street parking facilities as required in this chapter shall
be required for any existing building or use, unless said building or use
shall be enlarged, in which case the provisions of this chapter shall
apply only to the enlarged portion of the building or use.
O. Accessory off-street parking facilities in existence on the effective date
of this chapter and located on the same lot as the building or use served
shall not hereafter be reduced below the requirements for a similar new
building or use under the provisions of this chapter.
A. Apartment hotels. One and one-half parking spaces shall be provided
for each dwelling unit or lodging room and additional space as shall be
required for supplemental uses.
B. Educational (non-boarding) and cultural institutions.
(1) Elementary and middle schools. One parking space shall be
provided for each employee and adequate visitor space to be
determined by the Board of Education.
(2) Senior high schools. One parking space shall be provided for each
employee, and one parking space shall be provided for each five
students, based on the maximum number of students attending
classes on the premises at any one time during any twenty-fourhour
period.
(3) Public libraries, art galleries, museums and aquariums. One space
shall be provided for each two employees plus additional parking
space equal to 50% of capacity in persons.
(4) School auditoriums and gymnasiums. One parking space shall be
provided for each eight seats.
(5) Stadiums and grandstands. One parking space shall be provided for
each eight seats.
(6) Colleges, junior colleges, and universities. One parking space shall
be provided for each employee, and one parking space shall be
provided for each five students, based on the maximum number of
students attending classes on the premises at any one time during
any twenty-four hour period.
(7) Fraternities, sororities, and dormitories in conjunction with
colleges, junior colleges, and universities. One parking space shall
be provided for each three active members or dormitory residents,
plus one parking space for the manager.
C. Health and medical institutions.
§ 295-309 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-310
1:759
(1) Convalescent homes, nursing homes, rest homes, institutions for
the care of the aged and for children and sanitariums. One parking
space shall be provided for each four beds, plus one parking space
for each two employees (other than staff doctors), plus one parking
space for each doctor assigned to the staff.
(2) Hospitals. One parking space shall be provided for each four
hospital beds, plus one parking space for each two employees and
doctors assigned to the staff.
(3) Group homes. One parking space for each four occupants
authorized and one parking space for each employee on the
maximum staff.
D. Multiple-family dwellings. One and one-half parking spaces shall be
provided for each dwelling unit. In addition, there shall be provided one
guest parking space for each four units in all multiple dwellings or
fractions thereof.
E. Philanthropic and charitable institutions. One parking space shall be
provided for each employee, plus spaces adequate in number, as
determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission, to serve the
public.
F. Planned developments. Parking spaces shall be provided on the basis of
the required spaces for each individual use.
G. Public utility and service uses. One parking space shall be provided for
each two employees, plus spaces adequate in number, as determined by
the Planning and Zoning Commission, to serve the public.
H. Radio and television stations. One parking space shall be provided for
each two employees.
I. Religious institutions.
(1) Churches, chapels, temples, and synagogues. One parking space
shall be provided for each four seats.
(2) Convents, seminaries, monasteries, rectories, parsonages, parish
houses, and religious retreats. Parking space shall be provided in
adequate number, as determined by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, to serve persons employed or residing on the
premises, as well as for the visiting public.
J. Recreational.
(1) Stadium, ballparks, and other outdoor sports' arenas. One parking
space for each four permanent seats. Such parking shall be located
no further than 800 feet to the nearest corner of the property on
which the place of assembly is located.
§ 295-310 HOBART CODE § 295-310
1:760
(2) Theaters, indoor sports' arenas, and auditoriums, other than those
incidental to schools. One parking space for each four seats, plus
one additional parking space for each two employees on the
maximum shift.
(3) Bowling alleys. Four parking spaces per alley, plus additional
requirements for such other uses as eating and drinking
establishments.
(4) Dance halls, skating rinks, lodge halls, exhibition halls, without
fixed seats. One parking space for each 80 square feet of usable
floor area.
(5) Golf driving ranges or shooting ranges. One parking space for each
driving tee or shooter station.
(6) Miniature courses or putting greens. Two parking spaces for each
golf hole.
(7) Game and athletic courts. Two parking spaces for each court.
(8) Golf courses. Eight parking spaces per hole and one for each 35
square feet of gross floor area in the principal building connected
with the course, plus one for each 200 square feet of gross floor
area for adjoining accessory commercial uses.
(9) Swimming pools (other than those used in accessory uses with
residential and commercial uses). One parking space for every 100
square feet of pool area, one parking space for each employee on
the maximum shift. Customer pickup and dropoff zone shall be
provided on a curbed directional driveway with the parking zones
behind the street setback area, said parking zone not to interfere
with the other parking requirements.
(10) Marinas, harbors, and launching ramps. One parking space for
each boat berth or on-site storage space. In addition, double-length
car-trailer spaces shall be required, if launching ramp is available,
per Planning and Zoning Commission requirements.
K. Rooming houses. One and one-half parking spaces shall be provided for
each rooming unit, plus one space for the owner or manager.
L. Single-family detached dwellings. Two parking spaces shall be provided
for each dwelling unit not to be located within the right-of-way.
M. Two-family dwellings. Two parking spaces shall be provided for each
dwelling unit not to be located within the right-of-way.
N. Day-care centers and nursery schools. One parking space for each eight
children authorized and one parking space for each staff member;
however, such parking requirement for children authorized may be
reduced to one parking space per 10 children, if a customer pickup and
dropoff zone is provided on a curved directional driveway with the
§ 295-310 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-310
1:761
parking zones behind the street setback area, said parking zone not to
interfere with the other parking requirements.
O. Day-care homes, family. One parking space for each eight children
authorized and one parking space for each staff member; however, if
the staff resides in the home, the required spaces and driveway
standards of a single-family home may apply, upon the discretion of the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
P. Commercial and retail service uses.
(1) Animal hospitals and kennels. Two parking spaces shall be
provided for each employee.
(2) Dry-cleaning establishments, laundromats, and receiving stations.
One parking space shall be provided for each two employees and
every two automatic self-service units.
(3) Funeral homes and mortuaries. One parking space for each five
seats or 100 square feet of floor area for each chapel or parlor,
whichever is greater.
(4) Governmental buildings, United States, state, county, and city. One
parking space for each two employees, plus such additional space
deemed necessary by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(5) Hotels. One parking space shall be provided for each lodging room,
plus one parking space for each employee, plus additional spaces
for affiliated uses, as required by this chapter.
(6) Medical and dental clinics. Three parking spaces shall be provided
for each staff member and regularly visited doctor.
(7) Motels and rooming units. One and one-half parking spaces shall be
provided for each dwelling unit or lodging room, plus one parking
space for each employee.
(8) Planned development. Parking facilities shall be provided on the
basis of the required spaces for each individual use.
(9) Restaurants, taverns, supper clubs, cocktail lounges and night
clubs. Parking spaces equal in number to 50% of the capacity in
persons shall be provided, plus one space for each employee.
(10) Retail stores and shopping centers. One parking space shall be
provided for each 150 square feet of floor area.
(11) Schools, music, dance, or business. One parking space shall be
provided for each two employees, plus one space for each five
students.
(12) Theaters, indoor. Parking spaces equal in number to 50% of the
seating capacity in persons shall be provided.
§ 295-310 HOBART CODE § 295-310
1:762
(13) Banks, savings and loan associations, and other financial
institutions. One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area,
plus one parking space per employee on the maximum shift.
(14) Drive-in banks, savings and loan associations, and other financial
institutions. Six spaces for drive-in window, plus four spaces for
each additional drive-in window, in addition, one parking space per
employee on the maximum shift.
(15) Barber shops, beauty salons, and other similar personal service
use. Two spaces per operator's station and one space per employee
on the maximum shift.
(16) Bus and motor coach depot or station. One space per employee
during maximum shift, plus six spaces per bus at peak loading
capacity.
(17) Bus and motor coach service garage. One space per employee on
the maximum shift, plus suitable area for servicing and parking bus
and motor coaches.
(18) Carry-out restaurants, confectioneries, and drive-in restaurants.
One parking space per 50 square feet of net patron floor area,
excluding rest rooms, plus one space per employee on the
maximum shift, plus six stacked parking spaces for each vehicle
service window.
(19) Automobile service station uses and automobile wash facilities.
One space per employee on the maximum shift and two spaces per
service stall or bay, plus three stacked spaces per each fueling
position or car washing staff.
(20) Motor vehicles, machinery sales and repair garage. One parking
space for each 400 square feet of floor area, plus one space per
employee on the maximum shift.
(21) Shops repairing household appliances and equipment. One parking
space per 200 square feet of floor area, plus one space per
employee on the maximum shift.
(22) Furniture and large appliance store. One parking space for each
500 square feet of gross floor area, plus one parking space per
employee on the maximum shift.
(23) Outdoor sales areas, such as for new or used automobile, boat or
trailer sales, lumber or building material yards, plant nurseries, or
similar uses. One parking space for each 1,000 square feet of
uncovered sales area, plus one parking space per employee on the
maximum shift.
(24) General retail sales, including department stores not located in a
shopping center. One parking space per 200 square feet of gross
floor area, plus one per employee on the maximum shift.
§ 295-310 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-310
1:763
(25) Offices, business, governmental, and professional offices (except
health care, but including counseling services). One parking space
shall be provided for each 300 square feet of floor area for the first
8,000 square feet of gross floor area. One additional parking space
shall be furnished for each 700 square feet or fraction thereof for
the next 12,000 square feet of total floor area, and one additional
parking space shall be provided for each 1,000 square feet, or
fraction thereof, for total area in excess of 20,000 square feet. One
parking space shall also be provided for each staff member or
employee on the maximum shift.
(26) Cultural and community centers, such as libraries, art galleries,
and museums. One parking space for every 300 square feet of
visitor use area, plus one parking space for each 1.5 employees on
the maximum shift.
(27) Business (not listed above). One parking space for each two staff
members or employees, plus such additional parking space as may
be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission for customers
or users.
Q. Industrial districts and uses, unless specifically mentioned. Off-street
parking spaces accessory to uses allowed in the several industrial
districts shall be provided in accordance with the following minimum
requirements.
(1) For the uses listed hereunder, one parking space shall be provided
for every 1,000 square feet of building area or for every two
employees, whichever constitutes the greater number of stalls:
(a) Air, motor, railroad, water freight terminals, and repair shops.
(b) Contractors' shops and yards.
(c) Greenhouses, wholesale.
(d) Mail-order houses.
(e) Radio and television stations.
(f) Sewage treatment plants, municipal.
(g) Warehouses.
(h) Manufacturing establishments.
(i) Printing and publishing establishments.
(j) Any establishments for production, fabrication, processing,
cleaning, servicing, testing, repair, or storage of materials,
goods, or products.
(k) Building materials sales yards.
§ 295-310 HOBART CODE § 295-310
1:764
(2) In the industrial districts and for any industry, one space for every
1,000 square feet of building area or for every two employees,
whichever constitutes the greater number of stalls. Industries
operating more than one shift must have additional spaces to
provide for change of personnel at shift change times.
§ 295-310 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-310
1:765

ARTICLE XXIX
Man-Made Bodies of Water
§ 295-311. Purpose.
This is an article defining the term "man-made body of water," regulating
the design, maintenance, and use thereof, and providing a penalty for
violations.
§ 295-312. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARTIFICIAL LAKE — A man-made body of water 1/2 acre or larger.
POND — A man-made body of water less than 1/2 acre.
WATER GARDEN — A man-made body of water 800 square feet or less of
surface area.
§ 295-313. Zoning.
Artificial lakes shall be a conditional use in all zoning districts.
§ 295-314. Exemptions.
§ 295-315. Approval and submittals.
A permit is required from the Village of Hobart for all excavations or
mounding which will result in a pond or lake as defined herein. Any
alterations to existing man-made bodies of water other than routine
maintenance are subject to the provisions of this article. To obtain such
A. Swimming pools as defined in this chapter.
B. Manure storage pits, as defined and designed in Brown County
Ordinance Chapter 26, Animal Waste Management, and with the
following conditions. Such exempt manure storage pits shall be:
(1) Located wholly in Agriculture or Exclusive Agriculture zoning.
(2) A minimum of 300 feet from any existing residential area.
(3) Outside the sewer service area.
(4) Fenced according to the regulations contained herein.
C. Water gardens, 800 square feet or less in surface area.
D. Detention ponds being constructed as part of a Village-approved
stormwater management system as long as they are designed and
constructed in accordance with the set standards of Brown County,
EPA, and DNR.
§ 295-311 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-315
1:767
a permit, an application shall be made to the Village of Hobart Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector on the proper forms provided by the
Village. Applications shall include a site plan scaled to at least one inch
equaling 200 feet with the following:
§ 295-316. Design standards.
A. A map showing the location of the premises and the adjoining
properties within 500 feet.
B. Any existing or future buildings, easements, property lines, and
setbacks.
C. Any existing waterways, floodways and navigable streams.
D. A scaled section view of the pond or lake with slopes, depths, high and
low water levels.
E. Outflow design.
F. Methods of maintaining water level.
G. Proposed access to the site.
H. Proposed regrading and revegetation of the site after completion.
I. Contour intervals of the proposed site at intervals of 20 feet.
J. If the excavation site shall fall within a county floodplain, shoreland, or
conservancy zone district, the regulations as set forth in the Shoreland-
Floodplain Protection Ordinances for Brown County shall apply. Brown
County, Department of Natural Resources, and EPA permits must
accompany application if required.
K. Applications shall be approved or denied within 60 days from the date
all information is received in order. No application shall be processed or
approved without adequate information.
A. All ponds and artificial lakes shall be designed within the scope of this
article. In all cases where a portion of the pond or lake will have a slope
of greater than 3:1, a slope of no greater than 3:1 shall be maintained
around the entire perimeter of said pond to a minimum water depth of
48 inches before the greater slope may occur.
B. All ponds and lakes shall have an outflow to maintain the maximum
normal water level; the size of this outflow shall be determined by
design and shall be capable of removing one inch of water from the
surface of the entire pond or lake every 12 hours. The size of the
outflow pipe shall not be less than six inches in diameter. Calculations
shall be provided with the permit application. Outflows shall not flow
directly onto adjacent parcels of property. Outflow discharge may cross
adjacent parcels through a natural existing waterway only, but in no
case shall this discharge create a waterway or a nuisance. A safety
§ 295-315 HOBART CODE § 295-316
1:768
buffer area with a slope of 3:1 or less shall be established and
maintained from normal high water level; this area shall be no less than
six feet measured from the water's edge.
C. All ponds and lakes shall protect the shoreline banks from erosion and
excess seepage. This protection shall be provided in one of the
following ways:
(1) Existing clay soils.
(2) Clay blanket.
(3) Compaction.
(4) Waterproof liners.
(5) Stones, rocks, or landscaping bricks.
D. The minimum side and rear setbacks shall be 30 feet; front setbacks
and corner side setbacks shall be 50 feet.
E. The Village of Hobart may at its discretion require fencing and dry
hydrants. Where such fencing is required, the following criteria shall be
used:
(1) A structural fence four feet in height and no less than six feet from
the water's edge at the high water line shall be provided. It shall be
constructed so that no holes, gaps, or openings larger than four
inches in any dimension. All gates or doors shall be kept securely
latched at all times when unsupervised.
F. The groundwater table in the surrounding area and adjacent to the
pond or lake shall be protected.
G. Village and state permits shall be required if high-capacity wells are
drilled on the site. Location of all wells shall be provided on the site
plans; well logs shall be provided to the Village after completion of the
well.187
H. At all stages of operations, proper drainage shall be provided to prevent
the collection and stagnation of water and to prevent harmful effects
upon surrounding properties.
I. The premises shall be excavated and graded in conformity with the plan
as approved. Any deviation from the plan shall be cause for the Village
to revoke the permit.
J. The perimeter of the pond/lake/body of water shall be landscaped and
seeded with a perennial ground cover within three months after
completion of the excavation.
187. Editor's Note: Original Subsection 8, The Division of Environmental Health requirements
shall be met to insure proper safety of swimmers, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 295-316 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-316
1:769
§ 295-317. Inspections.
§ 295-318. Owner responsibilities.
The owner of any land on which a man-made body of water shall exist is
required to maintain that land and body of water within the limits of this
chapter.
§ 295-319. Permit fees.
Permit fees shall be established and charged as per the Village fee schedule.
§ 295-320. Construction deposit.
A construction deposit shall be required.
§ 295-321. Performance bond.
§ 295-322. Violations and penalties.188
Any person, firm, company, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the
K. The Village of Hobart retains the right to require any other and or
future restrictions as deemed necessary to protect the health, safety,
and welfare of the community.
L. Introduction of fish, game, or plant life shall meet DNR regulations.
A. Owner/agent shall call for the following required inspections 24 hours
in advance; other periodic inspections shall be granted to the Village of
Hobart Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector, Village Board and
Planning and Zoning Commission during normal working hours.
B. A site inspection shall be made prior to any excavation. Property lines
adjacent to the excavation, proposed excavation boundaries, and
outflow termination point shall be marked clearly for site approval.
C. An excavation inspection shall be made after all slopes are established.
D. Final inspection shall be made when all fencing is in place (when
required) and the pond/lake has reached its minimum water level.
A. Performance bond may be required at the discretion on the Village
Board.
B. Exception. Manure storage pits governed by this article shall be exempt
from any performance bond.
188. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 295-316 HOBART CODE § 295-322
1:770
penalties provided in § 1-3. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist
shall constitute a separate offense and may be punishable as such.
§ 295-322 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-322
1:771

ARTICLE XXX
Earth Excavation
§ 295-323. General.
§ 295-324. Exemptions.
The following uses shall be exempt from the provisions of this article:
§ 295-325. Permit.
A. Hereinafter, all excavations of sand, gravel, clay, silt, loam, rock, stone,
muck, dirt, soil, and other earth materials as well as the operation of
sand pits, gravel pits, and rock quarries shall come under jurisdiction of
this article.
B. All existing sites of excavation shall comply with this article prior to any
expansion or alteration of the existing site.
A. Excavation and removal of less than 100 cubic yards over a period of
one year from any single tract of land recorded in the Brown County
Register of Deeds office.
B. Necessary foundation and trench excavation in connection with work
on the premises for which a building permit has been issued.
A. Application for a permit to excavate or remove earth materials shall be
made to the Hobart Village Board by the property owner or his/her
assigned agent. Application forms shall be provided by the Village of
Hobart.
B. Application shall contain required information as specified in § 295-326
of this article.
C. Upon receipt of application and accompanying excavation plan, the
Village Board shall inspect the site identified on the plan. Following site
inspection, the Village Board shall approve the plan and grant the
permit only when it is satisfied the conditions specified in § 295-326,
Site plans, and § 295-330, Other requirements, will be complied with in
undertaking the extraction. Said approval shall be made within 30 days
of application date.
D. Upon expiration of the permit, the Village Board shall inspect the site
before reissuing the permit. If the regulations of this article have been
complied with, the permit shall be reissued.
E. An annual $50 permit fee shall be charged for the issuance of an earth
extraction permit or the renewal of same. Said permit shall be valid for
365 days from the date of issue.
§ 295-323 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-326
1:773
§ 295-326. Site plans.
The following information shall be required on a site plan prior to issuing
an earth extraction permit:
§ 295-327. Trucks and machinery.
§ 295-328. Material handling.
§ 295-329. Excavation sites.
A. A map showing the location of the premises and adjoining properties
within 500 feet. The map shall be drawn at a scale not smaller than one
inch to 200 feet.
B. Contour intervals of the site, as indicated by the United States
Geological Survey (USGS), quadrangles or other accurate sources, of
not more than 20 feet.
C. Existing and proposed surface water drainage.
D. Proposed regrading and revegetation of site after excavation.
E. Truck and machinery access.
F. Types and location of buildings to be erected on site.
G. Approximate total amount of earth material to be excavated.
H. Approximate number of trucks and other machinery to be used.
I. Hours of operation, which shall be restricted to within the hours of
between sunrise and sunset.
A. No machinery shall be permanently erected within 200 feet of any
property line or street right-of-way line.
B. Truck access and storage shall be arranged to minimize danger to
traffic and nuisance to surrounding property.
A. A minimum of 50 feet of undisturbed material shall be maintained
between the point of excavation and any property line or street right-ofway
line.
B. No sifting, washing, crushing or other forms of processing shall be
conducted upon the premises, unless it is located more than 500 feet
from any residential dwelling.
A. The excavation of earth materials shall be a conditional use in the A-1
Agricultural Zone and the A-2 Exclusive Agricultural Zone if the
excavation is a public (governmental) operation or if it is incidental to
the farm operation. Conditional use permits for proposed excavation of
earth materials and nonmetallic mining operations in the Exclusive
Agricultural Zoning District may only be approved if all criteria
§ 295-326 HOBART CODE § 295-329
1:774
§ 295-330. Other requirements.
identified in § 295-13B for agricultural related operations and § 295-13E
for government and nonprofit community-related operations are found
applicable. [Amended 12-16-2014]
B. Extraction operations shall be prohibited in all remaining zoning
districts.
A. At all times, proper drainage shall be provided to prevent the collection
and stagnation of water and to prevent harmful effects upon
surrounding properties.
B. The premises shall be excavated and graded in conformity with the plan
as approved. Any deviation from the plan shall be cause for the Village
Board to revoke the permit.
C. When excavation and removal operations are no longer used, as
determined by the Village Board, the excavated area shall be graded so
that no gradients in disturbed earth shall be steeper than a slope of 3:1
(horizontal:vertical), except hard rock quarries. A layer of arable topsoil
capable of supporting perennial grasses shall be spread over the
excavated area, except exposed bedrock surfaces, to a minimum depth
of four inches. The area shall be seeded with a perennial grass capable
of survival in this climate and maintained until a uniform growth is
established.
D. If the excavation site shall fall within a Floodplain, Shoreland, or
Conservancy Zone District, the regulations as set forth in Chapter 290,
Floodplain Zoning, and Chapter 293, Shoreland Zoning, shall also
apply. [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
E. Village Board members shall be allowed on the premises during
scheduled operating hours for inspection purposes.
F. A performance bond of $1,000 per acre of proposed excavation shall be
required of the excavator.
G. To allow for ease in rehabilitation of site, the operator may begin
sloping, as prescribed in Subsection C of this section, 10 feet from lot
lines or road right-of-way lines, provided material disturbed within 50
feet of lot lines or road rights-of-way is used in the sloping operation as
fill.
H. No unlicensed dumping of solid waste, junk cars, or sanitary wastes
shall occur in extraction sites.
I. Proper measures shall be taken to minimize the nuisance of noise and
flying rocks or dust.
J. Any extractive operation necessitating blasting or the use of explosives
shall be considered a conditional use requiring a public hearing to be
held concerning the same.
§ 295-329 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-330
1:775
K. Truck access to the excavation shall be so arranged as to minimize
danger to traffic and nuisance to surrounding properties. The access
roads to the area of operation shall be provided with a dustless surface
if deemed necessary by the Village Board.
§ 295-330 HOBART CODE § 295-330
1:776
ARTICLE XXXI
Administration and Enforcement
§ 295-331. Purpose.
This article of the chapter shall set forth the requirements to adequately
provide and develop the proper administration and enforcement of this
chapter.
§ 295-332. General.
§ 295-333. Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector.
The Village of Hobart Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector shall have
the following duties:
A. This chapter shall provide for the position of Zoning Administrator/
Building Inspector, Board of Appeals and Village Planning and Zoning
Commission.
B. This article shall provide the authority and necessary requirements for
the issuance of building permits and occupation permits, variances,
appeals, amendments, conditional uses, fees, and penalties.
A. Issue all building permits and make and maintain records thereof.
B. Issue all certificates of occupancy and make and maintain records
thereof.
C. Issue all rezoning certificates and make and maintain records thereof.
D. Conduct inspection of buildings, structures, and use of land to
determine compliance with the terms of this chapter.
E. Provide and maintain a public information bureau relative to all matters
arising out of this chapter.
F. Forward to the Village of Hobart Planning and Zoning Commission all
applications for conditional uses and for amendments to this chapter
that are initially filed with the office of the Zoning Administrator/
Building Inspector.
G. Forward to the Board of Appeals applications for appeals, variances, or
other matters on which the Board of Appeals is required to pass under
this chapter.
H. Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including, but
not limited to, all maps, amendments, conditional uses, variances,
appeals, and applications thereof.
I. Initiate, direct, and review from time to time a study of the provisions of
this chapter and to make reports of its recommendations to the Village
Planning and Zoning Commission.
§ 295-331 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-334
1:777
§ 295-334. Board of Appeals.
The Board of Appeals is hereby established as authorized under the
provisions of the Wisconsin State Statutes, § 62.23.
A. Jurisdiction. The Board of Appeals is hereby entrusted with the
jurisdiction and authority to:
(1) Hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made under the provisions of this chapter and
Chapter 121, Building Construction, of this Code.
(2) Hear and pass upon the application for variances from the terms
provided in this chapter in the manner prescribed by and subject to
the standards established herein.
(3) Hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it is
required to pass under this chapter, as prescribed by § 62.23 of the
Wisconsin State Statutes.
(4) May, in appropriate cases, and subject to appropriate conditions
and safeguards, make special exceptions to the terms of this
chapter in harmony with its general purpose and intent, and in
accordance with general or specific rules therein contained.
B. Meetings and rules.
(1) All meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson of the Board and at such times as the Board of Appeals
may determine.
(2) All hearings conducted shall be open to the public. Any person may
appear and testify at a hearing either in person or by a duly
authorized agent or attorney.
(3) Notice of the time and place of such public hearing shall be
published as provided by the state law on planning and zoning and
applicable to the Village of Hobart.
(4) The Chairperson, or in his/her absence the Acting Chairperson,
may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
(5) The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote
of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its hearings and
other official actions.
(6) All official proceedings regarding the action of the Board of
Appeals shall be a matter of public record and placed on file with
the Board of Appeals.
(7) The Board shall adopt its own rules and procedures, not in conflict
with this chapter or with the applicable Wisconsin State Statutes,
and select or appoint such officers as it deems necessary.
§ 295-334 HOBART CODE § 295-334
1:778
§ 295-335. Village Planning and Zoning Commission.
The Village Planning and Zoning Commission shall be the authorizing
planning agency and shall perform the duties of the Village Planning and
Zoning Commission as set forth in § 62.23 of the Wisconsin State Statutes.
C. Decisions. All decisions and findings of the Board of Appeals on appeals
or upon application for a variance shall be by the concurring vote of
four members of the Board and after said hearing shall in all instances
be final administrative decisions and shall be subject to judicial review
as by law may be provided.
D. Board membership.
(1) The Board of Appeals shall consist of five members appointed by
the Village President and subject to confirmation by the Hobart
Village Board.
(2) The terms shall be for three years, except that of those first
appointed; one shall serve for one year, and two for two years; and
two for three years, the members of the Board shall serve at such
compensation, if any, to be fixed by ordinance or resolution. The
Village President shall designate one of the members as
chairperson. The Board may employ a secretary and other
employees. The Village President may appoint, for staggered terms
of three years, two alternate members of such Board, in addition to
the five members provided for. Annually, the Village President shall
designate one of the alternate members as first alternate and the
other as second alternate. The first alternate shall act, with full
power, only when a member of the Board refuses to vote because of
interest, or when a member is absent. The second alternate shall so
act only when the first alternate so refuses or is absent, or when
more than one member of the Board so refuses or is absent.
(3) The members of the Board of Appeals shall be removable by the
Village President for cause upon written charges and after public
hearing. This provision also applies to removal of alternates.
(4) Vacancies, including vacancies of alternates, shall be filled for the
unexpired terms of members whose terms become vacant. The
Village President shall appoint members to fill the vacancies,
subject to approval by the Village Board of Hobart.
A. Jurisdiction. The Hobart Village Planning and Zoning Commission shall
carry out the following duties under this chapter.
(1) Review all applications for conditional uses and amendments to
this chapter and report said findings and recommendations to the
Village Board in the manner designated by this chapter for
amendments and conditional uses.
§ 295-334 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-335
1:779
§ 295-336. Building permit.
(2) Receive from the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector his/her
recommendations as related to the effectiveness of this chapter and
report his/her conclusions and recommendations to the Hobart
Village Board.
(3) Hear and decide matters upon which it is required to pass under
this chapter.
B. Meetings.
(1) All meetings of the Village Planning and Zoning Commission shall
be held at the call of the Chairperson of the Commission at such
times as the Commission may determine.
(2) The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the
vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to
vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its
hearings and other official actions.
C. Decisions. All actions of the Village Planning and Zoning Commission
shall require the vote of the majority of the members of the
Commission.
D. Membership.
(1) The Village Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of seven
members, as provided by § 62.23 of the Wisconsin State Statutes.
(2) Commission members shall consist of the Village President, who
shall be its presiding officer, one Village Board member, and five
citizens.
(3) The Village Planning and Zoning Commission members shall be
removable by the Village Board of Hobart for cause upon written
charges.
(4) Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms of members. The
Village President shall appoint personnel to fill the vacancies,
subject to approval by the Village Board of Hobart.
A. No building or addition thereto 50 square feet or more in size,
constructed after the effective date of this chapter, and no addition 50
square feet or more in size to a previously existing building shall be
occupied, and no land, vacant on the effective date of this chapter, shall
be used for any purpose until a building permit has been issued by the
Village Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector. No change in a use
shall be made until a building permit has been issued by the Village
Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector. Every building permit shall
state that the use complies with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 295-335 HOBART CODE § 295-336
1:780
§ 295-337. Plats.
All applications for building permits for residential, industrial, and business
uses shall be accompanied by the following:
§ 295-338. Occupancy certificate.
§ 295-339. Variances.
B. Application for said building permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Hobart Village Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector by the
landowner or his/her authorized agent.
C. Application for a building permit shall be deemed to be an application
for an occupancy certificate as well.
D. Each building permit shall be accompanied by a plat or certified survey
map in accordance with requirements as specified in § 295-337, Plats.
E. Each building permit applied for shall be granted or denied within a
ten-day period from the date of application. Reason for denial of a
building permit will be forwarded, in writing, by the Village Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector to the applicant.
A. A copy of the plat or certified survey map of the proposed building site.
B. A sketch plan, drawn at a minimum scale of one inch to 100 feet
showing the ground area, height and bulk of building or structure, the
building lines in relation to lot lines, the location of sanitary absorption
systems, the use to be made of the building, structure, or land; and such
other information as may be required by the Village Planning and
Zoning Commission and Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector for
the proper enforcement of this chapter.
A. No occupancy certificate for a building, or a portion thereof,
constructed after the effective date of this chapter, shall be issued until
construction has been completed and the premises inspected and
certified by the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector to be in
conformity with the plans and specifications upon which the building
permit was based.
B. The occupancy certificate shall be issued, or written notice shall be
given to the applicant stating the reason why a certificate cannot be
issued, not later than seven days after the Zoning Administrator/
Building Inspector is notified, in writing, that the premises or building
are ready for occupancy.
C. All occupancy permits shall be issued by the Village of Hobart Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector.
A. Application.
§ 295-336 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-339
1:781
§ 295-340. Appeals.
(1) An application for a variance shall be filed with the Village Clerk-
Treasurer. The application shall contain such information as the
Board of Appeals by rule may require. Due notice of the hearing
shall be given to parties of interest, as well as owners of property
located within 100 feet of the property in appeal. The Board shall
reach a decision within 60 days from the filing of the request for
variance.
(2) Notice of the time and place of such public hearing shall be
published as provided in the state law on planning and zoning and
applicable to the Village of Hobart.
B. Standards for variances. Variances may be granted by the Board of
Appeals only when:
(1) Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographical condition of the specific property involved a
particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished
from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations
were to be carried out.
(2) Conditions upon which a petition for a variance is based are unique
to the property for which the variance is sought, and are not
applicable, generally, to other property within the same zoning
classification.
(3) Alleged difficulty or hardship is caused by this chapter and has not
been created by any person presently having an interest in the
property.
(4) Granting of the variance shall not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood in which the property is located.
(5) Proposed variance shall not impair an adequate supply of light and
air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the congestion of
the public streets, or increase the danger of fire, or endanger
public health and safety, or substantially diminish or impair
property values within the neighborhood.
C. Authorized variances. Variances shall be granted by the Board of
Appeals in accordance with the standards established in Subsection B.
A. Scope of appeals.
(1) An appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by any person,
firm, or corporation, or by any office, department, board, or bureau
aggrieved by a decision of the Village Planning and Zoning
Commission or Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector.
§ 295-339 HOBART CODE § 295-340
1:782
§ 295-341. Amendments.
(2) Such an appeal shall be made within 30 days after the decision or
the action complained of, by filing with the Village Clerk-Treasurer
or Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds thereof.
(3) The Village Planning and Zoning Commission shall forthwith
transmit to the Board of Appeals all of the papers constituting a
record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
B. Findings on appeals.
(1) An appeal shall terminate all further proceedings on action, unless
the Village Planning and Zoning Commission certifies to the Board
of Appeals that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay
would, in its opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property, in
which case proceedings shall not be stayed, otherwise than by a
restraining order, which may be granted by the Board of Appeals or
by a court of record on notice to the Village Planning and Zoning
Commission and on due cause shown.189
(2) The Board of Appeals shall select a reasonable time and place for
the hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties
of interest, as well as owners of property located within 100 feet of
the property in appeal.
(3) The Board of Appeals shall thereafter reach its decision within 60
days from the filing of the appeal.
(4) The Board of Appeals may affirm or may reverse, wholly or in part,
or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination
appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or
determination, that in its opinion ought to be made and to that end,
shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is
taken. The Village Planning and Zoning Commission shall maintain
records of all action of the Board of Appeals relative to appeals.190
A. Authority. The Hobart Village Board may, from time to time, in the
manner hereafter set forth, amend the regulations imposed in the
districts or amend district boundary lines, provided that in all
amendatory ordinances adopted under the authority of this section due
allowance shall be made for the intent purpose of said changes as per
Article II of this chapter.
B. Initiation. Amendments may be proposed by any governmental body,
interested person, or organization.
189. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
190. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 295-340 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-341
1:783
C. Application. An application for an amendment shall be filed with the
Village Clerk-Treasurer in such form and accompanied by such
information as required by the Village Planning and Zoning
Commission. Said application shall be reviewed by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and a written recommendation submitted thereon
to the Village Board.
D. Hearing notice. The Village Board shall hold a public hearing on each
application for an amendment. Time, place and purpose of the hearing
shall be published as provided in the state law on planning and zoning
and applicable to the Village of Hobart. Due notice of the hearing shall
be given to parties of interest, as well as owners of property located
within 100 feet of any property proposed to be rezoned.
E. Findings and recommendations.
(1) The Village Planning and Zoning Commission shall make written
findings of fact and shall submit the same together with its
recommendations to the Village Board prior to the public hearing.
(2) Where the purpose and effect of the proposed amendment is to
change the zoning classification of particular property, the Village
Planning and Zoning Commission shall make findings based upon
the evidence presented to it in each specific case with respect to
the following matters:
(a) Existing uses or property within the general area of the
property in question.
(b) Zoning classification of property within the general area of the
property in question.
(c) Suitability of the property in question to the uses permitted
under the existing zoning classification.
(d) Trend of development, if any, in the general area of the
property in question, including changes, if any, which have
taken place in its present zoning classification.
(e) The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend the
adoption of an amendment changing the zoning classification
of the property in question to any higher classification than
that requested by the applicant.
(f) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall not recommend the
adoption of a proposed amendment unless it finds that the
adoption of such amendment is in the public interest and is not
solely for the interest of the applicant.
F. Village Board action.
(1) The Village Board shall not act upon a proposed amendment to this
chapter until it shall have received a written report and
§ 295-341 HOBART CODE § 295-341
1:784
§ 295-342. Conditional uses. [Amended 1-2-2019 by Ord. No.
2018-17]
recommendation from the Village Planning and Zoning Commission
on the proposed amendment.
(2) The Village Board may grant or deny any application for an
amendment; provided, however, that in the event of a written
protest against any proposed amendment to this chapter, duly
signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20% or more either of
the areas of the land included in such proposed change, or by the
owners of 20% or more of the land immediately adjacent, extending
100 feet therefrom, or by the owners of 20% or more of the land
directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the street
frontage of such opposite land, such changes or amendments shall
not become effective, except by the favorable vote of 3/4 of the full
Village Board membership. [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No.
01-2015]
(3) If an application for a proposed amendment is not acted upon
finally by the Village Board within 60 days of the date upon which
such application is received by the Village Board, it shall be
deemed to have been denied.
A. Purpose. To place unique land use characteristics within favorable
zoning districts to ease conflicts on neighboring lands and public need.
B. Initiation. Any person having a freehold interest in land, or a possessory
interest entitled to exclusive possession, or a contractual interest which
may become a freehold interest or an exclusive possessory interest, and
which is specifically enforceable, may file an application to use such
land for one or more of the conditional uses provided for in this chapter
in the zoning district in which the land is located.
C. Application. The application for a conditional use shall be filed with the
Hobart Village Clerk-Treasurer on a form so prescribed by the Village of
Hobart. The application shall be accompanied by such plans and/or data
prescribed by the Village Planning and Zoning Commission and shall
include a statement, in writing, by the applicant and adequate evidence
showing that the proposed conditional use will conform to the
standards set forth in the respective zone districts, based on substantial
evidence as defined in Subsection G below. Such application shall be
reviewed by the Village Planning and Zoning Commission and a written
recommendation submitted thereon to the Village Board.
D. Hearing on application. Upon receipt in proper form of the written
recommendation referred to in Subsection C, the Village Board shall
hold a public hearing on the proposed conditional use. Due notice of the
hearing shall be given to parties of interest, as well as owners of
property located within 100 feet of the property in appeal. The Board
§ 295-341 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-342
1:785
shall reach a decision within 60 days from the filing of the conditional
use request.
E. Authorization. For each application for a conditional use, the Village
Planning and Zoning Commission shall report to the Village Board its
findings and recommendations, including the stipulation of additional
conditions and guarantees that such conditions will be complied with
when they are deemed necessary for the protection of the public
interest. If an application for a proposed conditional use is not acted
upon within 90 days of the date upon which said application was filed
with the Hobart Village Clerk-Treasurer, it shall be deemed to have
been denied.
F. Standards.
(1) No conditional use shall be recommended by the Village Planning
and Zoning Commission, unless said Commission shall find that the
conditions comply with Article II, Intent, Purpose, and Severability,
and is based on substantial evidence as defined in Subsection G
below.
(2) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the site, existing
and proposed structures, architectural plans, neighboring uses,
parking areas, driveway locations, highway access, traffic
generation and circulation, drainage, sewerage and water systems,
and the proposed operation.
(3) Conditions such as landscaping, architectural design, type of
construction, construction commencement and completion dates,
sureties, lighting, fencing, planting screens, operational control,
hours of operation, improved traffic circulation, deed restrictions,
highway access restrictions, increased yards or park requirements
may be recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission
upon its finding that these are necessary to fulfill the purpose and
intent of this chapter.
G. Substantial evidence. Substantial evidence means facts and
information, other than merely personal preferences or speculation,
directly pertaining to the requirements and conditions an applicant
must meet to obtain a conditional use permit and that reasonable
persons would accept in support of a conclusion.
H. Conditions and guarantees. Before issuing a conditional use permit, the
Village Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend and the
Village Board shall stipulate such conditions and restriction upon the
establishment, location, construction, maintenance, and operation of
the conditional use as is deemed necessary for the protection of the
public interest and to secure compliance with the standards and
requirements specified in Subsection F above. In all cases in which
conditional uses are granted, the Village Board shall require such
evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the
§ 295-342 HOBART CODE § 295-342
1:786
§ 295-343. Fees.
Any application for an amendment or conditional use, filed by or on behalf
of the owner or owners of the property affected, shall be accompanied by a
fee as established by the Village Board by resolution. The fee for variances
and appeals shall be as established by the Village Board by resolution. All
fees shall be paid to the Village Clerk-Treasurer.
§ 295-344. Violations and penalties.
conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be
complied with.
A. Any building or structure hereinafter erected, moved or structurally
altered or any use hereinafter established in violation of the provisions
of this chapter by any person, firm, association, corporation (including
building contractors) or his/her/their agent shall be deemed an
unlawful structure or use.
B. The Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector shall report all such
violations to the Village Attorney, who shall bring action to enjoin the
erection, moving, or structural alteration of such building or the
establishment of such use or to cause such building, structure, or use to
be vacated or removed.
C. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, any person, firm, or
corporation, or agent, employee, or contractor of such who violates,
destroys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who resists
enforcement of any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to the penalties provided in § 1-3. Each
violation and each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
[Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
D. This section shall not preclude the Village of Hobart from maintaining
any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of this chapter.
§ 295-342 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-344
1:787

ARTICLE XXXII
Telecommunications Antennas and Towers
§ 295-345. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Man-made structures such as light
poles, elevated tanks, electric utility transmission line towers,
nonresidential buildings, and similar alternative-design mounting
structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
ANTENNA — Any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or
television communications through the sending and/or receiving of
electromagnetic waves.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
GOVERNING AUTHORITY — The Village Board of the Village of
Hobart.[Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance
measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other
structure, even if said highest point is an antenna.
PREEXISTING TOWERS AND ANTENNAS — The meaning set forth in
§ 295-346D of this article.
TOWER — Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for
the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting
lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and
television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers,
cellular telephone towers, PCS towers, alternative tower structures, and the
like.
§ 295-346. Applicability.
A. District height limitations. The requirements set forth in this section
shall govern the location of towers that exceed, and antennas that are
installed at, a height in excess of the height limitations specified for
each zoning district. The height limitations applicable to buildings and
structures shall not apply to towers and antenna; however, in no case
shall any tower exceed the following height limitations:
(1) For a single user: up to 90 feet in height;
(2) For two users: up to 120 feet in height; and
(3) For three or more users: up to 150 feet in height.
B. Public property. Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased,
or otherwise controlled by the Village Board shall be exempt from the
§ 295-345 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-346
1:789
§ 295-347. General guidelines and requirements.
requirements of this section, provided a license or lease authorizing
such antenna or tower has been approved by the Village Board.
C. Amateur radio; receive-only antennas. This section shall not govern any
tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under 70 feet in height
and is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station
operator or is used exclusively as a receive-only antenna.
D. Preexisting towers and antennas. Any tower or antenna for which a
permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this
section shall not be required to meet the requirements of this article
other than the requirements of § 295-347E and F. Any such towers or
antennas shall be referred to in this section as "preexisting towers" or
"preexisting antennas."
A. Purpose; goal. The purpose of this section is to establish general
guidelines for the siting of towers and antennas. The goals of this
section are to:
(1) Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas and
minimize the total number of towers throughout the community;
(2) Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites;
(3) Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the
community is minimal;
(4) Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way
that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and
antennas; and
(5) Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services
to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and
efficiently.
B. Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered
either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use or an existing
structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an
antenna or tower on such lot. For purposes of determining whether the
installation of a tower or antenna complies with district development
regulations, including but not limited to setback requirements, lot
coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions
of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may
be located on leased parcels within such lots. Towers that are
constructed, and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the
provisions of this section shall not be deemed to constitute the
expansion of a nonconforming use or structure.
§ 295-346 HOBART CODE § 295-347
1:790
C. Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and or tower
shall provide to the Planning and Zoning Commission an inventory of its
existing towers that are either within the jurisdiction of the Village
Board, or within one mile of the border thereof, including specific
information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The
Planning and Zoning Commission may share such information with
other applicants applying for administrative approvals or conditional
use permits under this section or other organizations seeking to locate
antennas within the jurisdiction of the Village Board; provided,
however, that the Planning and Zoning Commission is not, by sharing
such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites
are available or suitable.
D. Aesthetics and lighting. The guidelines set forth in this subsection shall
govern the location of all towers, and the installation of all antennas,
governed by this section; provided, however, that the Village Board may
waive these requirements if it determines that the goals of this section
are better served thereby.
(1) Towers shall maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any
applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to
reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(2) At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures
shall, to the extent possible use materials, colors, textures,
screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to
the natural setting and built environment.
(3) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must
be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with,
the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and
related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
(4) Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA
or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the Village
Board may review the available lighting, alternatives and approve
the design that would cause the least disturbance to the
surrounding views.
(5) Towers and antennas shall not be used for displaying any
advertising. If FCC rules require that the owner's name be shown
on the tower or antenna, it shall be posted no more than six feet
above the ground on a placard no larger than 1 1/2 square feet.
E. Federal and state requirements. All towers must meet or exceed
current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other
agency of the federal and state government with the authority to
regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are
changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this
article shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such
revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective
§ 295-347 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-347
1:791
§ 295-348. Permitted uses.
§ 295-349. Conditional use permits.
date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent
compliance schedule is managed by the controlling federal agency.
Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised
standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of
the tower or antenna by the Village Board at the expense of the tower
or antenna owner, or at the expense of the property owner in the case
where the owner of the tower or antenna is leasing the property upon
which the tower or antenna is installed.
F. Building codes, safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of
towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in
compliance with standards contained in applicable state and local
building codes, and the applicable standards for towers that are
published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from
time to time. If upon inspection the Village Board concludes that a
tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a
danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the
owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower
into compliance with such standards. If the owner fails to bring such
tower into compliance within said 30 days, the Village Board may
remove such tower at the expense of the tower or antenna owner, or at
the expense of the property owner in the case where the owner of the
tower or antenna is leasing the property upon which the tower or
antenna is installed.
A. General. The uses listed in this section are deemed to be permitted uses
and shall not require a conditional use permit. Nevertheless, all such
uses shall comply with § 295-347 of this article and all other applicable
sections.
B. Specific permitted uses. The following uses are specifically permitted:
(1) Installing an antenna on an existing structure other than a tower
(such as elevated tanks, electric utility transmission line towers, or
nonresidential buildings), so long as said additional antenna adds
no more than 20 feet to the height of said existing structure; and
(2) Installing an antenna on an existing tower or any height, including
a preexisting tower, and further including the placement of
additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in
connection with said antenna, so long as the addition of said
antenna adds no more than 20 feet to the height of said existing
tower.
A. General. The following provisions shall govern conditional use permits:
§ 295-347 HOBART CODE § 295-349
1:792
(1) If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under § 295-348 of
this article, then a conditional use permit shall be required prior to
construction of any tower or the placement of any antenna.
(2) Towers and antennas may only be located in the Agricultural,
Exclusive Agricultural, Limited Industrial and Industrial Park
Zoning Districts. Conditional use permits for towers and antennas
proposed in the Exclusive Agricultural Zoning District may only be
approved if all the criteria identified in § 295-213B(1) are
applicable. [Amended 12-16-2014]
(3) If a conditional use permit is granted, the Village Board may
impose conditions to the extent the Village Board concludes such
conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the
proposed tower on adjoining properties.
(4) Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant
submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical shall be certified
by a licensed professional engineer.
B. Information required. Each applicant requesting a conditional use
permit under this section shall submit a scaled site plan and a scaled
elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other
documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate licensed
professionals, showing the location and dimensions of all
improvements, including information concerning topography frequency
coverage, tower height requirements, setbacks, drives, parking,
fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and other information deemed by
the Village Board to be necessary to assess compliance with this
section.
C. Factors considered in granting conditional use permits. The Village
Board shall consider the following factors in determining whether to
issue a conditional use permit, although the Village Board may waive or
reduce the burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria if
the Village Board concludes that the goals of this section are better
served thereby:
(1) Height of the proposed tower;
(2) Capacity of the tower structure for additional antenna equipment
to accommodate expansion, or to allow for co-location of another
provider's equipment;
(3) Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential
district boundaries;
(4) Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
(5) Surrounding topography;
(6) Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
§ 295-349 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-349
1:793
(7) Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating
visual obtrusiveness;
(8) Proposed ingress and egress;
(9) Availability of suitable existing towers and other structures as
discussed in Subsection D of this section.
D. Availability of suitable existing towers or other structures. No new
tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Village Board that no existing tower or
structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna.
Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure
can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any
of the following:
(1) No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic
area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements.
(2) Existing, towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet
applicant's engineering requirements.
(3) Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural
strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related
equipment.
(4) The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic
interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures,
or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause
interference with the applicant's proposed antenna.
(5) The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner to
share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower
or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new
tower development are presumed to be unreasonable.
(6) The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors
that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
E. Setbacks and separation. The following setbacks and separation
requirements shall apply to all towers and antennas for which a
conditional use permit is required; provided, however, that the Village
Board may reduce the standard setbacks and separation requirements
if the goals of this section would be better served thereby.
(1) Towers must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower
from any off-site residential structure.
(2) Towers, guys, and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum
zoning district setback requirements.
§ 295-349 HOBART CODE § 295-349
1:794
§ 295-350. Removal of abandoned antennas and towers.
Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12
months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna
or tower shall remove same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the
Village Board notifying the owner of such abandonment. If such antenna or
tower is not removed within said 90 days, the Village Board may remove
such antenna or tower at the expense of the tower or antenna owner, or
at the expense of the property owner in the case where the owner of the
tower or antenna is leasing the property upon which the tower or antenna is
installed. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision
shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower.
F. Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the landscaping
surrounding towers for which a conditional use permit is required;
provided, however, that the Village Board may waive such requirements
if the goals of this section would be better served thereby.
(1) Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a mixture of deciduous
and evergreen trees and shrubs that effectively screens the view of
the tower compound from adjacent residential property. The
standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least four feet
wide outside the perimeter of the compound.
(2) In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal,
the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived altogether.
(3) Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases,
such as towers sited on large wooded lots, natural growth around
the property perimeter may be sufficient buffer.
§ 295-349 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-350
1:795

ARTICLE XXXIII
Site Review/Development and Design Standards
§ 295-351. Introductory statement.
The Village Board of the Village of Hobart does hereby ordain that
§§ 295-352 through 295-364 of the Municipal Code of the Village of Hobart
are created to read as follows:
§ 295-352. Introduction.191
This article is designed to provide for the future growth and development
of those multifamily residences, businesses, and industries that seek an
aesthetically attractive working environment. The intent and purpose of
this article is to promote and maintain desirable economic development
within all zoning districts that is practical, feasible, and an asset to owners,
neighbors, and the Village of Hobart while maintaining an attractive
environment. The Centennial Centre at Hobart (PDD #1), PDD #2 and the
PDD #3 have their own set of regulations and guidelines regarding site/
review/development and design standards incorporated into their master
plans.
§ 295-353. Objectives.
The purpose of this article is to establish rules, regulations, standards,
and procedures for approval of all new development proposals and the
expansion of existing businesses and industries in order to:
A. Provide for safe and efficient vehicular, pedestrian, and bicyclist
circulation. [Amended 3-17-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-02]
B. Provide for screening, landscaping, signage, lighting and green space.
C. Ensure efficient, safe, and attractive land development.
D. Provide for compliance with appropriate design standards to ensure
adequate light and air, proper building arrangements, and minimal
adverse effect on adjacent properties.
E. Develop proper safeguards to minimize the impact on the environment.
F. Ensure the provision of adequate water supply, drainage, and
stormwater management, sanitary facilities, and other utilities and
surveys.
G. Encourage modern and unique innovative design, construction,
technology and planning methods.
H. Advance and promote sound growth and continuous development
within the Village.
191. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 295-351 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-354
1:797
§ 295-354. Application to all districts.
This article applies to the following: all zoning districts within the Village of
Hobart.
§ 295-355. Standard requirements.
The interpretation and application of the provisions of these standards shall
be held as minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, and welfare.
§ 295-356. Administration.
The administration of this article shall be vested in the following: Village
Administrator, Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector, and Site Review
Committee.
§ 295-357. General building and performance standards.
A. No structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or
altered, and no structure or land shall be used for any purpose nor in
any manner which is not in conformity with the provisions of this
article.
B. Where permitted and prohibited uses, site and landscape regulations,
building design criteria, off-street parking and loading requirements,
and other regulations contained herein are either more or less
restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by provisions contained
in the Village of Hobart Zoning Ordinance or of any other law,
ordinance, rule, resolution or regulations, the requirements that are
more restrictive or which impose a higher standard shall govern.
A. It shall be the duty of the Village Administrator to be in charge of the
day-to-day administration and interpretation of the development and
design standards. Enforcement of these standards is charged to the
Hobart Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector in accordance with
§ 62.23(7), Wisconsin Statutes.
B. The Site Review Committee shall consist of seven regular members, two
of whom shall be Village Board members, and one alternate member.
Village Board members shall serve as full voting members. All regular
members shall be residents of the Village. [Amended 1-6-2015 by
Ord. No. 01-2015]
C. From time to time the design criteria may be amended, changed or
deleted. Such action shall take place originating before the Site Review
Committee in accordance with § 62.23(7), Wisconsin Statutes.
D. Appeals. Unless otherwise provided herein, appeals to the
requirements contained in these standards shall be heard by the Board
of Appeals.
§ 295-354 HOBART CODE § 295-357
1:798
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish general
development performance standards, in accordance with the Village of
Hobart Zoning Ordinance. These standards are intended and designed
to assure compatibility of uses; to prevent urban blight, deterioration,
and decay; and to enhance the health, safety, and general welfare of the
residents of the community.
B. Building. The Village of Hobart's overall approach encourages a variety
of architectural styles. However, basic harmony is intended to prevail so
that no one structure detracts from the attractiveness of the overall
environment. The Site Review Committee shall review building design
in order to insure architectural compatibility and integrity.
C. Building exterior. All zoning districts' colors, materials, finishes, and
building form shall be coordinated in a consistent manner on the front,
side, and rear exterior walls. Materials shall be one of the following
(color and texture to be approved):
(1) Hard-burned clay brick.
(2) Concrete masonry. Units shall be those generally described by the
National Concrete Masonry Association as "customized
architectural concrete masonry units" or shall be broken-faced
brick-type units with marble aggregate or split face or broke off
concrete block. There shall be no exposed concrete block on the
exterior of any building facing any public road. Any concrete
masonry units that have a gray cement color shall be color-coated.
(a) In all districts, metal siding may be used for entire side and
rear building walls with approval by the Site Review
Committee.
(3) Concrete may be poured in place, tilt-up or precast. Poured-inplace
and tilt-up walls shall have a finish of stone, a texture or a
coating. Textured finishes shall be coated. Precast units which are
not uniform in color shall be color-coated. Coating shall be an
approved cementations or epoxy type with a ten-year minimum life
expectancy.
(4) Natural stone.
(5) Glass curtain walls.
(6) Metal siding may be used only in combination with one of the
approved materials and with approval of the Site Review
Committee. In all zoning districts, metal siding may be utilized only
on the side and rear building walls that do not face an adjacent
street. Twenty-five percent of any walls facing the street (excluding
door, window or other openings) shall be constructed of the
materials listed under Subsection C(1) through (5) above. Any
metal siding proposed for use shall be entirely coated with a
colorfast, abrasion- and corrosion-resistant, long-life (minimum of
§ 295-357 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-357
1:799
20 years) finish that is resistant to chemicals, withstands
temperature extremes, and has a low permeability. Any material
utilized to attach the metal siding to the building shall be concealed
or the utilization of shadow panels or semi-concealed fastener
panels with fasteners painted to match the panels shall be
required.
(7) R-4 multifamily structures must have eight feet of masonry on all
four sides. [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
(8) The building exterior requirements of this section are intended to
be minimum requirements and more stringent requirements may
be imposed by the Site Review Committee, taking into
consideration public interests such as coordinating a consistent
appearance and quality of construction with adjacent structures,
the size of the proposed structure, the topography of the site, and
the proximity of the structure to public rights-of-way.
D. Front building wall and building walls facing an adjacent street. Any
exterior building wall (front, side or rear) facing an adjacent street shall
be constructed of one of the materials listed under Subsection C(3), (4),
(5), above, as follows: [Amended 10-3-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-07]
(1) Not less than 35% of the wall surface for industrial construction,
45% of the wall surface for commercial business construction and
50% of the exterior building wall for office and retail construction,
except that buildings and structures may reduce this percentage by
5% for each additional street exposure above one street, and not to
be reduced by more than a maximum of 15%.
(2) The colors, materials, and finishes shall be coordinated in a
consistent manner with other buildings within the district. The
exterior building wall (front, side or rear) facing an adjacent street
may be finished or accentuated with the following:
(a) Brick and masonry.
(b) Natural stone.
(c) Glass curtain walls.
(3) Mechanical equipment. All mechanical equipment shall be
enclosed or screened. Roof-mounted equipment shall be integrated
into the design of the structure, enclosed or screened to the extent
possible.
(4) Construction. Construction shall commence within one year of plan
approval or in accordance with a development agreement with the
Village. No site plan approval by the Site Review Committee shall
be valid for more than 12 months from the date of such approval
unless a building permit is obtained and development in
accordance with such site plan is commenced within such period.
§ 295-357 HOBART CODE § 295-357
1:800
§ 295-358. Lighting standards in all districts requiring site plan
review.
To provide for the basic needs of safety and security, appropriate lighting
shall be provided in order to delineate roads, drives, parking areas,
pedestrianways, buildings, and other organizational points. Lighting shall
be an integral part of the overall architectural design; therefore, proposed
lighting, whether freestanding or building-mounted, shall complement the
architectural character of the principal use. Lighting design shall correlate
energy conservation with aesthetic, architectural, and safety factors.
The provisions of this section shall apply unless otherwise agreed
to by the Site Review Committee.
(5) Maintenance. The exterior walls and roof of buildings shall be
maintained in a clean, orderly, and attractive condition; free of
cracks, dents, punctures, breakage, and other forms of visible
marring. Materials that become excessively faded, chalked,
cracked, chipped, damaged or otherwise deteriorated shall be
replaced, refinished, repaired or repainted in accordance with the
reasonable determination and order of the Zoning Administrator/
Building Inspector within 60 days' notice of such defect.
(6) No right to divide property. After a site has been purchased, it shall
not be further divided without a review and consent of the
Village.192
A. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking, loading and service
areas shall be shaded, diffused, or arranged to reflect light away from
adjacent parcels and public streets. Glare, whether direct or reflected,
as differentiated from general illuminated, shall not be visible beyond
the limits of the site from which it originates. Parking lot lights may be
used in either a single or multi format. Characteristics, 27,000 lumen
high-pressure sodium, spaced approximately 100 to 120 feet off center,
consisting of sharp, cutoff-type luminaries. Maximum height for pole
not to exceed 30 feet to be an approved metal pole. The use of wooden
poles is prohibited.
B. Walkway lighting should be of the same family as mentioned above,
height to be 10 feet to 14 feet above grade. Bollard lighting can be used
as low-level walkway illumination on private property.
C. Building lighting should occur as part of the overall design concept
using recessed lighting in overhangs and at the entrance. Well-designed
soft lighting of the building exterior is allowed, provided it does not
impact on the surrounding properties, complements the architecture,
and the light source is concealed.
192. Editor's Note: Former Sec. 6.029, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 5-11-2010. See now Art. IV, General Provisions, for current provisions.
§ 295-357 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-358
1:801
§ 295-359. Site plan.
Procedure. The following procedure shall be followed for the submittal of
site plans. Where procedures and requirements imposed by this section are
either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable procedures and
requirements imposed by any other provision of this chapter or any other
law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations
which are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements
shall govern.
D. The use of floodlights, building-mounted or otherwise, and tall
"freeway-type" fixtures is prohibited.
E. Flag directional lighting is permitted with approval of Site Review
Committee.
A. Preliminary consultation. Prior to the submittal of a site plan, it is
recommended that the developer meet with the Zoning Administrator/
Building Inspector, and/or other appropriate Village staff to discuss
zoning district, site plan, and landscaping plan requirements. Such
meeting should occur prior to any extensive outlay of funds on the part
of the developer since it is intended to identify potential problems and
methods to alleviate them and to encourage a cooperative effort
between the developer/owner and the Village.
B. Plan submittal. Twelve copies of all site plans requiring approval of the
Site Review Committee shall be submitted no later than 10 days prior to
the third Tuesday of the month to the Village Clerk-Treasurer. All plans
shall be drawn to an engineering scale no greater than one inch equals
100 feet plus one complete set of such plans reduced in size to 11
inches by 17 inches and include the following information:
(1) Name of project/development;
(2) Location of project/development by street address or CSM;
(3) Name and mailing address of developer/owner;
(4) Name and mailing address of engineer/architect;
(5) North point indicator;
(6) Scale;
(7) Boundary lines of property, with dimensions;
(8) Location identification and dimensions of existing and proposed:
(a) Topographic contours at a minimum interval of two feet and
key spot elevations;
(b) Adjacent streets and street rights-of-way, respective elevation
of building first floor;
§ 295-358 HOBART CODE § 295-359
1:802
(c) On-site streets and street rights-of-way, and fire lanes;
(d) Utilities and any other easements, including but not limited to
the following types:
[1] Electric.
[2] Natural gas.
[3] Telephone.
[4] Water.
[5] Sewer (sanitary and storm).
[6] Fiber-optic lines.
[7] Other transmission lines.
[8] Ingress-egress easements.
(e) All buildings and structures, existing and proposed, to consider
maximum development of the parcel if more than one structure
could be located on the parcel;
(f) Parking facilities;
(g) Water bodies and wetlands;
(h) Surface water holding ponds, drainage ditches, and drainage
patterns, location and size of culverts;
(i) Sidewalks, walkways, and driveways;
(j) Off-street loading areas and docks;
(k) Fences and retaining walls;
(l) All exterior signs;
(m) Exterior refuse collection areas in R-4 and B-1 must be
enclosed a minimum of three sides;
(n) Exterior lighting;
(o) Traffic flow on and off site.
(9) Location of open space/green space;
(10) Site statistics, including:
(a) Site square footage;
(b) Percent site coverage;
(c) Percent open space and green space.
§ 295-359 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-359
1:803
§ 295-360. Landscaping.
(d) Floor area ratio.
(11) Location and dimensions of proposed outdoor display areas;
(12) Architectural rendering of the proposed structures and buildings,
including:
(a) All dimensions;
(b) Gross square footage of existing and proposed buildings and
structures; and
(c) Description of all exterior finish materials.
(13) Erosion control plans;
(14) A staging plan of any project involving more than one phase of
construction season which sets forth the chronological order of
construction and relates to the proposed uses and structures of
various service facilities and estimated completion dates.
(15) Other information considered pertinent by Site Review Committee
and/or the developers/owners.
C. Review by Site Review Committee. Site plans shall be forwarded to the
Village Clerk-Treasurer 10 days prior to the third Tuesday of the month.
The Site Review Committee shall review and either approve,
conditionally approve, or deny approval of the site plan based upon the
appropriate zoning district requirements and the criteria set forth in
Subsection B above.
D. Appeals. Appeals of a Site Review Committee decision may be made to
the Appeals Board.
A. General statement. The Village of Hobart finds that is in the public
interest for all developments to provide landscape improvements for
the purposes of complementing the natural environment; improving the
general appearance of the Village and enhancing its aesthetic appeal;
preserving the economic base; improving quality of life; delineating and
separating use areas; increasing the safety, efficiency, and aesthetics of
use areas and open space; screening and enhancing privacy; mitigating
the diverse impact of climate; conserving energy; abating erosion and
stabilizing slopes; deadening sound; and preserving the quality of our
air and water.
B. Landscape plan. All applicants for building permits for all zoning
districts shall submit a landscape plan, prepared pursuant to
Subsection C below, for review and approval as required herein prior to
the request for a building permit. Where procedures and requirements
imposed by this section are either more restrictive or less restrictive
than comparable procedures and requirements imposed by any other
§ 295-359 HOBART CODE § 295-360
1:804
provision of this chapter or any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule
or regulation or any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or
impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
C. Procedure. The following procedure shall be followed for the submittal
of landscape plans:
(1) Preliminary consultation. Prior to the submittal of a landscape plan,
it is recommended that the developer/owner meet with the Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector, and/or other appropriate Village
staff to discuss zoning district, site plan, and landscaping plan
requirements. Such meeting should occur prior to any extensive
outlay of funds on the part of the developer since it is intended to
identify potential problems and methods to alleviate them and to
encourage a cooperative effort between the developer/owner and
the Village.
(2) Plan submittal. Twelve copies of all landscape plans requiring
approval by the Site Review Committee shall be submitted to the
Village Clerk-Treasurer 10 days prior to the third Tuesday of the
month. Landscaping plans may be submitted separately or included
in the site plan. All plans shall be drawn to an engineering scale no
greater than one inch equals 100 feet plus one complete set of such
plans reduced in size to 11 inches by 17 inches and contain the
following information:
(a) The location and dimensions of all proposed open space/green
space areas;
(b) Identification of all proposed vegetation:
[1] Symbols, quantities, common names, and size of all plant
materials.
[2] Showing all species to scale of mature crown diameter or
spread.
(c) All existing vegetation to be saved; and
(d) Typical sections of berms, fences, retaining walls, planter
boxes, etc.
(3) Reviews. Review of landscape plans shall be conducted
concurrently and follow the same procedure as site plan review.
(4) Appeals. Appeals of Site Review Committee decisions may be made
to the Appeals Board.
D. Specific requirements.
(1) Ground cover. Open space areas shall, at a minimum, be seeded six
months after completion of building. The following exceptions may
be granted by Village staff during the review process:
§ 295-360 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-360
1:805
(a) The use of mulch material for shrubs and foundation plantings.
(b) The seeding of future expansion areas delineated on site plan;
(c) Areas maintained in a natural state that are undisturbed
during construction; or
(d) Other landscape elements such as decks, patios, stepping
stones or landscape stones may be incorporated therein.
(2) Minimum size of plantings. Required vegetation shall be of the
following minimum planting size. Plantings must be 17 feet from
the property line equally spaced; one tree every 50 feet of road
frontage.
(a) Deciduous trees. One per every 50 feet of road frontage is
required, required size 1.5 inches diameter as measured six
inches above ground. Choice of Maple or Ash.
(b) Evergreen shrubs used for screening purposes, including those
used in conjunction with berms, shall be a minimum of 24
inches in height.
(3) Species.
(a) All trees used in site development shall be indigenous to the
appropriate hardiness zone and physical characteristics of the
site.
(b) All plant material shall conform to "American Standards for
Nursery Stock," latest edition; sponsored by the American
Association of Nurserymen, Inc. All vegetation shall be planted
in accordance with accepted planting procedures.
(c) All proposed vegetation included in the landscape plan shall be
reviewed by the Site Review Committee to assure compliance
with the requirements contained herein.
(4) Implementation/replacement.
(a) All approved landscaping is to be installed in accordance with
compliance timetable.
(b) Any vegetation included on an approved landscape plan that
dies shall be replaced by the owner/developer within one
planting season. Vegetation replaced shall conform to the
approved landscape plan and the requirements contained
herein.
(5) Maintenance. It shall be the joint responsibility of the owner and/or
lessee of the principal use, uses, or building to maintain in a neat
and adequate manner all landscaping materials, vegetation,
screening, and fences contained in the approved landscape and site
plans.
§ 295-360 HOBART CODE § 295-360
1:806
§ 295-361. Regulation of signs.
(6) Compliance timetable. All landscape plans shall include a timetable
for construction, installation or planting within a period not to
exceed two years from the date of commencement of construction.
Any person who is, or has been, required to landscape any part of a
zoning lot and who has not complied with that requirement shall,
within 60 days of receipt of written notice from the Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector that a violation of this chapter
exists, comply with all requirements.
E. District requirements. Future development within the Village shall
meet the following minimum requirements:
(1) R-5 and R-6 Multifamily shall contain, at a minimum:
(a) One tree per 50 feet of road frontage.
(b) Forty percent of total lot area shall remain open/green space.
(2) B-1 Community Business District and B-2 Limited Community
Business District shall contain, at a minimum:
(a) One tree per 50 feet of road frontage.
(b) Twenty-five percent of total lot area shall remain open/green
space.
(3) I-1 Limited Industrial and I-2 Industrial Park shall contain, at a
minimum:
(a) One tree per 50 feet of road frontage.
(b) Twenty-five percent of total lot area shall remain open/green
space.
(4) Buffers. That portion of any business, industrial, or multifamily
district (other than duplex construction) that is abutting property
zoned for single-family residential development shall have a
landscaped area of at least six feet wide extending the full length of
the business, industrial, or multifamily district and meeting the
following minimum requirements:
(a) One tree per 35 lineal feet, or fraction thereof, of lot line
bordering single-family districts.
(b) A shrub, border, hedge, wall, fence, earthen berm, or other
durable landscape barrier, or combination thereof, at least four
feet high, but not exceeding eight feet high, which is 90%
impervious to sight placed along the perimeter of such
landscaped strip, except in the front yard setback.
A. Purpose.
§ 295-360 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-361
1:807
(1) To regulate the size, type, construction standards, maintenance
and placement of signs situated within the boundaries of the
Village of Hobart, Wisconsin.
(2) To promote the public health, safety, welfare and comfort of the
general public by:
(a) Reducing distractions and obstructions from signs that would
adversely affect traffic safety, and alleviate hazards caused by
signs projecting over or encroaching upon the public right-ofway.
(b) Discouraging excessive visual competition in signage and
ensuring that signs aid orientation and adequately identify
uses and activities to the public, and
(c) Preserving or enhancing the natural beauty and unique
physical characteristics of the Village of Hobart as a
community in which to live and work by requiring new and
replacement signage which is:
[1] Creative and distinctive;
[2] Harmonious with the building, surrounding neighborhood
aesthetics and other signs in the area;
[3] Appropriate to the type of activity to which it pertains;
[4] Expressive of the Village's identity in a manner which will
not diminish property values; and
[5] Complementary to the Village's suburban architectural
character and unobtrusive commercial developments.
(d) Promote a healthy and properly designed business
environment.
(e) Protect property values within the Village.
B. Definitions. When used in this article, the following words and phrases
shall have the specific meaning as hereinafter defined, and any words
not listed shall have the meanings provided in other respective state,
county and Village ordinances. [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No.
01-2015; 7-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-07]
AREA — The area of a sign shall be calculated to encompass all
elements of the actual sign face, including any writing, representation,
emblem or any figure or similar character together with any material
forming an integral part of the display or forming the backing surface
or background on which the message or symbols are displayed.
For a wall sign painted on or applied to a building or to a
freestanding wall, the area shall be calculated using the sum of
the area of the smallest rectangles that will encompass each
(1)
§ 295-361 HOBART CODE § 295-361
1:808
BANNER — A sign intended to be hung either with or without a frame,
and that possesses characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations
applied to paper, plastic, or fabric of any kind.
BEACON — A stationary or revolving light that flashes or projects
illumination, single color or multicolored, in any manner that is
intended to attract or divert attention.
BILLBOARD — A freestanding structure consisting of poster panels,
painted bulletins or painted/plastic panels that advertise goods,
products, services, etc., not necessarily sold on the premises on which
the sign is located.
BULLETIN BOARD — A sign located on the premises of a charitable,
religious, or educational institution or a public body for purposes of
announcing events that are held on the premises.
CANOPY SIGN — Any sign that is attached to or part of an awning,
canopy or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a
door, entrance, window or outdoor service area.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN — A sign identifying individuals or companies
involved in design, construction, wrecking, financing, or development
of a building/lot and/or identifying the future use of the building/lot.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A sign for the purpose of directing patrons or
attendants to an establishment off the main traveled highway, or to
service clubs, churches, schools or other nonprofit organizations; also,
signs solely indicating ingress and egress placed at driveway locations
and containing no advertising material.
DIRECTORY SIGN — A sign that indicates the name of four or more
occupants or tenants located on the premises.
DISPLAY SURFACE — The surface made available on the sign, either
for the direct mounting of letters and decorations or for the mounting
of facing material intended to carry the entire advertising message.
DOUBLE-FACED SIGN — A sign with copy on two parallel faces that
are back-to-back, facing in opposite directions.
continuous element, to include all lettering, wording and
accompanying designs or symbols, together with any background
of a different color other than the natural color or finish material of
the building or architectural wall.
The main supporting sign structure (i.e., brackets, posts,
foundation, etc.) shall not be included in the area measurement if
such framework is incidental to the display.
(2)
When a sign has two faces, the area of each face or side shall apply
in determining the area.
(3)
Irregular-shaped signs, excluding wall signs, will be calculated
using the area of the smallest rectangle that will encompass every
element of the sign.
(4)
§ 295-361 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-361
1:809
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER — A sign in which electronic means
is used to change the letters, characters, message and graphics.
EXTERNAL ILLUMINATION — Illumination of a sign with an exterior
light source.
FACING — The surface of the sign or billboard upon, against, or
through which the message of the sign or billboard is displayed.
FLASHING SIGN — A sign whose illumination is not kept constant in
intensity at all times when in use and/or which exhibits changes in light,
color, direction, animation and word/text changes. Illuminated signs
that indicate the date, time and temperature will not be considered
flashing signs.
GROUND SIGN — A sign that is freestanding, placed directly on or
is supported by the ground, and is not physically attached to any
structure.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign in which an artificial source of light is
used in connection with the display of such sign.
INTERNAL ILLUMINATION — Illumination of a sign in which the
source of light is contained within the sign itself.
LETTERS AND DECORATIONS — The letters, illustrations, symbols,
figures, insignia, logo and other media employed to express and/or
illustrate the sign message.
MARQUEE — A permanent roof-like structure attached to and
supported by the building and projecting over public property.
MARQUEE SIGN — A sign attached to, painted on, or supported by a
marquee.
MOBILE MOUNTED SIGN — A sign, excluding banners, mounted on
a frame or chassis designed to be easily relocated, including, but not
limited to, those mounted on wheels, mobile platforms, or trailers.
MONUMENT SIGN — A sign that is continuous from the ground up to
its maximum height and is not attached to any structure.
NEON OR OTHER GAS TUBE ILLUMINATION — Illumination from a
light source consisting of a neon or other gas tube that forms letters,
symbols or other shapes.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign existing at the effective date of
the adoption of this chapter that does not conform to the terms of this
chapter.
OFF-PREMISES SIGNS — Any sign that advertises, calls attention to or
identifies an occupant, business or property situated on a different lot
than the sign.
ON-PREMISES SIGNS — Any sign that advertises, calls attention to or
identifies an occupant, business or property situated on the same lot as
the sign.
§ 295-361 HOBART CODE § 295-361
1:810
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING — Any outdoor structure or device that is
used as an announcement, declaration, demonstration, display,
illustration, indication, symbol, insignia, logo, emblem or
advertisement.
PEDESTAL SIGN — A freestanding sign whose bottom edge is located
above the natural grade and is supported by one or more uprights/poles
and is not attached to any part of a structure.
PORTABLE SIGN — A sign not permanently affixed to the ground,
building, or other structure and that may be easily moved from place to
place.
PROJECTING SIGN — A cantilevered sign affixed to and protruding
perpendicularly from the external wall of a building or structure.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A sign that is used to offer for sale, lease, or rent
the premises upon which such sign is placed.
ROOF SIGN — A sign or billboard that is located or projects above the
lowest point of the eaves or the top of the parapet wall of any building,
or that is painted on or fastened to a roof.
SHOPPING CENTER — A planned/coordinated grouping of
architecturally unified commercial establishments built on the same
site and managed as one operating unit offering for sale goods such as
food, drugs, hardware and personal services.
SIGN — Any display of lettering, logos, colors, lights, or illuminated
neon tubes visible to the public from outside of a building or from a
traveled way that either conveys a message to the public or intends to
advertise, direct, invite, announce or draw attention to goods, products,
services, facilities, persons, property interest or business either on the
lot or on any other premises.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A ground sign, banner, or mobile mounted sign
erected for the purpose of designating a building, new tenant,
development, subdivision promotion, announcement of a special event
or similar informational purpose.
TRIM — The moldings, battens, capping, nailing strips, lattice and
platforms attached to any sign or billboard structure.
VIDEO DISPLAY — Any sign displaying a motion video.
WALL SIGN — A sign or billboard affixed or attached directly to the
exterior wall of a building or structure.
WARNING SIGN — A sign, containing no advertising material, warning
the public of the existence of danger.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign attached to, placed upon, or painted on the
interior of a window or door of a building that is intended for viewing
from the exterior of such building.
C. Authority and permits.
§ 295-361 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-361
1:811
(1) Authority. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter, or
relocate any sign or other advertising structure as defined in this
chapter without first obtaining approval from the Site Review
Committee. All illuminated signs shall, in addition, be subject to the
provisions of the National Electrical Code (NEC).
(2) Application for permit. Application shall be completed on a form
provided by the Village of Hobart. This form will require the
following information:
(a) Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
Location of building, structure, or lot to which or upon which
the sign is to be attached or erected.
(b) Name of person, firm, corporation, or association erecting the
sign.
(c) Written consent of the owner of the building, structure, or land
to which or upon which the sign is to be affixed.
(d) A scale drawing of such sign indicating the dimensions,
materials to be used, color scheme, type of illumination, if any,
and the method of construction and attachment.
(e) A scale drawing indicating the location and position of such
sign in relation to nearby buildings or structures.
(f) For wall signs, a scale drawing indicating the size and position
of such sign in relation to the wall upon which it will be placed.
(g) Copies of any other permit required and issued for said sign.
(h) Additional information as may be required by the Village.
(i) Sign permit applications shall be filed with the Village of
Hobart. The Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector shall
review the application for its completeness, accuracy and
obvious issues of noncompliance.
(3) Issuance of permits.
(a) All applications for signs will be reviewed for compliance with
the Village of Hobart sign ordinance by the Site Review
Committee.
(b) Upon approval of the Site Review Committee, the Zoning
Administrator/Building Inspector will issue permits.
(c) If the proposed sign is not in compliance with the requirements
of this chapter and all other regulations of the Village of
Hobart, the Site Review Committee shall deny such permit and
state the specific lack of compliance with the ordinance
requirements in the denial.
§ 295-361 HOBART CODE § 295-361
1:812
(d) If a proposed sign application is denied, the applicant may:
[1] Resubmit a new application or appeal to the Board of
Appeals.
(e) If the approved sign is not constructed within 12 months from
approval, the sign permit shall be declared null and void.
[Added 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
(4) Fees. Administrative fees for sign permits shall be in accordance
with the Village of Hobart's established fee schedule.
(5) Revocation of permits. The Zoning Administrator/Building
Inspector is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke any
permit issued for failure of the holder to comply with any provision
of this chapter.
D. Illumination standards.
(1) In addition to complying with the provisions of this chapter, all
signs in which electrical wiring and connections are to be used
shall be subject to the applicable provisions of the NEC Electrical
Code. No person may erect a sign with exposed electrical wires.
(2) The use of unshielded lighting, including exposed incandescent
light bulbs hung or strung on poles, wires or any other type of
support intended to illuminate a sign or other advertising device, is
expressly prohibited.
(3) All sign lighting shall be so designed, located, shielded or hooded
so as to prevent the casting of glare or direct light upon adjacent
roadways, surrounding properties or into the sky.
(4) In no case shall the lighting intensity of any sign, whether resulting
from internal or external illumination, exceed 60 footcandles when
measured with a standard light meter held perpendicular to the
sign face at a distance of 10 inches.
(5) Neon signs or other exterior neon displays may be permitted in
cases where they are custom designed to be compatible with the
building's architectural character and where their color has been
selected to harmonize with the buildings' exterior colors. Such
lighting shall be subject to review and approval of the Site Review
Committee.
(6) Electrical illumination of signs in residential districts shall be as
regulated in the Wisconsin Industrial Commission Electrical Code.
(7) All illumination of signs shall be provided utilizing electricity.
E. Landscaping standards.
§ 295-361 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-361
1:813
(1) In the case of any pole or ground-mounted freestanding signs, a
landscape area shall extend a minimum of five feet from the base of
the sign.
(2) Where any sign is proposed to be externally illuminated using
ground-mounted fixtures (i.e., floodlight), landscape plantings shall
be installed in such a manner as will entirely shield the light source
from the surrounding view. Landscape plantings shall be of the type
as will ensure effective year-long screening.
F. Location standards.
(1) In any zoning district, no sign or sign supporting structure shall be
set back/offset less than 10 feet from any abutting lot line, right-ofway
or driveway.
(2) Placement of all signs shall be subject to the vision setback
regulations as put forth in the Village of Hobart Zoning Code,
county and state codes, where applicable.
(3) No nonresidential sign shall be located closer than 50 feet to an
abutting residential zone.
G. Design, construction and erection standards.
(1) Architectural design.
(a) Ground, pedestal, and monument signs shall be architecturally
integrated with the principal building in the following manner:
[1] The base of the sign shall be constructed with the principal
building's primary building material, to the greatest extent
practical.
[2] The color scheme of the sign shall follow the color scheme
of the principal building, to the greatest extent practical.
[3] Architectural features (e.g., sills, piers, reveals, capstones,
medallions, etc.) which are part of the architectural style
of the principal building shall be incorporated into the
sign, to the greatest extent practical.
[4] The Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector and/or Site
Review Committee may approve, deny, or request changes
to a proposed sign, based on the architectural design of
that sign.
(b) Wall signs.
[1] Illuminated signs may be permitted, provided they are
architecturally approved by the Site Review Committee as
part of a total sign package.
§ 295-361 HOBART CODE § 295-361
1:814
[2] Channeled letter sign colors are subject to Site Review
Committee approval as part of a total sign package.
[3] Business logos or symbols may be allowed but shall be
included in the total sign calculation.
(c) Sign content.
[1] Signs shall serve a primary function of site identification.
Signs shall not include superfluous text, symbol, and/or
graphics that serve as advertisements. Features such as
website addresses and phone numbers may be allowed.
[2] Business logos may be allowed, and property addresses
are required to be identified on the sign.
(2) Structure design.
(a) Wind pressure. All signs shall be constructed, erected and
maintained to safely withstand wind pressure as specified by
Wisconsin State Statute and applicable administrative code.
(b) The design, construction and erection of all signs shall be by a
competent professional in the sign design and construction
industry.
(c) Wall signs attached to exterior building walls shall be anchored
or attached in such a manner as will ensure stability and safety.
H. Permitted signs. [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015;
7-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-07]
(1) Residential uses. For all residential uses, the following signs are
hereby allowed, subject to issuance of a permit in accordance with
this section. Name and address signs of buildings containing four
or more residential units indicating only the name of the building,
the name of the development in which it is located, the
management thereof, and/or address of the premises shall be
subject to the following:
(a) Type. Building name and address signs may be either wall
signs or ground signs.
(b) Number. There shall not be more than one name and address
sign for each building, except that where a building abuts two
or more streets and has a separate address, one sign may be
allowed for each abutting street frontage.
(c) Area. Building name and address signs shall not exceed six
square feet in area per sign or per side.
(d) Location. Building name and address signs shall not be located
closer than 10 feet to any property line, right-of-way, or
driveway.
§ 295-361 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-361
1:815
(e) Height. Building name and address signs shall not exceed
seven feet as measured from finished construction grade at the
base of the sign.
(2) Subdivision identification signs. A permanent sign used to
designate a residential subdivision entrance may be permitted,
subject to Site Review Committee approval and the following
criteria:
(a) Subdivision identification signs shall be ground signs.
(b) Number. There shall not be more than two subdivision
identification signs for each point of vehicular access to the
subdivision.
(c) Area. Subdivision identification signs shall not exceed 32
square feet in area per sign or per side.
(d) Location. Subdivision identification signs shall not be located
closer than 10 feet to any property line, right-of-way or
driveway.
(e) Height. Subdivision identification signs shall not exceed seven
feet as measured from finished construction surrounding grade
at the base of the sign.
(3) Commercial, industrial, park, and institutional uses. For all
commercial, industrial, park, and nonreligious institutional uses,
only the following signs are hereby allowed, subject to issuance of a
permit in accordance with Subsection C of this section. [Amended
3-17-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-03]
(a) Wall signs.
[1] Number.
[a] Single-tenant buildings. There shall be not more than
one wall sign for each principal building within the
B-1, C-1, I-1 and I-2 Zoning Districts. Buildings visible
from more than one public roadway may be permitted
to have a second wall sign on a second building wall
elevation with specific approval from the Site Review
Committee, taking into account the physical and
spatial environment, traffic patterns, and overall
integration into the neighborhood and surrounding
development. Wall signs within the B-2 (office) District
shall be prohibited.
[b] Multitenant buildings shall have not more than one
wall sign per tenant, and it shall be located at the
primary entrance within the B-1, C-1, I-1 and I-2
Zoning Districts. Corner-of-building tenant spaces and
buildings having access to more than one public
§ 295-361 HOBART CODE § 295-361
1:816
roadway may be permitted to have a second wall sign
on a second building wall elevation with specific
approval from the Site Review Committee, taking into
account the physical and spatial environment, traffic
patterns, and overall integration into the
neighborhood and surrounding development. Wall
signs within the B-2 (office) District shall be
prohibited.
[2] Area.
[a] Single tenant. Except in the case of multitenant
buildings as regulated in this chapter, the gross
surface area of a wall, including doors and windows,
to which the sign is to be affixed for buildings
containing more than 20,000 square feet shall not
exceed 10% of the area of the tenant building wall or
300 square feet, whichever is less, and for buildings
containing 20,000 square feet or less shall not exceed
20% of the area of the tenant building wall or 150
square feet, whichever is less. No sign design height
shall exceed 1/2 the overall height of the building wall
to which the sign is affixed. The Site Review
Committee, with specific approval, may increase the
maximum allowable square footage by not more than
50% for any permitted sign when taking into account
the physical and spatial environment, traffic patterns,
and overall integration into the neighborhood and
surrounding development.
[b] Multitenant common entrance. For common-entrance
multitenant buildings, the gross surface area of a wall
sign shall not exceed 10% of the area of the tenant
building wall, including doors and windows, to which
the sign is to be affixed or 60 square feet, whichever is
smaller.
[c] Multitenant dedicated access. For multitenant
buildings with a dedicated exterior access, the gross
surface area of a wall sign shall not exceed 10% of the
area of the tenant building wall, including doors and
windows, to which the sign is to be affixed or 60
square feet, whichever is smaller. Signs shall be
affixed to the wall with the primary entrance.
[3] Location. A wall sign may be located on the outermost wall
of any principal building but shall not project more than 10
inches from the wall to which the sign is to be affixed
unless NEC standards require a greater distance.
§ 295-361 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-361
1:817
[4] Height. A wall sign shall not project higher than the
parapet line of the wall to which the sign is to be affixed. A
wall sign shall not exceed 20 feet in height from the base
of the building wall to which the sign is affixed.
(b) Freestanding ground signs.
[1] Number. There shall not be more than one freestanding
ground sign for each principal building, except as follows:
[a] Properties with street frontage on State Highway 29
shall be permitted one ground sign to be installed in
the street yard fronting State Highway 29 in addition
to a ground sign located in a street yard facing a
Village street. In no case may more than one ground
sign be placed in any street yard.
[b] Corner properties with frontage on two public
roadways may have no more than two such signs
located so there is one sign per roadway when
specifically approved by the Site Review Committee,
taking into account the physical and spatial
environment, traffic patterns, and overall integration
into the neighborhood and surrounding development.
[2] Area. The gross surface area of a ground sign shall not
exceed 50 square feet of area per sign or per side, except
as follows:
[a] 100 square feet of area per sign or per side for signs
located in yards fronting roads with a posted speed
limit of 45 miles per hour or more.
[3] Location. A ground sign may not be located closer than 10
feet to any property line, right-of-way or driveway.
[4] Height. A ground sign shall not project higher than 10 feet,
as measured from finished construction surrounding grade
at the base of the sign, except as follows:
[a] Twenty feet for signs located in street yards fronting
State Highways 54 and 172.
[b] Thirty feet for signs located in street yards fronting
State Highway 29.
[5] Width. No ground sign shall exceed 20 feet in width.
(c) Awning, canopy, and marquee signs.
[1] Number. Except for the case of the multitenant buildings
as regulated in this section, there shall not be more than
one awning, canopy, or marquee sign exceeding an
§ 295-361 HOBART CODE § 295-361
1:818
aggregate gross surface sign area of four square feet for
each principal building. Awning, canopy, and marquee
signs which are four square feet or less in aggregate gross
surface area are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter as specified in this section.
[2] Area. The gross surface area of an awning, canopy or
marquee sign shall not exceed 50% of the gross surface
area of the face of the awning, canopy, or marquee to
which such sign is to be affixed or 30 square feet in area,
whichever is less.
[3] Location. A sign may be affixed to or located upon any
awning, canopy, or marquee.
[4] Height. An awning, canopy, or marquee sign shall not
project higher than the top of the awning, canopy, or
marquee to which such sign is to be affixed.
(d) Window signs.
[1] Neon signs. Each business tenant shall be allowed to
display on each public street it fronts one neon sign not
exceeding five square feet in size or 50% of the window
area, whichever is less. Neon signs shall emit a steady
light and only be illuminated during business hours.
Blinking, flashing, strobe or other light animation shall not
be allowed.
[2] Temporary signs. Temporary, nonilluminated window signs
covering less than 25% of the individual window area shall
be allowed.
(e) Changeable letter and electronic message center signs.
[1] Changeable letter or electronic message center signs shall
be per ground sign, subject to the following limitations.
[2] Changeable letter signs shall meet the following:
[a] Shall be part of a permanent ground sign;
[b] Shall not exceed 32 square feet in area;
[c] Shall be allowed in addition to the ground sign square
footage.
[3] Electronic message centers shall meet the following:
[a] Shall be part of a permanent ground sign.
[b] Shall not exceed 32 square feet in area.
§ 295-361 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-361
1:819
[c] Shall be allowed in addition to the ground sign square
footage.
[d] Are permitted to contain individual letters and/or
graphics (such as snowflakes falling, clouds moving,
flags waving, etc.) only. Animation such as video is
prohibited.
[e] Any individual letter or graphic scrolling or otherwise
displayed on an electronic message center shall
remain illuminated and visible for a minimum of two
seconds.
[f] The message shall not flash. Any message that
remains visible for less than two seconds shall be
considered as flashing.
[g] Regardless of the light source, undue brightness is
prohibited, and compliance with § 295-361D is
required. For the purpose of enforcing this provision,
"undue brightness" will be construed to mean
illumination of a white portion of the sign in excess of
the following intensity levels: daylight hours: 10,000
nits; night hours: 750 nits. Additionally the following
provisions shall be provided:
[i] The light source shall be governed by a properly
functioning ambient light measurement tool or
device such as a photocell.
[ii] The sign shall have an automatic phased
proportional dimmer, which shall be used to
reduce nighttime brightness levels (compared to
daytime brightness levels).
[iii] Prior to the issuance of a permit for an electronic
message center sign, the applicant shall provide
written certification from the sign manufacturer
that the light intensity has been factory pre-set
not to exceed the levels specified in this section,
and the intensity level is protected from being
manipulated or altered by other than the
manufacturer through the use of passwordprotected
software or other method as deemed
appropriate by the Zoning Administrator.
[iv] Prior to issuance of a permit for an electronic
message center sign, the owner of the sign shall
provide a signed authorization permitting the
Village to contact the sign manufacturer and/or
successors having authority to adjust the light
§ 295-361 HOBART CODE § 295-361
1:820
intensity, at any time in the future, to verify the
settings for the light intensity.
[h] Electronic message centers may also be subject to
additional state and federal regulations.
(f) Tenant board signs. One multitenant board sign not exceeding
25 square feet in size and six square feet in height shall be
allowed to be placed in front of each individual building in the
B-2 (office) Zoning District.
(g) Directory sign:
[1] Can be a pedestal, ground sign or off-premises sign, and all
regulations apply.
[2] Size of sign shall not exceed 80 square feet per side, 10
feet in height, and eight square feet per tenant.
(h) Temporary sign. In addition to the permanent signs allowed
under this section, temporary signs, as defined in this chapter,
for the purpose of announcing or promoting a new building,
development, occupant, or special events, shall be permitted
for limited periods of time in any district subject to the
following:
[1] Number: A property/business owner is limited to two signs
per lot using such signage.
[2] Area: The gross surface area of a temporary sign shall not
exceed 50 square feet of area. Requests for signage over
50 square feet, but no larger than 75 square feet, may be
permitted by the Village's Director of Planning and Code
Compliance, taking into account site and environmental
factors. Any requests over 75 square feet may be reviewed
and permitted by the Site Review Committee, taking into
account safety, surrounding zoning and the impact on
adjacent properties and attractiveness of the Village.
[3] Location: A temporary sign shall not be located closer than
10 feet to any property line, right-of-way, or driveway.
[4] Height: A temporary sign shall not project higher than 12
feet, as measured from existing grade, at the base of the
sign.
[5] Special conditions: Temporary signs shall be attached to
ground posts or meet the definition of a "mobile mounted
sign." The content of the sign message must directly relate
to the on-premises organization or business use and
operation. Temporary signs and banners shall not be
displayed for more than 30 consecutive days and shall be
§ 295-361 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-361
1:821
limited to no more than 90 days per year. A separate
permit shall be required for each display period.
[6] Development "grand opening" signage package. New
development or redevelopment shall be allowed to put
forth a "grand opening" signage package which will allow
for the placement of "opening/coming soon," "grand
opening," "now hiring" and/or similar/like signage for a
period not to exceed six months. Extensions over six
months may be granted by the Site Review Committee
upon receipt of adequate reasoning/rationale. All such
"grand opening" signage shall be removed within one
week of such development opening. The gross surface area
of a temporary sign shall not exceed 50 square feet of area.
Requests for signage over 50 square feet, but no larger
than 75 square feet may be permitted by the Village's
Director of Planning and Code Compliance, taking into
account site and environmental factors. Any requests over
75 square feet may be reviewed and permitted by the Site
Review Committee, taking into account safety,
surrounding zoning and the impact on adjacent properties
and attractiveness of the Village.
[7] All temporary signs, other than those identified in
§ 295-361L, shall obtain a permit from the Village prior to
display. In addition, all temporary signs require a deposit
to ensure timely removal. If such signs are not removed
within the allowed time frame, the deposit shall be
forfeited. If signage is removed within the allowable time
frame and confirmed by the Village Zoning Administrator,
the deposit shall be refunded. Forfeiture of the sign
deposit does not negate the ability of the Village to issue
municipal citations for failure to comply with timely
removal of a temporary sign or banner.
(4) Religious uses. For all religious uses, only the following signs are
hereby allowed and are subject to Site Review Committee approval:
(a) Wall signs.
[1] Number. There shall be not more than one wall sign for
each principal building.
[2] Area. The gross surface area of a wall sign shall not exceed
2.5% of the area of the building wall, including doors and
windows, to which the sign is to be affixed or 60 square
feet, whichever is smaller.
[3] Location. A wall sign may be located on the outermost wall
of any principal building but shall not project more than 10
inches from the wall to which the sign is to be affixed
unless NEC standards require a greater distance.
§ 295-361 HOBART CODE § 295-361
1:822
[4] Height. A wall sign shall not project higher than the
parapet line of the wall to which the sign is to be affixed. A
wall sign shall not exceed 20 feet in height from the base
of the building wall to which the sign is affixed.
(b) Freestanding ground signs.
[1] Number. There shall not be more than one freestanding
ground sign for each principal building.
[2] Area. The gross surface area of a ground sign per side
shall not exceed 50 square feet of area.
[3] Location. A ground sign may not be located closer than 10
feet to any property line, right-of-way, or driveway.
[4] Height. A ground sign shall not project higher than 10 feet,
as measured from preconstruction grade at the base of the
sign.
(c) Temporary sign or banner.
[1] Number. There shall not be more than one freestanding
temporary ground sign for each site per street frontage.
[2] Area. The gross surface area of a temporary sign or banner
shall not exceed 50 square feet of area.
[3] Location. A temporary sign or banner shall not be located
closer than 10 feet to any property line, right-of-way, or
driveway.
[4] Height. A temporary sign or banner shall not project
higher than seven feet, as measured from preconstruction
grade at the base of the sign.
[5] Special conditions. Temporary signs and banners shall be
attached to ground posts. While the sign or banner face
and message may change throughout the year, the content
of the sign message must directly relate to the religious
organization's use and operation. Auxiliary banners shall
not be displayed for more than 14 consecutive days, and
shall be limited to no more than six events per year
(maximum total of 84 banner days per year).
I. Prohibited signs. The following types of signs are prohibited in the
Village of Hobart: [Amended 7-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-07]
(1) Roof signs.
(2) Signs placed on or affixed to vehicles and/or trailers excepting
properly permitted mobile mounted signs, which are parked on a
public right-of-way, public property, or private property so as to be
visible from a public right-of-way where the apparent purpose is to
§ 295-361 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-361
1:823
advertise a product or direct people to a business or activity.
However, this is not in any way intended to prohibit signs placed
on or affixed to vehicles and trailers, such as lettering on motor
vehicles, where the sign is incidental to the primary use of the
vehicle or trailer.
(3) Signs which are attached or otherwise affixed to rocks, trees, or
other living vegetation.
(4) Signs which imitate, interfere with, obstruct the view of, or can be
confused with any authorized traffic control sign, signal, or other
device.
(5) Flashing or rotating signs, signs containing moving parts, and signs
containing reflective elements which sparkle or twinkle in the
sunlight are not permitted.
(6) Signs indicating the current time and/or temperature may be
permitted, provided they meet all other provisions of this chapter
and subject to approval of the Site Review Committee.
(7) A-frame, sandwich board, sidewalk, or curb signs, except as a
temporary sign, as may be provided for in the exemptions of this
chapter.
(8) Banners, pennants, streamers, balloons, and other gas-filled
figures, except as a temporary sign, as may be provided for in
exemptions of this chapter.
(9) Billboards and off-premises signs, except Village-approved as
temporary off-premises signs to identify businesses during road
construction. Official Village bulletin boards are also allowed offpremises.
(10) Any sign advertising or identifying a business or organization
which is either defunct or no longer located on the premises is not
permitted.
(11) Any sign larger than 50 square feet in area except as may
otherwise be permitted under the terms of this chapter and subject
to review and approval by the Site Review Committee if the sign is
proposed to be located within a Village-owned park or preserve.
(12) Projecting signs.
(13) Portable and wheeled signs.
(14) Signs or other advertising painted directly on walls unless
specifically approved by the Site Review Committee if the sign is
proposed to be located within a Village-owned park or preserve.
(15) Inflatable signs and tethered balloons.
§ 295-361 HOBART CODE § 295-361
1:824
(16) Signs attached to, erected or maintained on any standpipe, exterior
stairway, fire escape, tower, or balcony so as to interfere with the
use thereof.
(17) Signs erected at or near the intersection of any streets in such
manner as to obstruct free and clear vision.
(18) Signs at any location where, by reason of the position, shape or
color, may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with
any authorized traffic sign, signal or device.
(19) Signs which make use of the words "STOP," "LOOK," "DANGER" or
any other word, phrase, symbol, or character in such manner as to
interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic.
(20) Signs erected, constructed or maintained so as to obstruct any exit
or any window opening necessary for required light or ventilation.
(21) Signs extending above the top or beyond the side of the exterior
wall to which such sign is attached.
(22) Signs with associated lighting fixtures which project more than 10
inches from the exterior wall to which they are attached.
(23) Signs entirely supported by a parapet wall.
(24) Signs, cards, banners, pictures, handbills, sign posters,
advertising, or notice of any kind on public ground, public
waterway or upon any structure projecting over any public
thoroughfare, public ground or public waterway within the Village
except by Site Review Committee authorization.
(25) Except as may otherwise be permitted by this chapter, the
placement, creation, or use of outdoor advertising devices such as
banners, decorative displays or other advertising devices of cloth,
paper, or other nonrigid materials.
J. Existing signs.
(1) Existing signs which become nonconforming upon adoption of this
chapter shall not be reconstructed, remodeled, relocated or
changed in size unless such action will make the sign conforming in
all respects with this chapter. Nonstructural changes to an existing
freestanding sign face as a result of tenant changes, business name
changes, ownership change or other content-related changes shall
require compliance with this chapter.
(2) A nonconforming sign or sign structure which is destroyed or
damaged may be restored only after the owner has shown that the
damage did not exceed 50% of the appraised value of the sign. If
such sign or sign structure is destroyed or damaged to an extent
exceeding 50% of the appraised sign value, it shall be removed and
shall not be reconstructed or replaced unless such action makes
§ 295-361 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-361
1:825
the sign and sign structure conforming, in all respects, to the Sign
Code. If restoration of a damaged sign is not completed within six
months of the date damage occurred, such sign shall be removed or
replaced in a manner as will conform with all specifications of this
chapter. Replacement signs may require Site Review Committee
approval.
(3) A nonconforming sign or sign structure shall be removed within 30
days of the date the building containing the use to which the sign is
accessory is demolished or destroyed to an extent exceeding 50%
of the building's appraised value.
(4) At any such time as the owner of any building or lot on which a
nonconforming sign(s) is located, requests Site Review Committee
approval for any change to the use, building, or lot, the Site Review
Committee may require that such nonconforming sign(s) be
removed or made to conform with this chapter as a condition of
building or site approval.
K. Maintenance and removal of signs. The Village Board may cause any
sign or other advertising structure which is, in the Board's opinion, an
immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and
without notice.
(1) Appearance requirements:
(a) The owner of any sign as defined and regulated by this chapter
shall be required to properly maintain the appearance of all
parts and supports of their sign as directed by the Village.
(b) In the event that the sign owner does not provide proper sign
maintenance within 30 days after written notification from the
Village, the sign shall be removed as provided in this chapter.
(2) Removal of certain signs and billboards.
(a) Any sign or billboard, now or hereafter existing, which no
longer advertises a bona fide business or product, or which is
dilapidated, out of repair, unsafe, insecure, or has been
constructed, erected or maintained in violation of the
provisions of this chapter, shall be taken down and removed by
the owner, agent, or person having the beneficial use of the
building or land upon which such sign may be found. If within
30 days after written notification from the Village the sign
owner fails to comply with such notice, the Village may remove
such sign. Any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the
owner of the building or land to which such sign is attached. In
the event such cost and expenses are not paid within 30 days
from the date of billing, then the costs and expenses incurred
for such removal shall be assessed against the real estate upon
which such sign is located and collected as other taxes are
collected on said real estate.
§ 295-361 HOBART CODE § 295-361
1:826
(b) Any sign which is constructed without proper approval and
permit shall be removed or must be issued a proper permit
within five days' notice to the owner by the Village. In the event
that the owner of such sign is not issued a proper permit or
fails to remove said sign, the Village may remove such sign.
Any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the
building or land to which such sign is attached. In the event
such cost and expenses are not paid within 30 days from the
date of billing, then the costs and expenses incurred for such
removal shall be assessed against the real estate upon which
such sign is located and collected as other taxes are collected
on said real estate.
(c) In the event that the owner of an illegal sign cannot be
ascertained by the Village, then notice as indicated in this
chapter shall be given to the owner of the real estate upon
which the sign is located. In the event that the owner of the
real estate is not issued a proper permit or does not remove the
sign within 30 days, then such sign may be removed by the
Village of Hobart. Any expense incident thereto shall be paid
by the owner of the building or land to which such sign is
attached. In the event such cost and expenses are not paid
within 30 days from the date of billing, then the costs and
expenses incurred for such removal shall be assessed against
the real estate upon which such sign is located and collected as
other taxes are collected on said real estate.
(d) If a permit is denied, the Village shall issue a five-day removal
notice. If the sign is not removed within the five-day period, the
sign may be removed by the Village of Hobart. Any expense
incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the building or
land to which such sign is attached. In the event such cost and
expenses are not paid within 30 days from the date of billing,
then the costs and expenses incurred for such removal shall be
assessed against the real estate upon which such sign is
located and collected as other taxes are collected on said real
estate.
(e) The cost of removing any signs located in the road right-of-way
at the time the road is widened, and such signs must be
relocated or removed, shall be paid by the sign owner.
L. Sign exemptions.
(1) The following outdoor signs, advertising structures or devices shall
be exempted from this section:
(a) One wall sign not to exceed three square feet in size
maintained by the owner or occupant of any residential
building for the purpose of displaying the name of the owner or
occupant. Home occupation signs shall not be permitted.
§ 295-361 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-361
1:827
(b) Bulletin boards not over 15 square feet in size for public,
charitable or religious institutions when the same are located
on the premises of said institutions. Such signs shall be subject
to the location, lighting and landscaping standards as set forth
in this chapter and shall not exceed seven feet in height.
(c) Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of
erection when cut into any masonry surface or when
constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials grave
markers, statutory, or other remembrances of persons or
events that are noncommercial in nature.
(d) Traffic signs, legal notices, railroad crossing signs, danger and
such temporary emergency or nonadvertising signs as may be
erected for the public safety.
(e) One sign, not to exceed 15 square feet in area, identifying farm
operations on all agricultural parcels of land.
(f) Flag poles 25 feet or less.
(g) Special decorative displays or signs in public right-of-way
when authorized by the Village Board.
(h) Up to four Village authorized and constructed directional signs
for any single business or organization, provided such signs do
not exceed three square feet in area or four feet in height.
Village-supplied off-premises direction signs shall be located in
accordance with Site Review Committee approval.
(i) Signs which are located within the interior of any building and
which are not visible from the exterior of the building.
(j) Yard sale signs, provided that no person shall attach posters,
notices or advertisements to utility poles, meter posts, or trees
in or along any street right-of-way within the Village; and, that
no person shall put up any notice upon any building, wall,
fence, or other property of another person without having first
obtained the consent of the owner of such property. The
maximum time limit for all yard sale or estate sale signs is
three consecutive days and nine cumulative days in a one-year
period. Such signs shall not exceed six square feet in area.
(k) Nonilluminated window signs, including but not necessarily
limited to paper signs, box signs, and painted window signs,
covering less than 25% or 10 square feet, whichever is less, of
the individual window area.
(2) The following temporary signs shall also be exempted from this
chapter, subject to the following conditions:
(a) Temporary real estate signs.
§ 295-361 HOBART CODE § 295-361
1:828
[1] Number. There shall not be more than one temporary real
estate sign for each lot, except that where a lot abuts two
or more streets, one "For Sale" sign may be allowed for
each abutting street frontage.
[2] Area.
[a] Single-family and duplex residential areas. In all
residential zoned areas, temporary "For Sale" or "For
Rent" real estate signs shall not exceed six square feet
in gross surface area.
[b] Business and multifamily residential areas. In
business and multifamily residential zoned areas,
temporary "For Sale" real estate signs shall not
exceed 32 square feet in gross surface area and
temporary "For Lease" or "For Rent" real estate signs
shall not exceed 12 square feet in gross surface area.
[c] Exception. Where vacant land in business and
multifamily zoned areas is "For Lease" or "For Rent," a
freestanding real estate sign, not exceeding 32 square
feet in gross surface area, may be allowed in
accordance with the setback standards established in
this chapter.
[3] Location. Temporary "For Sale" real estate signs shall be
located only upon the premises for sale and shall not be in
the right-of-way. Temporary "For Lease" or "For Rent" real
estate signs shall be attractively designed and located on
the existing business's freestanding sign.
[4] Exceptions.
[a] Property for sale or lease that does not have roadway
frontage may locate a real estate sign on a nearby
property that does have roadway frontage, in
accordance with location requirements stated in this
chapter, shall only be permitted with the permission of
the property owner in which the sign is being placed.
[b] The Site Review Committee may waive and/or modify
location requirements if such requirements would
result in a visual hindrance due to existing vegetation.
[c] If a business site does not have a freestanding sign to
attach a "For Lease" sign, the lease sign may
alternatively be placed on the building facade.
[d] In any case where the setback of the "For Sale" sign
results in the sign being located within the road right-
§ 295-361 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-361
1:829
of-way, the Village shall not be held liable or any sign
damage or maintenance.
[e] A-1 Agricultural Districts and B-1 Community
Business Districts. A temporary "For Sale" (lease,
develop or build to suit) real estate sign, also
constituting a ground sign, on real estate adjacent to a
four-lane state or federal highway is permitted in A-1
Agricultural Districts and B-1 Community Business
Districts, provided the Site Review Committee
approves the sign and the following restrictions are
met:
[i] The "For Sale" real estate sign/ground sign
complies with all rules of the Department of
Transportation;
[ii] The "For Sale" real estate sign/ground sign is
used for the real estate upon which it is placed;
[iii] The "For Sale" real estate sign/ground sign is not
located closer than 10 feet from the property line;
[iv] The real estate that is the subject of the "For Sale"
real estate sign/ground sign is initially a minimum
of 250 acres at the time the permit is granted;
[v] The "For Sale" real estate sign/ground sign's
display surface is not greater than 200 square
feet;
[vi] The "For Sale" real estate sign/ground sign is not
more than 16 feet in height and 30 feet in length;
and
[vii] The "For Sale" real estate sign/ground sign is
removed within a period of one year from the
issuance of the permit, unless the Site Review
Committee approves additional six-month periods
and the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector
issues corresponding renewal permits.
[5] Height.
[a] Temporary "For Sale" real estate signs shall not
project higher than seven feet as measured from
preconstruction grade at the base of the sign.
[b] Temporary "For Lease" or "For Rent" real estate signs
shall not project higher than the existing business's
freestanding sign.
§ 295-361 HOBART CODE § 295-361
1:830
[6] Special conditions. Temporary real estate signs shall be
removed within seven days of the sale or lease of the
premises upon which the sign is located.
(b) Temporary construction signs. [Amended 3-17-2020 by Ord.
No. 2020-03]
[1] Number. A property/business owner is limited to two signs
per lot using such signage.
[2] Location. Temporary construction signs shall be located
only upon the premises upon which construction either is
about to occur or is occurring. Such signs shall be set
back/offset a minimum of 10 feet from any abutting
property line or road right-of-way.
[3] Height. Temporary construction signs shall not project
higher than 12 feet, as measured from preconstruction
grade at the base of the sign.
[4] Area. The gross surface area of a temporary sign shall not
exceed 50 square feet of area. Requests for signage over
50 square feet, but no larger than 75 square feet, may be
permitted by the Director of Planning and Code
Compliance, taking into account site and environmental
factors. Any requests over 75 square feet may be reviewed
and permitted by the Site Review Committee, taking into
account safety, surrounding zoning and the impact on
adjacent properties and attractiveness of the Village.
[5] Time period. Temporary construction signs may be erected
and maintained for a period not to exceed 30 days prior to
the commencement of construction and shall be removed
within 30 days of issuance of an occupancy permit.
(c) Temporary political campaign signs. The Village Board of the
Village of Hobart declares the following legislative intent
regarding the subject of political campaign signs:
[1] Individuals who are political candidates are possessed
with important rights which include the right to vote, to
run for public office, to travel, and to address their appeals
to the voters.
[2] The public is possessed with the important right of safe
and unobstructed travel over the public rights-of-way.
[3] It is necessary as a matter of public policy that the
buildings and grounds of public agencies maintain a strict
appearance of neutrality during political campaigns.
[4] The substantial possibility exists of a proliferation of
political campaign signs in the Village over extended
§ 295-361 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-361
1:831
§ 295-362. Off-street parking requirements in B-1, B-2, I-1, I-2 and
R-4, R-5 and R-6 Districts. [Amended 12-18-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-18]
periods of time with the attendant traffic safety, litter,
structural hazards, and loss of meaning of the message
conveyed by said signs in the absence of any regulation of
such signs.
[5] A compelling need therefore exists for a reasonable system
of regulation of political campaign signs in order to protect
the rights and advance the concerns stated in this section.
[Amended 4-19-2011]
[a] Size. The gross surface area of a political campaign
sign shall not exceed 24 square feet or five feet in
height, where it is proposed or actual placement will
adversely impact pedestrian or traffic safety.
[b] Prohibited on public property. Political campaign signs
shall not be posted on any building, structure, public
right-of-way or grounds that are owned, operated or
maintained by any public agency.
[c] Special conditions. The Village shall be authorized to
remove any political campaign signs that are found to
be in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
[d] Time limit. Such signs shall not be posted prior to the
election campaign period as defined in § 12.04(1)(a),
Wis. Stats., in connection with which the sign is being
posted, and shall be removed within 10 days after the
election in connection with which the sign was posted.
M. Penalty, enforcement by injunction, declared nuisances.
(1) Penalty. Any person, firm, company, or corporation who violates,
disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with or who resists
the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to the penalties provided in § 1-3. Each day that a violation
exists shall constitute a separate violation and be punishable as
such. [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
(2) Declared nuisances. Any sign or similar advertising structure
erected, structurally altered, painted, moved, or maintained in
violation of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to be a
nuisance per se, and the Village may apply to any court of
competent jurisdiction to restrain or abate such.193
193. Editor's Note: Original Subsection N, Appeals, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015.
§ 295-361 HOBART CODE § 295-362
1:832
A. Location. All parking spaces required to serve employees and visitors of
buildings erected or established after the effective date of this chapter
shall be located on the same zoning lot as the building or use served.
Off-street parking areas may be located in the front of the buildings in
any district, with a minimum of 25 feet of green space/open space from
the property line. However, uninterrupted walkways shall be provided
between the buildings and adjacent sidewalks or trails to allow
pedestrians to safely access the buildings without crossing the parking
areas. [Amended 3-17-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-02]
B. Floor area. The term "floor area" for the purpose of calculating the
number of off-street parking spaces required shall be determined on the
basis of the exterior floor area dimensions of the building, structure or
use times the number of floors, minus 10%, except as may hereinafter
be provided or modified.
C. Nonconforming structures. Should a nonconforming structure or use be
damaged or destroyed (defined as 50% or more of the structure being
damaged) by accidental destruction, Acts of God, or otherwise, it may
be reestablished if elsewhere permitted in these regulations, except
that in doing so, any off-street parking or loading space which existed
before shall be retained and expanded as necessary to comply with the
standards herein.
D. Change of use or occupancy of buildings. Any change of use or
occupancy of any building or buildings, including additions thereto,
requiring more parking shall not be permitted until there is furnished
such additional parking spaces as required by these regulations.
E. Parking dimensions. Parking stall shall be a minimum of 180 square feet
and not less than nine feet in width.
F. Within structures. The off-street parking requirements may be
furnished by providing spaces so designed within the principal building
or structure attached thereto; however, unless provisions are made, no
building permit shall be used to convert said parking structure into
another activity until other adequate provisions are made to comply
with the required off-street parking provisions of this chapter.
G. Circulation between bays. Parking areas shall be designed so that
circulation between parking bays or aisles occurs within the designated
parking lot and does not depend upon a public street. Parking area
design which requires backing into the public street is prohibited.
H. Driveway requirements. Notwithstanding other provisions of this
chapter concerning appeals and review of plans submitted hereunder,
permits for and review of driveway approaches shall be as provided
below:
(1) All off-street parking spaces shall have access from driveways and
not directly from the public street.
§ 295-362 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-362
1:833
(2) Driveway access curb openings on a public street shall not be
located less than 12 feet from each other.
(3) No singular curb cut shall exceed 40 feet in width unless approved
by the Site Review Committee.
(4) Joint driveways are encouraged and require appropriate Village
staff approval, maximum 50 feet width, unless approved by the Site
Review Committee.
(5) The number, location(s), and width(s) of curb cuts shall be as
determined by the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector upon
consultation with the Site Review Committee, taking into
consideration traffic flow, safety concerns, and the needs of the
business.
I. Drainage. All parking areas shall have adequate drainage.
J. Surfacing.
(1) R-5 and R-6 Multifamily, B-1 Community Business District and B-2
Limited Community Business District. All areas intended to be
utilized for parking space and driveways shall be surfaced with
bituminous asphalt or concrete, and are to be installed within one
year of completion of construction. Plans for surfacing and
drainage of driveways and stalls for five or more vehicles shall be
submitted.
(2) I-1 and I-2 Industrial Districts. All areas intended to be utilized for
parking space and driveways up to 20 feet beyond the rear of the
buildings are to be surfaced with bituminous asphalt or concrete.
Non-hard-surfaced areas are to be approved by the Site Review
Committee.
K. Striping. All parking stalls shall be marked with painted lines not less
than four inches wide.
L. Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall
be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining property,
abutting residential uses, and public rights-of-way.
M. Signs. No sign shall be so located as to restrict the sight lines and
orderly operation and traffic movement within any parking lot.
N. Curbing. All off-street parking shall have a perimeter concrete curb and
gutter around the entire parking lot unless the site plan shows that
runoff from the parking lots will not cause erosion or adversely affect
adjacent properties.
O. Parking lot landscaping. To avoid the undesirable monotony, heat and
wind associated with large parking lots, such lots shall have a minimum
of one internal landscaped island-delineator in addition to any required
traffic safety island for each 21,780 square feet (1/2 acre) or fraction
§ 295-362 HOBART CODE § 295-362
1:834
thereof of off-street parking space; such islands shall be a minimum of
360 square feet (two parking spaces) and shall be bounded by concrete
curbing. Trees may be installed in approved traffic safety islands used
to delineate parking spaces from driving aisles and in other areas.
The internal landscaped island(s) required above may be deleted if the
aggregate area and trees of individual traffic islands meets or exceeds
the above requirement.
P. Parking lot screening. The parking or storage of operable motor
vehicles, if not within an enclosed building structure, shall be
effectively screened as defined.
Q. Planting standards. All plant material shall conform to the
specifications and procedures stated in § 295-360, Landscaping, of this
article. Landscaping, except required grass or ground cover, shall not
be located closer than six feet from the edge of any driveway pavement
or within the established right-of-way.
R. Maintenance. It shall be the joint and several responsibility of the
lessee and owner of the principal use, uses or building to maintain in a
neat and adequate manner the parking space, access ways, striping,
landscaping, screening, and required fences.
S. Use of required area. Required accessory off-street parking spaces in
any district shall not be utilized for open storage, sale or rental of
goods, or storage of inoperable vehicles without approval of the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
T. Number of spaces required to be compatible with Article XXVIII, offstreet
parking requirements, of this chapter. The following minimum
number of off-street parking spaces shall be provided and maintained
by ownership, easement, and/or lease for and during the life of the
respective uses hereinafter set forth unless the developer/owner
provides the Site Review Committee with justification for a lesser
amount.
(1) Manufacturing, fabricating, or processing of a product or material.
One space per two employees (while considering shift changes),
plus one space for each company-owned truck (if not stored inside
principal building), plus visitor parking.
(2) Distribution centers, storage of handling of bulk goods. One space
per two employees on maximum shift and one space for each
company-owned truck (if not stored inside principal building), plus
visitor parking.
(3) Research or testing facilities. One space per two employees on the
major shift, plus one space for each company owned truck, plus
visitor parking.
(4) Office, four spaces per 1,000 gross square feet of floor area.
§ 295-362 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-362
1:835
§ 295-363. Off-street loading requirements in B-1, B-2, I-1 and I-2
Districts.
(5) Hotels/motels, if allowed. One space for each rental unit and one
space for every four employees on maximum shift, plus additional
spaces as follows for affiliated uses: Restaurants, taverns, supper
clubs, cocktail lounges, night clubs, and banquet rooms: one space
for each 50 square feet of gross customer service area, plus one
space for each 250 square feet of other floor area.
(6) Other compatible uses not listed above. Number of parking spaces
based on the requirements of § 295-310, Specific requirements for
off-street parking, of this chapter.
A. Minimum facilities. All warehousing, manufacturing plants, or any
other building where large amounts of goods are received or shipped
shall provide adequate loading and unloading berths as determined by
the Site Review Committee.
B. Location.
(1) All required loading berths shall be off-street and located on the
same lot as the building or use to be served.
(2) Loading berths shall not occupy the front yard.
(3) Loading berths located at the side of buildings on a corner lot shall
observe the following requirements:
(a) Loading berths shall not conflict with pedestrian movement.
(b) Loading berths shall not obstruct the view of the public rightof-
way from off-street parking access.
(c) Loading berths shall comply with all other requirements of the
site review plan. [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
(4) Each loading berth shall be located with appropriate means of
vehicular access to a street in a manner which will cause the least
interference with traffic.
C. Size. A required off-street loading berth shall be at least 55 feet in
length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space, and shall have a
vertical clearance of at least 15 feet.
D. Surfacing. All areas intended to be utilized for off-street loading shall be
surfaced with bituminous asphalt or concrete. Any non-hard-surfaced
areas are to be reviewed and approved by the Site Review Committee.
E. Utilization. Space allocated to any off-street loading shall not, while so
allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street
parking facilities.
§ 295-362 HOBART CODE § 295-363
1:836
§ 295-364. Outdoor storage. [Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No.
01-2015]
Outdoor storage of any material other than motor vehicles in operable
condition is prohibited. Storage of materials, equipment, parts, inventory,
etc., shall take place in enclosed structures that meet the general building
and performance requirements contained herein (see § 295-357). Upon
approval by the Site Review Committee, a ninety-percent impervious fence
may be used. Outdoor storage of motor vehicles in operable condition is
allowed, provided such outdoor parking (storage) areas are screened.
F. Change of use. Where a change of use in off-street loading facilities is
made necessary due to damage, destruction, increased use, or any
other change of use, such change shall be approved by the Site Review
Committee.
§ 295-363 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-364
1:837
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 2000 Code to 2014 Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. III.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 2000 Code Location in 2014 Code
Charter Ordinance of the Village of Hobart Ch. 5
Ch. 1, General Ordinances
1.0, General Provisions
§§ 1.001, 1.003, 1.004, 1.007 to 1.009 NLP; see Ch. 1, Art. III
§ 1.002 Ch. 1, Art. I
§§ 1.005 and 1.006 Ch. 1, Art. II
1.1, Brown County Community Relations
Social Development Commission
REP
1.3, Brown County Equal Opportunities in
Housing Ordinance
REP
1.4, Village of Hobart Obligates itself to Pay
County Taxes
Ch. 40, Art. I
1.6, Collection of Sewer Taxes for
Interceptor
Ch. 40, Art. II
1.7, Office of Village Administrator Ch. 7
1.8, Record Retention Ordinance Ch. 75, Art. I
1.9, Election and Term of Office for Village
Board
Ch. 82, Art. I
1.10, Creation of Police Committee and
Police Department
REP
1.11, Creation of Municipal Court Ch. 26
1.12, Imposition of Juvenile Dispositions and
Sanctions in the Municipal Court
REP
1.13, An Ordinance to Establish Municipal
Code Relative to Meetings on Election Day
Ch. 33, Art. I
1.14, Nondisclosure of Confidential
Information
Ch. 54, Art. I
§ 295-364 HOBART CODE § DT-1
1:838
Chapter/Title From 2000 Code Location in 2014 Code
1.15, Charge to Benefiting Owners for
Professional Fees
Ch. 163, Art. I
1.16, Community Development Authority Ch. 20
Ch. 2, Parks and Recreation
2.0, Park Special Fund Ordinance Ch. 163, Art. II
2.1, Ordinance Regulating Parks Ch. 215
2.2, Tree Ordinance Ch. 255
Ch. 3, Peace and Good Order
3.0, Burning Ordinance Ch. 127
3.1, Ordinance Establishing Curfew Ch. 197, Art. I
3.2, Ordinance on Abatement of Barking
Dogs
Ch. 102, Art. I
3.3, Weapons and Discharge Ordinance Repealed by Ord. No.
03-2010; see Ch. 170
3.4, Nuisance Ordinance Ch. 207, Art. I
3.5, Prohibited and Protected Animals,
Fowls, Reptiles, and Insects
Ch. 102, Art. II
3.6, Ordinance Restricting Offensive
Industries
Ch. 207, Art. II
3.7, Emergency Alarm Systems Ch. 95
3.8, Peace and Good Order
§§ 3.801 to 3.803, 3.805 to 3.807, 3.810,
3.811, 3.817, 3.822, 3.824, 3.825, 3.828,
3.829, 3.831, 3.832, 3.834
Ch. 221
§ 3.804 REP
§ 3.808 Ch. 102, Art. IV
§§ 3.809, 3.812 and 3.813 Ch. 207, Art. I
§ 3.814 See Ch. 215
§ 3.815 REP
§ 3.816 Ch. 215
§ 3.818 Ch. 121, § 121-11
§ 3.819 Ch. 233, Art. I
§ 3.820 Ch. 160
§ 3.821 Ch. 227, Art. II
§ 3.823 REP
§ 3.826 (Reserved) Omitted
§ 3.827, Truancy offenses Ch. 197, Art. II
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:839
Chapter/Title From 2000 Code Location in 2014 Code
§ 3.830 Ch. 197, Art. III
§ 3.833 Ch. 197, Art. IV
§ 3.835 REP
3.9, Fire Prevention Ordinance Repealed 5-2013
3.95, Solid Fuel-Fired Heating Devices Ch. 177
3.10, Prohibiting the Use of Compression
Brakes in On-Emergency Situations
Ch. 201, Art. I
Ch. 4, Building and Construction
4.0, Adoption of the State Building Code and
Building Permit Requirements
Ch. 121
4.1, Official Map Ordinance Ch. 60
4.2, Storm Water Runoff Ch. 150, Art. I
4.3, Erosion Control Ordinance Ch. 150, Art. II
4.4, Obstructions and Encroachments Ch. 227, Art. I
4.5, Stormwater Management Utility Ch. 150, Art. III
Ch. 5, Licenses, Permits and Fees
5.0, Licensing and Regulation of Dogs Ch. 102, Art. III
5.1, Fees Regarding Flammable Liquids Ch. 163, Art. III
5.3, Explosives and Blasting Ordinance Ch. 156
5.4, Direct Sellers Ordinance Ch. 142
5.5, Regulation and Licensing of Fermented
Malt Beverages and Intoxicating Liquor
Ch. 189, Art. I
5.6, Fire Services Fees Ch. 163, Art. IV
Ch. 6, Zoning Ordinance Ch. 295
7.0, Bicycle Ordinance Ch. 114
6.039, Shoreland Zoning Ch. 293
Ch. 7, Traffic Ordinances
7.0, Bicycle Ordinance Ch. 114
7.1, Speed Zones Ch. 264, Art. I
7.2, Parking and Other Miscellaneous Traffic
Provisions
Ch. 264, Art. II
7.3, State Traffic Laws Adopted Ch. 264, Art. III
Ch. 8, Citations Ch. 14
Ch. 9, Recycling and Garbage Collection
9.0, Recycling Ordinance Superseded by Ord. No.
3-2014
Ch. 10, Health
§ DT-1 HOBART CODE § DT-1
1:840
Chapter/Title From 2000 Code Location in 2014 Code
10.0, Public Sanitation REP
10.1, Solid Waste and Nuisance Ch. 248, Art. I
10.2, Agricultural Shoreland Management
Standards
Ch. 288
10.3, Animal Waste Management Ch. 185, Art. I
Ch. 11, Utilities
11.0, Cross Connection Control Ordinance Ch. 273, Art. I
11.1, Well Abandonment Ordinance Ch. 280, Art. I
11.2, Wellhead Protection Ordinance Ch. 280, Art. II
11.4, Sewer Use and User Charge System
Ordinance
Ch. 237
11.5, Mandatory Hook-Up to Water System Ch. 273, Art. II
11.6, Water Utility Rules and Regulations Ch. 273, Art. III
11.7, Connection Fees Ch. 163, Art. V
Ch. 12, Nonmetallic Mining
12.0, Regulation of Nonmetallic Mining Ch. 194, Part 1
12.1, Nonmetallic Mining Reclamation Ch. 194, Part 2
Ch. 125, Alcoholic Beverages
125.0, Underage and Intoxicated Persons;
Possession; Proof of Age; Presence on
Licensed Premises
Ch. 189, Art. II
Appendix A, Fees to be Set by Resolution NI
Appendix B, Effective Dates of Village of
Hobart Ordinances
NI
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:841
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
7-15-2014 Prohibited and
protected animals, fowl,
reptiles and insects;
licensing and
regulation of animals;
zoning amendment
Ch. 102, Art. II;
Ch 102, Art III;
Ch. 295
Ord. No.
02-2014
8-27-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 295
Ord. No.
04-2014
10-7-2014 Administration of
government;
organization of Village
amendment
Ch. 5
12-16-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 295
Ord. No.
07-2014
1-6-2015 Nonmetallic mining
reclamation
Ch. 194, Part 2
Ord. No.
01-2015
1-6-2015 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. III
Ord. No.
02-2015
3-17-2015 Private well
abandonment
amendment
Ch. 280, Art. I
Ord. No.
03-2015
4-8-2015 Trees amendment Ch. 255
Ord. No.
01-2016
1-8-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 295
Ord. No.
02-2016
1-19-2016 Comprehensive Plan NCM
Ord. No.
03-2016
3-1-2016 Regulation of special
events
Ch. 250
Ord. No.
04-2016
1-8-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 295
Ord. No.
05-2016
6-7-2016 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 221
Ord. No.
06-2016
6-7-2016 Animals: prohibited and
protected animals, fowl,
reptiles, and insects
amendment; licensing
and regulation of
animals amendment;
zoning amendment
Ch. 102, Art. II;
Ch 102, Art III;
Ch. 295
§ DL-1 HOBART CODE § DL-1
1:842
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
07-2016
6-7-2016 Fees: fee in lieu of land
dedication amendment
Ch. 163, Art. II
Ord. No.
08-2016
6-7-2016 Elections: absentee
ballots
Ch. 33, Art. III
Ord. No.
2017-01
7-5-2017 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2017-02
9-5-2017 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 221
Ord. No.
2017-03
9-5-2017 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 221
Ord. No.
2017-04
9-5-2017 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 221
Ord. No.
2017-05
Not yet codified
Ord. No.
2017-06
10-3-2017 Vehicles and traffic:
speed zones
amendment
Ch. 264, Art. I
Ord. No.
2017-07
10-3-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 295
Ord. No.
2018-01
1-16-2018 Detached Heating
Devices
Ch. 177
Ord. No.
2018-02
1-16-2018 Erosion Control and
Stormwater
Management:
Stormwater
Management Utility
Amendment
Ch. 150, Art. III
Ord. No.
2018-03
6-2-2018 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2018-04
3-20-2018 Firearms and Other
Weapons Amendment
Ch. 170
Ord. No.
2018-05
3-6-2018 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2018-06
3-6-2018 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2018-07
7-17-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 295
Ord. No.
2018-08
8-7-2018 Water: Water Utility
Rules and Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 273, Art. III
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:843
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2018-09
Not adopted
Ord. No.
2018-10
8-7-2018 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2018-11
9-18-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 295
Ord. No.
2018-12
12-4-2018 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2018-13
12-4-2018 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2018-14
12-4-2018 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2018-15
12-4-2018 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2018-16
12-4-2018 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2018-17
1-2-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 295
Ord. No.
2018-18
12-18-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 295
Ord. No.
2018-19
12-18-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 295
Ord. No.
2018-20
1-2-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 295
Ord. No.
2018-21
1-2-2019 Short-Term Rentals Ch. 240
Ord. No.
2018-22
11-7-2018 Administration of
Government;
Organization of Village
Amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
2018-23
11-7-2018 Administration of
Government;
Organization of Village
Amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
2018-24
11-7-2018 Peace and Good Order
Amendment
Ch. 221
Ord. No.
2019-01
2-5-2019 Finance and Taxation:
Disposal of Village-
Owned Real Property
Ch. 40, Art. III
§ DL-1 HOBART CODE § DL-1
1:844
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2019-02
3-5-2019 Vehicles and Traffic:
Parking and Other
Traffic Provisions
Amendment
Ch. 264, Art. II
Ord. No.
2019-03
3-5-2019 Administration of
Government;
Organization of Village
Amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
2019-04
3-5-2019 Administration of
Government;
Organization of Village
Amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
2019-05
4-16-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2019-06
4-3-2019 Building Construction
Amendment
Ch. 121
Ord. No.
2019-07
5-7-2019 Animals: Licensing and
Regulation of Animals
Amendment; Vicious
Animals Prohibited;
Pigeons Amendment
Ch. 102, Art. III;
Ch. 102, Art. IV
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2019-08 9-17-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 11
2019-09 9-17-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 11
2019-10 11-5-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 11
2020-01 2-24-2020 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 11
2020-02 3-17-2020 Zoning Amendment Ch. 295 11
2020-03 3-17-2020 Zoning Amendment Ch. 295 11
2020-04 3-17-2020 Zoning Amendment Ch. 295 11
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:845