Village of Hales Corners Village Code
CHAPTER 1
Village Bylaws
I Title
II Name
III The Village Board
IV Village Officials
V Boards and Commissions
VI Police Department
VII Fire Department
VIII Department of Public Works
IX Village Personnel
X Finance
XI Budget
XII Administrative Review Procedure
XIII Public Records
XIV Smoking
XV Ethics Code
ARTICLE I TITLE
This Chapter shall be known as the “Bylaws of the Village of Hales Corners”, and shall regulate
the government of the Village.
ARTICLE II NAME
The name of this municipal corporation shall be the “Village of Hales Corners”.
ARTICLE III THE VILLAGE BOARD
(1) Meetings.
(a) Regular Meetings. Regular Meetings of the Village Board shall be held at the
Village Hall at 6:45 p.m. as follows:
1. On the second and fourth Monday of each month, excepting the months
of July and August when such regular meeting shall be held only on the
second Monday of each said month; but when the day so designated shall
fall on a legal holiday, such meeting shall be held on the first secular day
following such holiday.
(b) Special Meetings. Special meetings of the Village Board shall be held at the
place where regular meetings of the Board are held unless otherwise specified in
the call and notice of the special meeting. Special meetings may be called by any
two trustees, in writing, filed with the Village Clerk, who shall thereupon
seasonably notify all of the trustees, including the President, of the time, purpose,
and place thereof, by causing written notice of such meeting to be delivered to
each member of the Village Board personally if he can be found, and if he cannot
be found, by leaving in the presence of a member of the family of such Board
member of suitable age and discretion, or if not such member of his family can
be found, then by mailing such notice to such Board member by registered mail;
the Clerk shall cause an affidavit showing the service of such notice as above
provided for, to be filed in his office prior to the time fixed for such special
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
meeting. The Clerk shall give notice immediately upon the call for such meeting
being filed with him.
Special meetings may be held without such notice when all members of the
Village Board are present in person or consent in writing to the holding of the
meeting, such written consent shall be filed with the Clerk prior to calling of the
meeting.
(2) Rules of Village Board.
(a) General Rule. The deliberations of the Village Board while in session shall be
governed by the manual of parliamentary procedure commonly known as
“Roberts’ Rules of Order, Revised”, except when otherwise limited or modified
by these bylaws.
(b) Order of Business. The business of the Village Board shall be conducted in the
following order:
1. Roll Call
2. Approval of Minutes
3. Petitions, oral and written
4. Reports of Standing Committees
5. Reports of Select or Special Committees
6. Reports of Village Officials
7. Allowance of Accounts
8. Adjournment
9. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Village Board may take up business
in any order it sees fit, unless there be objection by any member of the
Village Board, in which event the foregoing shall control.
(c) Disposition of Petitions, Communications, Etc. Every petition or other writing of
any kind, addressed to the Village Board or to the Clerk or other Village officer
for reference to the Village Board shall be delivered by the Clerk or such other
Village officer to the President as soon as convenient after receipt of same, and in
any event, prior to or at the opening of the next meeting of the Village Board
following the receipt of same. Every such petition , or other writing, and every
paper, communication, or other proceeding which shall come before the Board
for action, may be referred by the President, without motion, to the appropriate
committee or officer, unless objected to by some member of the Village Board.
(d) Member to Present all Business. No business shall be considered by the Village
Board unless presented by a member.
(e) Precedence of Motions. When a question is in debate, no action shall be in order
except:
1. To adjourn
2. To lay on the table
3. The previous question
4. To postpone to a certain date
5. To refer to a standing, select, or special committee
6. To amend
7. To postpone indefinitely
8. The foregoing several motions shall have precedence in the order in
which they stand.
(f) Members to Speak not More than Twice. No member of the Village Board shall
speak more than twice on the same question except by leave of the Village
Board.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
(g) Every Member to Vote Unless Excused. Every member shall vote when a
question is put, unless the Village Board shall excuse him.
(h) Division of Ayes and Nos. On all questions, it shall be in order to call for a
division or for the ayes and nos, if made previously to the decision of the
President.
(i) Call for the Previous Question. Any member of the Village Board desirous of
terminating the debate may call the previous question when the question
announced by the President shall be: Shall the main question be put?” If a
majority of the members of the Village Board present vote in the affirmative, the
main question shall be put to a vote without further debate, and its effect shall be
to put an end to all debate and bring the Village Board to a direct vote, first upon
the pending amendments, if any, and then upon the main question.
(j) Reconsideration of Votes. Any member of the Village Board if in the majority
may move for the reconsideration of any vote in question at the same meeting or
at the next succeeding regular or adjourned meeting. A motion to reconsider
being put and lost shall not be renewed.
(k) Suspension of Rules. Any of the provisions of this Article may be suspended
temporarily by a majority of the members of the Village Board present at any
meeting.
(3) Village Board Committees
(a) Appointments. All appointments to the Village Board committees shall be made
by a majority vote of all of the members of the Village Board, and by a like vote
the membership of such committees shall be changed from time to time, but
unless so changed, all such appointments shall terminate on the third Tuesday in
April of each year.
(b) Standing Committees. The standing committees of the Village Board shall
consist of six (6) committees which shall have three (3) members of the Village
Board. The committees shall have general responsibility of, and to which there
shall be referred, questions pertaining to the subject matter which the committee
has responsibility of according to the committee classifications.
1. Public Finance
a. Recommend general financial policy of municipal government.
b. Assist Village Commissioner in preparation of annual budget
and budgetary control.
c. Audit claims against the Village and against others.
d. Provide the number, title, and compensation range of each
officer and each position in the Village service and the proposed
appropriation for the same for the ensuing year.
e. Provide a recommended compensation schedule of uniform rates
of pay for offices of the Village service and other positions.
f. Authorize borrowing of funds (bonds, bank loans).
g. Recommend Village insurance policy and policies.
h. Review and recommend schedule of costs for fees and permits.
i. Investment of Village surplus funds.
j. Purchase or sale of Village property (financial aspect).
k. Apportionment of assets and liabilities between the Village and
other municipalities.
l. All expenditures not included in the annual budget shall be
referred to the Finance Committee for approval, prior to approval
of the Village Board.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
m. Approve all transfer of funds within a fiscal budget, for major
outlays.
2. Public Safety
a. Recommend installation of pedestrian and vehicle traffic lanes,
walk lights, stop signs, street lighting, warning signals, and
signs, etc.
b. All matters pertaining to the police and fire departments.
c. Proper lighting of public buildings, grounds.
d. All safety matters pertaining to streets, such as parking, loading,
and unloading zones, sight clearance, etc.
e. School guard program (crossing guards).
f. Speed limitations on local streets and highways.
g. Civil defense.
h. Provide for adequate safety and protection of persons and
property within the Village.
3. Public Health – The Public Health Committee shall be responsible for all
matters pertaining to the sanitary conditions of the Village, viz., sanitary
sewer, water, and general health. It shall recommend to the Village
Board the installation, repair, and maintenance of sanitary sewer, water
mains.
a. Creek enclosures, widening of creeks, relocation of drainage
ditches.
b. Inspection of sewage treatment plant.
c. Installation and assessment of storm and sanitary sewers.
d. Claims pertaining to sanitary sewers and sewer laterals.
e. Pollution of rivers, streams, ditches.
f. Recommendations for water mains to be installed.
g. Recommendation for sanitary sewer installations.
h. Request or denial of utility services.
i. Complaints against smoke, odors, noise, etc.
j. General sanitation control and inspection.
k. Sanitary code.
l. Village dumping operations.
4. Public Buildings and Grounds – The Building and Grounds Committee
shall have the responsibility for all municipal buildings pertaining to
construction of new buildings, purchase of land, maintenance, repair, and
remodeling of existing buildings. The Committee shall also be charged
with the responsibility of roadway and streets pertaining to
recommendations for construction, repair, and maintenance. Also,
sidewalks, if and when, repaired.
a. Recommend construction, repair, and maintenance of buildings,
roadways, and streets, sidewalks which will include widening of
streets, resurfacing and paving of streets, extension and vacating
of streets.
b. Recommendations for curb and gutter, driveways, etc.
c. Purchase and sale of property.
d. Recommend planting strips, fences, walls separating Villageowned
property from private property.
5. Public Ordinances, Licenses, Permits – The Ordinance Committee shall,
with the assistance from the Village Attorney, consider and prepare all
matters referred to them for the creation of ordinances, and the
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
amendment and revision of existing ordinances. This shall apply to
licenses, permits, etc. Various boards and commissions may prepare
ordinances which shall be submitted to the Ordinance Committee and
Village Attorney for review and presentation to the Board of Trustees.
a. Preparation of all Village ordinances.
b. Review Village ordinances, codes, license applications, etc. and
recommend the same to the Village Board.
c. Study all referrals to the Committee for amendment and revision
of existing ordinances, building, electrical, plumbing, heating,
and zoning codes.
6. Personnel Committee – The Personnel Committee shall assist the Village
Commissioner in developing personnel policies and objectives within the
framework of the Village governmental structure which shall be
recommended to the Village Board who shall determine and create the
overall policy of personnel programs.
a. Recruitment of personnel.
b. In-service activities (discipline, health, safety and welfare
programs, transfers, promotion, demotion, etc.)
c. Salaries, working hours, good conduct, vacations, sick leave,
working conditions, etc.
d. Position classification and compensation recommendations.
e. Grievances, layoffs, suspensions, dismissals, retirement of
personnel.
f. Training programs.
The final power of decision on personnel policy matters rests with the
Village Board.
ARTICLE IV VILLAGE OFFICERS
(1) Elective Officers. The elective officers of the Village are:
(a) President
(b) Six Trustees
(c) Justice of the Municipal Court
(2) Terms of Elective Officers. The term of office of all elective officers shall be two (2)
years and until their respective successors are elected or appointed and qualify. All
officers shall be elected at the annual spring election in even-numbered years, except that
three (3) trustees shall be elected at the annual spring election in odd-numbered years.
(3) Appointed Officers. In addition to the elective officers, the Village Board may appoint
such additional officers for such terms, with such duties, and for such compensation as
the Village Boards shall determine.
(4) Village Administrator.
(a) Appointment. The Village Administrator shall be appointed by the President
with the advice and approval of the Village Board.
(b) Duties. Subject to the supervision and control of the Village Board, the Village
Administrator shall have general and supervisory control of all the departments
of Village government, and more particularly shall:
1. Appoint, and, when necessary or desirable for the good of the Village,
and with just cause, suspend or remove any Village employee after
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
consultation with the departmental supervisor, except statutory or elected
Village officials, the Village attorney, and such personnel under the
jurisdiction of separate Village boards or commissions or chiefs having
specific statutory powers on appointment, suspension, or removal.
2. Have general and supervisory control over the equipment and clerical
help in the Village.
3. Prepare annually and submit to the Finance Committee of the Village
Board, a budget for the upcoming fiscal period which complies with
appropriate statutes, provisions of the Village code, and other directives
of the Village Board.
4. Have superintendence of all expenditures and purchases of the Village.
5. Have charge and superintendence of all streets, alleys, highways,
sidewalks, crosswalks, parks, public playgrounds, municipal buildings,
garages, and all other public buildings and grounds belonging to the
Village; of all ditches, drains, sewers, water mains, and of the
construction, operation, and maintenance of all public works.
6. Have superintendence over personnel and the training of personnel, with
the responsibilities of developing training programs and participating in
labor negotiations.
7. Develop from time to time plans of administrative organization and
procedure, including a general organizational chart. Such plans shall
define job descriptions, administrative authority, and responsibility.
8. Prepare an agenda for all regular and special meetings of the Village
Board and Plan Commission.
9. Be a member of all committees and commissions, but without vote.
10. Make recommendations to the Village Board and its committees with the
objective of increasing economy, efficiency, and improved service.
11. Have such other duties as may be prescribed from time to tie by the
Village Board.
(c) The Village Administrator, as long as he is the Village Clerk, is designated the
custodian of and shall keep and preserve all property and things received from
his predecessor or other persons and required as specifically provided by statute
or by the Wisconsin Committee on Public Records, no water stubs, receipts of
current billings and customer’s ledgers of any municipal utilities shall be
destroyed until two (2) years shall have elapsed and no other public records shall
be destroyed until seven (7) years shall have elapsed.
(5) Village Attorney.
(a) How Appointed. The Village Attorney shall be appointed by the President with
the advice and approval of the Village Board. His appointment may be cancelled
by a majority of the Village Board upon the giving of 30 days’ written notice of
such cancellation to such Village Attorney.
(b) Duties. The Village Attorney shall conduct all the law business in which the
Village is interested; he shall when requested by Village officers give written
legal opinions, which shall be filed with the clerk; he shall draft ordinances,
bonds, notices, and other instruments as may be required by Village officers.
(c) Compensation. The compensation of the Village Attorney shall be fixed from
time to time by the Village Board.
(d) Assistant Village Attorney. The Village Attorney may appoint an assistant, who
shall have power to perform his duties and for where noted shall be responsible
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
to the Village. Such assistant shall receive no compensation from the Village,
unless previously provided by ordinance.
(e) Special Counsel. The Village Board may employ and compensate special
counsel to assist in or take charge of any matter in which the Village is interested.
(6) Justice of the Municipal Court
(a) Municipal Court. Pursuant to the authority granted by §755.01 and Chapter 755
Wis. Stats. (1986) there is hereby established a municipal court for the Village of
Hales Corners.
(b) Municipal Judge. Pursuant to the authority granted by §755.01, there is hereby
created the office of justice of the municipal court of the Village of Hales
Corners. A municipal justice shall be licensed to practice law in the State of
Wisconsin.
(c) Election; Term. The municipal justice shall be elected at-large at the spring
election of 1989 for a term of two (2) years commencing on May 1 succeeding
the election.
(d) Salary. The municipal justice shall receive a salary as determined from time to
time by the Village Board, which shall be in lieu of fees and costs. No salary
shall be paid to the justice for any time during term for which he has not executed
and filed his official bond and oath as required by paragraph (e).
(e) Bond; Oath. The municipal justice shall, pursuant to §755.03 execute and file
with the clerk of the circuit court for Milwaukee County the oath prescribed by
§757.02(1) and a bond in the penal sum $500.00.
(f) Jurisdiction. The municipal justice shall have such jurisdiction as provided by
law and §755.045 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(g) Procedure.
1. The court of the justice of the municipal court shall be called the
“Municipal Court for the Village of Hales Corners, Wisconsin”, and shall
be open as determined by order of the municipal justice.
2. The municipal justice shall keep his office and hold court in the
municipal building.
3. The procedure in such municipal court shall be as provided by this bylaw
and State law, but not excluding because of enumeration, Chapters 66,
755, 800, and 943 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
4. The municipal justice shall collect all forfeitures, fines, and taxable costs
in any action or proceeding before him and shall pay over such moneys
to the Village Treasurer not later than the 7th day of succeeding his
receipt thereof.
(h) The municipal justice may impose a forfeiture for contempt of court as defined in
§785.01 Wis. Stats., and in accordance with §800.12 Wis. Stats., in an amount
not to exceed $50.00 or upon non-payment of the forfeiture, penalty assessment
under §165.87 Wis. Stats., and jail assessment under §53.46, Wis. Stats., the jail
sentence not to exceed seven (7) days.
ARTICLE V BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
(1) Village Plan Commission.
(a) Creation. Pursuant to §61.35 and 62.23, Wis. Stats., there is hereby created a
Village Plan Commission, which Commission is vested with all the authority and
powers specified and delegated to city plan commissions pursuant to §62.23,
Wis. Stats.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
(b) Membership. The Village Plan Commission shall consist of the Village
President, one (1) Trustee, and five (5) citizens. The Village President shall be
the Commission’s presiding officer. Members of this Commission shall hold
office during their respective terms and until their successors are appointed.
Citizen members shall be persons of recognized experience and qualifications
and shall receive such compensation for service on the Commission as may be
fixed by the Village Board at its organizational meeting.
(c) Appointments.
1. Trustee Member. The Trustee member shall be annually appointed by
the Village President, subject to a two-thirds (2.3) vote at the
organizational meeting of the Village Board.
2. Citizen Members. The five (5) regular citizen members of the
Commission shall be appointed at the organizational meeting by the
Village President, subject to confirmation by the Village Board, for
staggered three (3) year terms of office.
3. All members shall be appointed by the Village President, subject to the
confirmation of the Village Board; provided, however, that should the
Village President fail to make any such appointment and file the same in
writing with the Village Administrator no later than 60 days from the
date of expiration of the term of the position to be filled, or within any
subsequent 60 day period following a Village Board action denying or
failing to approve a Village President appointment confirmation timely
made by the Village President under this ordinance, the authority to
select and appoint thereafter shall be with the Village Board. The tenure
and authority of each member appointed under this section and all
powers and duties arising form such appointment shall terminate
automatically if not previously terminated, upon the expiration of 60
days after the expiration of the specified chronological time limit of such
appointment term, regardless of the lack of appointment of a successor
and no such appointee shall thereafter have any of the power, authority,
or duties of a member, de facto, holdover, or otherwise.
(d) Powers and Duties. The Village Board, or any officer having final authority
thereon, shall refer to the Village Plan Commission, for its consideration and
report before final action is taken by the Board or officer, the following matters:
The location and architectural design of any public building; the location of any
statue or other memorial; the location, acceptance, extension, alteration, vacation,
abandonment, change of use, sale, acquisition of land for or lease of land for any
street, alley, or other public way, park, playground, airport, area for parking
vehicles, or other memorial or public playgrounds; the location, extension,
abandonment, or authorization for any public utility whether publicly or privately
owned; all plats of land in the Village or within the territory over which the
Village is given platting jurisdiction by Chapter 236; location, character, and
extent or acquisition, leasing or sale of lands for public or semi-public housing,
slum clearance, relief of congestion , or vacation camps for children; and the
amendment or repeal of any ordinance adopted pursuant to this section. Unless
such report is made within 30 days, or such longer period as may be stipulated by
the Village Board, the Board may take final action without it.
(e) Limitation on Application for Rezoning. In event an application for rezoning is
denied, no person may apply for a rezoning for the same classification within one
(1) year after the public hearing on the initial request for rezoning. This
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
limitation shall not prohibit the Plan Commission, on its own motion, requesting
a second and subsequent public hearing for rezoning to the same classification.
(f) Any party requesting a special meeting of the Village Plan Commission at a time
other than a regularly scheduled meeting shall file such request with the clerk,
together with a filing fee of $200. Such filing fee shall not be required if the
special meeting is scheduled at the instance and request of the Hales Corners
President, Administrator, or professional planning consultant.
(2) Board of Appeals
(a) Creation. Pursuant to §62.23, Wis. Stats., there is hereby created a Board of
Appeals, whose purpose shall be, in appropriate cases and subject to hereinafter
enumerate conditions, to make special exception to the terms of the Zoning Code
and Building Code in harmony with its general purpose and intent.
(b) Powers and Duties. The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers: to
hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official of the
Zoning Code and of the Building Code; to hear and decide all special exceptions
to the terms of the Zoning Code or Building Code; to authorize upon appeal in
specific cases such variance from the terms of the Zoning Code and Building
Code as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special
conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the Zoning and Building
Codes will result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit
of the ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and
substantial justice done. The Board may permit in appropriate cases, and subject
to the conditions of this bylaw, in harmony with the general purpose and intent of
the Zoning Code, a building or premises to be erected or used for such public
utility purposes in any location which is reasonably necessary for the public
convenience and welfare; and such other powers and duties as may be prescribed
from time to time by the Village Board.
(c) Variances. An application for a variance from the terms of the Zoning Code or
Building Code shall be filed with the Clerk, together with a filing fee as follows:
for a sign variance, $250.00; for a zoning or building code variance in an R-1, R-
2, or R-3 residential district, $150.00; for a zoning or building code variance in
an R-4, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, M-1, P-1, or RCO district, $300.00. When the Board
of Appeals orders a variation from the terms of the Zoning Code or Building
Code, it must make such order in writing based upon written findings:
1. That such variation is permitted by reason of practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship.
2. That a substantial justice would be done in permitting such variation.
3. That the spirit of the Zoning Code or Building Code will be observed and
that the public safety and welfare will be secured despite such variations.
(d) Membership. The Board of Appeals shall consist of five (5) members appointed
by the Village President subject to confirmation of the Village Board for terms of
three (3) years, except that of those first appointed, one (1) shall serve for one (1)
year, two (2) for two (2) years an two (2) for three (3) years. The members of the
Board shall receive no compensation for serving unless otherwise enacted by
ordinance, and shall be removable by the Village President for cause upon
written charges and after public hearing. The Village President shall designate
one of the members chairman. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms
of members whose terms become vacant. Members shall hold office for their
terms or until their successors are appointed. The Village President may appoint,
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
for a term of three (3) years, two alternate members of such board, in addition to
the five (5) members above provided for, to be designated Alternate Member No.
1 and Alternate Member No. 2, who shall act, with full power only when a
member of the board refuses to vote because of interest or when a member is
absent. The above provisions, with regard to removal and filling of vacancies,
shall apply to alternates. Alternate Member No. 1 shall have priority over
Alternate Member No. 2 in filling a vacancy. The tenure and authority of each
member appointed under this section and all powers and duties arising from such
appointment shall terminate automatically if not previously terminated, upon the
expiration of 60 days after the expiration of the specified chronological time limit
of such appointment term, regardless of the lack of appointment of a successor
and no such appointee shall thereafter have any of the power, authority, or duties
of a member, de facto, holdover, or otherwise.
(e) Procedure. The Board shall adopt rules of procedure and may from time to time
amend or supersede such rules, all subject to the approval of the Village Board.
Decisions shall be rendered and reduced to writing within one (1) week after any
hearing held by the Board upon rendition thereof sufficient copies shall be filed
with the Village Clerk so that each member of the Village Board and the
Building Inspector may receive one such copy of every decision so rendered by
the Board.
(f) State Law. The Board shall in all other matters be governed by the provisions of
§62.23(7)(e), Wis. Stats.
(g) Rules of the Board of Appeals.
Rule I. Interpretation. The Board of Appeals shall have no power to legislate, to
revise, amend or repeal any zoning ordinances building and related codes.
Generally, the powers of review of the Board are limited to practical difficulties,
or unnecessary hardships, in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the law.
The only power or right vested in the Board is to waive exact compliance with
the details of the ordinances. To grant such a variance, the Board must find that
exceptional and undue hardship will result to the owners and that such relief may
be granted only when it can be done without substantial detriment to the public
good and without substantially impairing the intent and purposes of the
ordinances.
Rule II. Appeals.
1. Who May Appeal. Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by
any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of
the Village affected by any decision of an administrative officer made
pursuant to the Building and Zoning Codes of the Village. The
procedures outlined herein shall also apply to the provision of Section
7.09 and 8.24(6), Village Code.
2. Time Within Which to Appeal. Such appeal shall be taken within 30
days of the act or omission of the administrative official.
3. Procedure on Appeal. The aggrieved party shall file with the officer for
whom the appeal is taken and with the Board of Appeals a written notice
of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The appellant shall annex to
the notice of appeal to the Board such plats, surveys, plans, or
specifications which are of probative value in the determination of the
appeal together with the name and address of the appellant. The officer
from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the chairman
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed
from was taken.
4. Effect of Appeal. Upon the filing of notice of appeal, an appeal shall
stay all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from,
unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of
Appeals after notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by
reason of facts stated in a certificate a stay would, in his opinion cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the
Board of Appeals or by a court of record on application, on notice to the
officer for whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown.
5. Fixing a Hearing. Upon the filing of the notice of appeal, the Board of
Appeals shall fix a time and place for the hearing of the appeal or other
matter referred to it.
6. Date and Notice of Hearing. The hearing of the appeal shall be initiated
not less than 10 nor more than 30 days from the date of receipt of the
request for the hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the
applicant, abutting property owners, and adjacent property owners at
least seven (7) days prior to the hearing by first class mail addressed to
their last known addresses. In addition, for at least seven (7) consecutive
days prior to the date of the hearing, a notice shall be posted on the
bulletin board in the lobby of the municipal building. In the event the
Board of Appeals determines that parties other than those mandated to
receive mailed notice of the hearing will be affected, the Board may send
additional notices in such manner and to such persons as the Board shall
deem appropriate.
7. The Hearing. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or by
agent or by attorney. The chairman may administer oaths and compel
the attendance of witnesses. The order of proceeding shall be as follows:
a. The appellant shall be heard. He shall state the facts of the case
and the grounds for his appeal. He shall file any exhibits which
he has not previously filed. He shall present his witnesses, if
any. He shall state his argument.
b. The administrative official shall be heard. He shall amend and
correct the statement of facts, if necessary. He shall file any
exhibits which he has not previously filed. He shall present his
witnesses, if any. He shall state the basis for his act or omission.
c. The appellant shall replay.
d. Anyone present shall be given opportunity to be heard.
Any member of the Board at any time may ask questions of any person
present. When a person becomes repetitious, or states mattes which are
irrelevant, immaterial, or incompetent, the chairman may limit the
discussion.
8. Adjournment of the Hearing. For any reasonable cause after the start of
the hearing, the Board may adjourn the hearing to a day certain which
shall not be more than seven (7) days from the date of the initial hearing.
Adjourned hearings thereafter shall be set on consecutive days excluding
Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays.
9. Determination of the Board. Within one week after the conclusion of the
hearing, the Board must make its final determination. The Board may
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and may make
such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made,
and to than end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the
appeal is taken, and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. The
concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary to
reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of ay such
administrative official or to decide in favor of the appellant on any matter
which it is required to pass under any such ordinance, or to effect any
variation in such ordinance. Whenever the Board orders a variation from
the terms of the Zoning Code or Building Code or related codes, it must
take such order in writing based upon written findings:
a. That such variation is permitted by reason of practical difficulty
or unnecessary hardship; and
b. That substantial justice will be done in permitting such variation;
c. That the spirit of the Zoning Code or Building and related codes
will be observed and that public safety and welfare will be
secured despite the variation.
10. Disposition of the Orders. Upon rendition of its decision, sufficient
copies thereof shall be filed with the Village Clerk so that each member
of the Village Board and the Building Inspector may receive one such
copy of every decision so rendered by the Board.
11. Any decision of the Board of Appeals affecting the acquisition of a
building permit shall remain in full force and effect for a period of one
year. In event a building permit is not obtained within one year from
such date, the decision of the Board of Appeals will be null and void.
Rule III. Meetings
1. At Call of Chairman. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of
the chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine.
2. Open to the Public. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the
public.
3. Records. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the
vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other
official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of
the Board and shall be a public record.
(3) Board of Review. Pursuant to the optional method set forth in §70.46, Wis. Stats., the
Board of Review shall consists of five (5) residents of the Village of Hales Corners, none
of whom may occupy any public office or be publicly employed. The members shall be
appointed by the Village President with the approval of the Village Board for staggered
five (5) year terms. One appointee shall be a member of the Board of Appeals; one
appointee shall be a member of the Building Board; one appointee shall be a member of
the Plan Commission. Additionally, one (1) resident may be appointed to serve as an
alternate in the absence of a regular member of the Board of Review. All members shall
be appointed by the Village President, subject to the confirmation of the Village Board;
provided, however, that should the Village President fail to make any such appointment
and file the same in writing with the Village Administrator no later than 60 days from the
date of expiration of the term of the position to be filled, or within any subsequent 60 day
period following a Village Board action denying or failing to approve a Village President
appointment confirmation timely made by the Village President under this ordinance, the
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
authority to select and appoint thereafter shall be with the Village Board. The tenure and
authority of each member appointed under this section and all powers and duties arising
from such appointment shall terminate automatically if not previously terminated, upon
the expiration of 60 days after the expiration of the specified chronological time limit of
such appointment term, regardless of the lack of appointment of a successor and no such
appointee shall thereafter have any of the power, authority, or duties of a member, de
facto, holdover, or otherwise.
(4) Board of Fire and Police Commissioners.
(a) The Village President, with the advice and approval of the Village Board, shall
appoint five (5) members of the Board of Police and Fire Commissioners for
terms expiring upon the appointment of their respective successors in the years
1963 to 1967, both inclusive. After the initial appointments, beginning with the
year 1963 each appointment shall be made for the term of five (5) years as
provided by statute. The tenure and authority of each member appointed under
this section and all powers and duties arising form such appointment shall
terminate automatically if not previously terminated, upon the expiration of 60
days after the expiration of the specified chronological time limit of such
appointment term, regardless of the lack of appointment of a successor and no
such appointee shall thereafter have any of the power, authority, or duties of a
member, de facto, holdover, or otherwise.
(b) The Board of Police and Fire Commissioners shall have the authority to appoint
and remove the Chief of Police and the Chief of the Fire Department, who shall
hold their offices during good behavior, subject to suspension or removal by the
Board for cause, in accordance with §62.13, Wis. Stats.
(c) The Board of Police and Fire Commissioners shall serve as an appeals board in
case of dismissals and suspensions of Police Department and Fire Department
personnel; shall adopt, repeal, or modify the rules calculated to secure the best
service in the departments; and shall have such other authority and duties as
prescribed by §62.13, Wis. Stats.
(d) The jurisdiction of the Board of Police and Fire Commissioners shall extend to
volunteers designated “Paid-on-Call” firefighters.
(e) Under the provisions of §62.13, Wis. Stats., the Village Board elects not to have
the Village President as a member of said Commission.
(f) Pursuant to the adoption by the electors at the regular election held on April 1,
1980 of the optional powers of the Board of Police and Fire Commissioners
under §62.13(6), Wis. Stats., the Board of Police and Fire Commissioners shall
have the further power:
1. To organize and supervise the fire and police departments and to
prescribe rules and regulations for their control and management.
2. To contract for and purchase all necessary apparatus and supplies for the
use of the departments under their supervision, exclusive of the erection
and control of the police and fire station buildings.
3. To audit all bills, claims, and expenses for the fire and police
departments before the same are paid by the Village Treasurer.
4. The provisions of this section shall supersede any conflicting provisions
which may be contained in the Village Code.
(5) Election Officials. Pursuant to §6.23(1a), Wis. Stats., the number of election officials
for each election district within the Village is decreased to five (5), consisting three (3)
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
inspectors of elections and two (2) ballot clerks. The Village Clerk may appoint a
Deputy Clerk in charge of elections.
(6) Hales Corners Recreational Committee. The Hales Corners Recreational Committee is
created for the purpose of coordinating and supplementing the activities of public and
private agencies devoted in whole or part to the welfare of youth.
(a) Composition. The Committee shall be appointed by the Village President with
the approval of the Village Board to serve for a term starting on September 1 and
ending on the next August 31. The Committee shall consist of five (5) voting
members, four (4) citizens at-large, and one (1) Whitnall School Board member
as recommended by the President of the Whitnall School Board. The Committee
shall elect a Chairman, Vice-Chairman, Treasurer, and Secretary from among its
membership. There shall be two (2) non-voting ex-officio members appointment
in the same fashion: the Director and a Village Board liaison. All members shall
be appointed by the Village President, subject to the confirmation of the Village
Board; provided, however, that should the Village President fail to make any
such appointment and file the same in writing with the Village Administrator no
later than 60 days from the date of expiration of the term of the position to be
filled, or within any subsequent 60 day period following a Village Board action
denying or failing to approve a Village President appointment confirmation
timely made by the Village President under this ordinance, the authority to select
and appoint thereafter shall be with the Village Board. The tenure and authority
of each member appointed under this section and all powers and duties arising
form such appointment shall terminate automatically if not previously
terminated, upon the expiration of 60 days after the expiration of the specified
chronological time limit of such appointment term, regardless of the lack of
appointment of a successor and no such appointee shall thereafter have any of the
power, authority, or duties of a member, de facto, holdover, or otherwise.
(b) Powers and Duties. The Recreational Committee shall be responsible for the
management of Village-funded or Village-sponsored programs and activities for
youth as determined appropriate by such Committee and funded by the Village
Board. It shall be under the general supervision and control of the Village
Administrator.
(c) Receipt and Disbursement of Funds.
1. The Village may receive and expend monies from the State or Federal
government or private persons for the welfare of youth. Any monies
received for such purposes shall be held in trust by the Village. The
Village may also levy taxes and appropriate money for recreational and
welfare project for youth.
2. All expenditures and all revenues whether from the Village funds or any
other source such as grants, donations, or sale of advertisements shall be
under the direct control of the Village and shall be handled in accordance
with Village procedures.
3. All external funds shall be handled in accordance with Village Board
policy on external funding of Village-sponsored programs.
(d) Compensation. The Committee, with the exception of the Director, shall serve
without compensation. The Director shall serve at such compensation as the
Village Board shall determine.
(e) Meetings. The Committee shall meet at the call of the Chairperson using proper
notice procedure. Meetings shall be held not less than four (4) times per year.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
(f) Procedures. The Treasurer shall be kept informed by the Director of all financial
matters and shall render an accounting to the Village Board of all receipts and
disbursements at or near the first regular Village Board meeting in August.
(7) Fourth of July Committee. The Fourth of July Committee shall plan and supervise
Village-sponsored festivities for the Fourth of July.
(a) Composition. The Village President, with the advice of the Village Board, shall
appoint 15 members of the Fourth of July Committee who shall serve for terms
of three (3) years starting on November 1, except that of those first appointed,
five (5) shall serve until October 31, 1990, five (5) shall serve until October 31,
1991, and five (5) shall serve until October 31, 1992; thereafter, at the first
meeting in October of each year, the vacancy shall be selected for three (3) year
terms. A member of the Village Board shall serve as a non-voting member
acting as a liaison to the Village Board and shall be appointed by the Village
President for an annual term beginning each November 1. The Village President
shall also appoint a youth representative as a non-voting member for an annual
term beginning each November 1. All members shall be appointed by the
Village President, subject to the confirmation of the Village Board; provided,
however, that should the Village President fail to make any such appointment
and file the same in writing with the Village Administrator no later than 60 days
from the date of expiration of the term of the position to be filled, or within any
subsequent 60 day period following a Village Board action denying or failing to
approve a Village President appointment confirmation timely made by the
Village President under this ordinance, the authority to select and appoint
thereafter shall be with the Village Board. The tenure and authority of each
member appointed under this section and all powers and duties arising form such
appointment shall terminate automatically if not previously terminated, upon the
expiration of 60 days after the expiration of the specified chronological time limit
of such appointment term, regardless of the lack of appointment of a successor
and no such appointee shall thereafter have any of the power, authority, or duties
of a member, de facto, holdover, or otherwise.
(b) Powers and Duties. The Committee shall have the responsibility of planning and
supervising the Village-sponsored festivities for the Fourth of July. The
Committee shall foster volunteerism in carrying out its responsibilities.
(c) Receipt and Disbursement of Funds.
1. All contracts shall be authorized by the Village Board.
2. All expenditures and all revenues shall be under the direct control of the
Village and shall be handled in accordance with Village procedures. All
funding from non-Village sources shall be handled in accordance with
the Village policy on external funding of Village-sponsored programs.
(d) Compensation. The Committee shall serve without compensation. Out-ofpocket
expenses shall be reimbursed by the Village under standard budget and
financial procedures.
(e) Meetings. The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson using
proper notice procedure.
(f) Procedures. The Committee shall select its own president, vice-president,
secretary, and treasurer who shall serve for one-year terms.
(8) Building Board
(a) Composition of Board. The Building Board shall consist of seven (7) residents
of the Village, appointed by the Village President, subject to confirmation of the
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
Village Board, for terms of three (3) years. Of the initial seven (7) members, two
(2) shall serve for a term expiring April 30, 1967, two (2) shall serve for a term
expiring April 30, 1968, three (3) shall serve for a term expiring April 30, 1969;
thereafter the successors shall serve three (3) year terms. All members shall be
appointed by the Village President, subject to the confirmation of the Village
Board; provided, however, that should the Village President fail to make any
such appointment and file the same in writing with the Village Administrator no
later than 60 days from the date of expiration of the term of the position to be
filled, or within any subsequent 60 day period following a Village Board action
denying or failing to approve a Village President appointment confirmation
timely made by the Village President under this ordinance, the authority to select
and appoint thereafter shall be with the Village Board. The tenure and authority
of each member appointed under this section and all powers and duties arising
form such appointment shall terminate automatically if not previously
terminated, upon the expiration of 60 days after the expiration of the specified
chronological time limit of such appointment term, regardless of the lack of
appointment of a successor and no such appointee shall thereafter have any of the
power, authority, or duties of a member, de facto, holdover, or otherwise.
(b) Procedure. The Building Board shall select its own chairman and its own
secretary, and in event any applications are pending, shall meet regularly at 7:30
p.m. on each Monday, to consider applications which have been filed by noon of
the prior Friday. Three (3) members shall constitute a quorum, but only those
members in attendance shall be compensated for serves at a meeting. The
Building Inspector shall be an ex-officio member of such board, shall attend each
meeting, and shall be compensated in the same manner as regular members of the
Board. Members of the Building Board shall be compensated as determined by
the Village Board. Two unexcused absences during a term shall be cause for
removal by the Village Board.
(9) Hales Corners Historical Commission. The Village President with the advice and
approval of the Village Board, shall appoint five (5) members of the Hales Corners
Historical Commission, who shall coordinate, preserve, and care for all records, both
printed and written, and other materials of historical interest illustrative of the history of
Hales Corners and one of whose functions shall be the establishment of an affiliated local
historical society pursuant to §44.03, Wis. Stats. The term of said members shall be for
three (3) years starting on April 30, except that of those first appointed, one shall serve
until April 1974, two shall serve until April 30, 1975, and two shall serve until April 30,
1976. A sixth ex-officio member, who shall be a trustee of the Village, shall be
appointed by the Village President at a regular board meeting in April to serve for a term
of one year. The five members of the Commission shall select their own president, vice
president, secretary, and treasurer who shall serve for one year terms commencing on
April 30. All members shall be appointed by the Village President, subject to the
confirmation of the Village Board; provided, however, that should the Village President
fail to make any such appointment and file the same in writing with the Village
Administrator no later than 60 days from the date of expiration of the term of the position
to be filled, or within any subsequent 60 day period following a Village Board action
denying or failing to approve a Village President appointment confirmation timely made
by the Village President under this ordinance, the authority to select and appoint
thereafter shall be with the Village Board. The tenure and authority of each member
appointed under this section and all powers and duties arising form such appointment
shall terminate automatically if not previously terminated, upon the expiration of 60 days
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
after the expiration of the specified chronological time limit of such appointment term,
regardless of the lack of appointment of a successor and no such appointee shall
thereafter have any of the power, authority, or duties of a member, de facto, holdover, or
otherwise.
(10) Library Board
(a) Composition. The Library Board shall be composed of seven (7) members
appointed by the Village President with the approval of the Village Board. The
Village President shall appoint as one of the members, a school district
administrator or his representative to represent the public school district in which
the Public Library is located. Not more than one (1) member of the Village
Board shall at any one time be a member of the Library Board.
(b) Term. The initial appointment shall be made as follows: Two (2) to serve for
three years, two (2) to serve for two years, and one (1) to serve for one year from
July 1, in the year of their appointment. Thereafter, each regular appointment
shall be made for a term of three years.
(c) Duties. The Library Board shall have the powers and duties set forth in Chapter
43, Wis. Stats.
(d) Officers. The members of the Library Board shall organize by the election, from
among their number, of a President and such other officers as they deem
necessary.
(e) Compensation. No compensation shall be paid to the members of the Library
Board for their services, but they may be reimbursed for their actual and
necessary expenses incurred in performing their duties outside the municipality if
so authorized by the Village Board.
(f) Meetings. The Library Board shall meet at least once every three months or
more at the call of the President.
(11)
(12) Board of Canvassers. Pursuant to §7.53(2), Wis. Stats., the Hales Corners Board of
Canvassers for municipal elections shall consist of the municipal clerk and two (2) other
reputable citizens appointed by the clerk prior to the date of the election being canvassed
to perform the duties imposed by §7.51, Wis. Stats.
(13) Ethics Board.
(a) Composition. The Ethics Board shall consist of five (5) residents of the Village
of Hales Corners, none of whom may be Village officials or employees. Upon
creation of the Ethics Board, the Village President shall appoint, subject to
confirmation by the Village Board, members in three (3) classes: two (2) of such
members shall serve for three (3) years, two (2) to serve two (2) years, and one
(1) to serve for a period of one (1) year or until the next organizational meeting,
whichever is first. Subsequently, members shall be appointed by the Village
President at the Board’s organizational meeting, subject to confirmation by the
Village Board, for staggered three (3) year terms. The Ethics Board shall
annually elect a chairperson and secretary. All members shall be appointed by
the Village President, subject to the confirmation of the Village Board; provided,
however, that should the Village President fail to make any such appointment
and file the same in writing with the Village Administrator no later than 60 days
from the date of expiration of the term of the position to be filled, or within any
subsequent 60 day period following a Village Board action denying or failing to
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
approve a Village President appointment confirmation timely made by the
Village President under this ordinance, the authority to select and appoint
thereafter shall be with the Village Board. The tenure and authority of each
member appointed under this section and all powers and duties arising form such
appointment shall terminate automatically if not previously terminated, upon the
expiration of 60 days after the expiration of the specified chronological time limit
of such appointment term, regardless of the lack of appointment of a successor
and no such appointee shall thereafter have any of the power, authority, or duties
of a member, de facto, holdover, or otherwise.
(b) Duties. The Ethics Board shall perform those duties prescribed under the Village
Ethics Code in Article XV of the Bylaws of the Village of Hales Corners Code of
Ordinances.
(c) Meetings. The Ethics Code shall meet twice a year or as necessary to enforce the
Ethics Code or provide ethics opinions.
(14) Environmental Committee. The Environmental Committee is created to encourage
ecologically sound practices and preservation of natural resources within the Village.
(a) Composition. The Village President shall appoint, subject to confirmation by the
Village Board, seven (7) voting members of the Committee. The Village
President shall designate one of those appointed as chairperson. The seven (7)
members shall serve staggered terms of three (3) years starting on July 1, except
that of those first appointed two (2) shall serve until June 30, 1991, two (2) shall
serve until June 30, 1992, and three (3) shall serve until July 30, 1993. A member
of the Village Board shall serve as a non-voting member acting as a liaison to the
Village Board and shall be appointed by the Village President for an annual term
beginning each July 1. All members shall be appointed by the Village President,
subject to the confirmation of the Village Board; provided, however, that should
the Village President fail to make any such appointment and file the same in
writing with the Village Administrator no later than 60 days from the date of
expiration of the term of the position to be filled, or within any subsequent 60
day period following a Village Board action denying or failing to approve a
Village President appointment confirmation timely made by the Village President
under this ordinance, the authority to select and appoint thereafter shall be with
the Village Board. The tenure and authority of each member appointed under
this section and all powers and duties arising form such appointment shall
terminate automatically if not previously terminated, upon the expiration of 60
days after the expiration of the specified chronological time limit of such
appointment term, regardless of the lack of appointment of a successor and no
such appointee shall thereafter have any of the power, authority, or duties of a
member, de facto, holdover, or otherwise.
(b) Powers and Duties. The Committee shall:
1. Assist in the development and implementation of programs related to
yard waste reduction and disposal. By way of illustration, but not of
limitation, such programs shall include: providing educational material to
residents through the Village website, newsletter and other outlets;
reviewing policies on open burning practices; and advising the Village
Board on new legislation pertaining to yard waste reduction and disposal.
2. Advise the Village Board on matters relating to its responsibility for
environmental protection. By way of illustration, but not of limitation,
such matters shall include: advising the Village Board on ecological and
recycling programs and legislation; assisting the Village in complying
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
with ecological and recycling requirements; monitoring new
technologies and developments in handling recyclable wastes and
materials; investigating methods of pollution abatement; monitoring
invasive species threats in the Village; and reviewing lawn care and
composting programs.
3. Function as the Village’s Tree Board. By way of illustration, but not of
limitation, such matters shall include: preparing grant applications for
tree programs; advising the Village Board of new treatments, issues or
programs for tree preservation and care; providing educational materials
for residents regarding tree care; maintaining the Village’s Tree City
USA eligibility; advising the Village Board on tree management plans;
and advising the Village Board on planting choices for Village projects.
(c) Receipt and Disbursement of funds. All revenues shall be appropriated by the
Village Board. All expenditures and all revenues shall be under the direct control
of the Village and shall be handled in accordance with Village procedures.
(d) Compensation. The Committee shall serve without compensation. Out-ofpocket
expenses shall be reimbursed by the Village under standard budget and
financial procedures.
(e) Procedures. The Committee shall meet monthly and at the call of the chairperson
using proper notice procedure. The Committee shall choose a vice-chairperson
and secretary from among its members.
(f) Quorum. Three (3) members shall constitute a quorum.
(15) Health Board
(a) Composition. The Health Board shall consist of five (5) members: the consulting
physician of the health department, a Village trustee, and three (3) resident
citizen members appointed by the Village President with the approval of the
Village Board. The three citizen members shall have a demonstrated interest or
competence in the field of public health or community health. A good faith
effort shall be made to appoint a physician and a registered nurse. The health
department administrator shall serve as a non-voting, ex-officio member.
(b) Term. The initial appointment of the citizen members shall be made as follows:
one (1) to serve three years, one (1) to serve two years, and one (1) to serve one
year, from July 1, in the year of their appointment. Thereafter, each regular
appointment shall be made for a term of three years. The Village Board trustee
appointment shall be made at the Village Board organizational meeting in April
for a term of one year. The term of the consulting physician appointment arises
from the office and shall continue for the individual appointed only while the
individual holds the consulting physician to the health department position.
(c) Powers and Duties. The Health Board shall have the powers and duties to
enforce all public health laws, rules, and orders; to report to the department; and
to make such assessments and determinations of public health needs, all as set
forth under §251.04, Wis. Stats., including, but not limited to, adopting
regulations, contracting, and employing public health professionals under
§251.04(8), Wis. Stats., the final approval authority for which matters shall be in
the Village Board.
(d) Officers. The members of the Health Board shall organize by the election, from
among their members, of a Chair and such other officers as they deem necessary.
(e) Compensation. Members of the Health Board shall serve without compensation.
Out-of-pocket expenses may be reimbursed by the Village under standard budget
and financial procedures in the sole discretion of the Village Board.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
(f) Meetings. The Health Board shall meet at least quarterly, or more, at the call of
the Chair.
ARTICLE VI POLICE DEPARTMENT
(1) Police Department. There is established within the Village of Hales Corners a police
department, which shall consist of one Chief and such other officers as may from time to
time be determined by the Village Board. The Police and Fire Commission shall have
supervisory control over the department.
(2) Appointments, Suspension, and Removal. All members of the Police Department,
including the Chief, shall be appointed, promoted, suspended, dismissed, or reduced in
rank pursuant to §62.13, Wis. Stats.
(3) Chief of Police.
(a) General Power. Subject to the provisions of this Article and the lawful orders of
the Police and Fire Commission, the Chief of Police shall be in charge of the
Police Department. The Chief of Police shall be the Village Marshall ex-officio
upon executing and filing his official bond as such Marshall, pursuant to §61.28,
Wis. Stats.
(b) Duties. The Chief of Police, subject to the provisions of this Article, shall cause
the public peace to be preserved and see that all ordinances of the Village and the
laws of the State of Wisconsin are enforced and obeyed; that the rules and
regulations for the government of the Police Department are obeyed and
whenever any violation of the ordinance or laws shall come to his attention, he
shall cause requisite complaint to be made and see that all available evidence is
procured for the successful prosecution of the offender or offenders. He shall be
responsible for the efficient and general good conduct of his department, and
shall be empowered to make regulations to accomplish efficiency.
(c) Deposit of Penalty and Costs. The Chief of Police whenever in his opinion
circumstances may require, may receive from any person who has been accused
of violating any Village ordinance and has been arrested therefor, a deposit in
money equal to the whole amount of the penalty and cost prescribed for such
violation and may release such person from arrest until the subsequent convening
of the court, but in each such case he shall issue a serially-numbered receipt for
such payment, a duplicate of which shall be permanently filed at police
headquarters within six (6) hours after the issuance of the same.
If the person arrested fails to appear personally or by authorized agent or attorney
before the court at the time fixed for hearing, the money deposited with the Chief
shall be retained and used for the payment of the forfeiture and cost which may
be imposed, and the balance, if any, remitted to the depositor, and evidence of
such payment shall be permanently filed at police headquarters. If such person is
acquitted, the whole amount shall be refunded to the depositor. The Village shall
in no case be liable for any money so deposited. No member of the Police
Department shall furnish bail for any person arrested. The Chief shall file
verified reports of all such moneys received and disbursed by him with the
Village Treasurer on the first day of January, April, July, and October. The Chief
may empower any member of his department to accept such deposits; however,
the Chief is solely responsible for all payments, rebates, and accounting of funds
so deposited.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
(d) Regulations of Department. The Chief shall regulate and assign the hours and
duties for each of the members of the Department.
(e) Hours of Duty. The normal hours of duty and vacation for the Chief of Police
shall be as prescribed by the Police and Fire Commission. He shall be on duty
during such hours as are necessary to enable him to properly supervise and
participate in the work of the Department to the satisfaction of the Village Board.
Except in case of an emergency, the Chief of Police is prohibited from leaving
Milwaukee County during his on-duty hours without the express consent of the
Commission Chairman.
(f) No Other Employment. The Chief shall devote his entire time and attention to
the business of the Department, and he is prohibited from following any other
calling or being employed in any other business.
(g) Records. The Chief shall cause a record to be kept on all complaints and
applications calling for the service of the Police Department. He shall also cause
to be made a daily record of all violators of law and ordinances, fires within the
Village, dangerous places and accidents with cause and proofs, and such other
data as may be prescribed from time to time by the Police and Fire Commission.
(h) Reports. Three (3) days prior to the first regular meeting each month of the
Police and Fire Commission, the Chief shall submit to the Commission Secretary
a written report of the principal activities of the Police Department, of the
schedule of on-duty hours for all members of the Police Department from the
preceding report, and of such other matters as may be prescribed from time to
time by the Commission.
(4) Salaries. Salaries of the Chief and all other members of the Department shall be as
determined by the Village Board from time to time.
(5) Hours of Duty; Overtime Pay; Vacations. The hours of duty, overtime pay, and
vacations shall be as prescribed by the Village Board.
(6) Uniform and Allowances. Each policeman shall furnish his own uniform and shall
receive such uniform allowances as the Village Board shall prescribe. No policeman
shall have a vested right in the uniform allowance, and in event he shall terminate his
employment with the Village as a policeman prior to any time hereinbefore set for
payment of the uniform allowance, he shall not receive any pro-rata payment.
(7) Equipment. The Village shall furnish firearms, ammunition, raincoats, and badges to the
Chief and subordinates and such equipment shall remain the property of the Village
under the care and charge of the Chief.
(8) Examinations. All examinations for appointment to the Police Department shall be
carried on according to regulations and under the supervision of the Board of Police and
Fire Commissioners. The Board of Police and Fire Commissioners shall certify to the
Chief of Police the three (3) most qualified applicants for each appointment (less than
three permitted if less than three qualify). The Chief of Police shall make an appointment
from the three applicants so certified; in the event less than three applicants are so
certified, the Chief of Police may make an appointment or may request the Board of
Police and Fire Commissioners to continue examining applicants until three are certified.
(9) Probationary Period. Any member of the Police Department may be suspended for a
period of 30 days or removed by the Chief of Police during his first year of service.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
(10) Rules. The rules of the Department shall be promulgated by the Chief, subject to
approval of the Police and Fire Commission.
ARTICLE VII FIRE DEPARTMENT
(1) Disbandonment and Creation. The volunteer fire company organized under Chapter
213, Wis. Stats., under the tile of Hales Corners Volunteer Fire Department, Inc., is
disbanded pursuant to §213.04, Wis. Stats. In lieu therof the members of such fire
organization are officially recognized as the Fire Department of the Village of Hales
Corners, and the duty of fire fighting and the prevention of fires in the Village of Hales
Corners is delegated to such Department.
(2) Rules. The rules for the control, management and government and for the regulation of
business and proceedings of the Department are as follows:
Rule I. Purpose of Department
(a) To aid and assist in the extinguishment of fires, to protect life and property in the
work of extinguishment of fires, to provide emergency rescue and first aid
services, and otherwise to do, perform, and engage in such things as are
especially necessary and incidental to fully carry out the general purposes of said
department.
Rule II. Name
(a) The name of the Department shall be the Hales Corners Fire Department and its
location and principal office shall be in the Village of Hales Corners.
Rule III. Membership. The Chief shall select the “paid-on-call” firemen. The Fire and
Police Commission shall select all full-time firemen. Within a period of one year from
the date of appointment, full-time firemen shall serve a probationary period and shall be
subject to removal during such probationary period without cause by a majority vote of
the Board of Police and Fire Commissioners.
Members are only those who actively participate in fire fighting or rescue squad activities
of the Department and those who are certified as adequately trained therefore by the
Chief.
Rule IV. Appointments, Suspension, and Removal. All full time members of the fire
department including the Chief, shall be appointed, promoted, suspended, dismissed, or
reduced in rank pursuant to §62.13, Wis. Stats.
Rule V. Administrative Officers.
(a) The administrative officers of the Fire Department shall be as follows: a “Fire
Chief”, and “Assistant Fire Chief”, a “Deputy Fire Chief”, “Captains”,
“Lieutenants”, and “Fire Inspector”.
(b) Fire Chief.
1. Duties. The Fire Chief shall have charge of all fire and rescue apparatus
and equipment, and shall be in full command and charge of directing the
performance of said Fire Department in attendance upon the
extinguishment of any fire or protection of any life or property in such
work and duties. The Chief of the Fire Department is authorized to give
aid, whenever possible, to any municipality which maintains a Fire
Department in case of serious fire or emergency provided that mutual aid
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
will not jeopardize the fire defenses of the Village of Hales Corners. The
Chief of the Fire Department is authorized to request aid, whenever
necessary, from any neighboring municipality which maintains a Fire
Department in the event of a serious fire or emergency within the limits
of the Village of Hales Corners.
2. Selection. The Fire Chief shall be subject to tenure, removal, and
suspensions, as provided in §62.13, Wis. Stats., and Article V(4)(e) of
the Bylaws of the Village of Hales Corners. Selection, tenure, removal,
and suspension shall be in accordance with §62.13, Wis. Stats., and
Article V(4)(e) of the Bylaws of the Village of Hales Corners.
3. Probationary Period and Residence. The Fire Chief, within the period of
one year from the date of his appointment, shall serve a probationary
period and shall be subject to removal during such probationary period
without cause by a majority vote of the Board of Police and Fire
Commissioners. As soon as practicable, the Fire Chief shall be a resident
of the Village, and arbitrary refusal to comply with such residency
requirement shall be cause for removal.
(c) Fire Inspector. It shall be the duty of the Fire Inspector to inspect at least very
six (6) months all buildings, premises, and thoroughfares within the Village for
the purpose of noting and causing to be corrected any condition liable to cause a
fire. The Inspector shall also investigate and issue permits n accordance with the
regulation of the State Industrial Commission for the storage and handling of
explosives and flammable liquids within the Village. He shall perform such
other duties as required by the State Industrial Commission.
(d) Additional Rules and Regulations. The Fire Chief may from time to time publish
such further rules and regulations not in conflict with these rules or the
ordinances of the Village as to the duties of the Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chief,
Deputy Fire Chief, Captains, Lieutenants, Fire Inspector, and the members of the
Fire Department.
Rule VI. Members Subject to Authority. Every member in attendance upon any fire or
alarm of fire, or at the Fire House attending at the alarm for any fire or training session,
shall be under the command of the Fire Chief or Line Officer, and shall in no way
interfere with their duties, and any member violating this provision or acting in an
insubordinate manner shall be subject to suspension or expulsion in the manner herein
provided.
(3) Funds and Disbursements. The Village Board shall appropriate funds to provide for
operation and for such apparatus and equipment for the use of the Fire Department as it
may deem expedient and necessary to maintain efficiency, properly protect life and
property from fire, and properly provide rescue service.
(4) Police Power of Department.
(a) The Fire Chief and assistants and officers in command at any fire are vested with
police authority at fires. Any officer of the Department may cause the arrest of
any person failing to give the right-of-way to the Fire Department in responding
to a fire.
(b) The Fire Chief may prescribe certain limits in the vicinity of any fire within
which no persons excepting firemen and policemen and those admitted by order
of any officer of the Department, shall be permitted to come. The Chief may
cause the removal of any property whenever it shall become necessary for the
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
preservation of such property from fire or to prevent the spreading of fire or to
protect the adjoining property, and during the progress of any fire he may order
the removal or destruction of any property necessary to prevent the further spread
of the fire. He may also cause the removal of all wires or other facilities and the
turning off of all electricity or other services where the same impedes the work of
the Department during the progress of the fire.
(c) Firemen May Enter Adjacent Property. Any fireman while acting under the
direction of the Chief or other officer in command may enter upon the premises
adjacent to or in the vicinity of any building or other property then on fire for the
purpose of extinguishing such fire and in case of any person shall hinder, resist,
or obstruct any fireman in the discharge of his duty as is herein provided, the
person so offending shall be deemed guilty of resisting firemen in the discharge
of their duty.
(d) Duties of Bystander to Assist. Every person who shall be present at a fire shall
be subject to the orders of the Fire Chief or officer in command and may be
required to render assistance in fighting the fire or in removing or guarding
property. Such officer shall have the power to cause the arrest of any person or
persons refusing to obey said orders.
(5) Fire Inspections.
(a) Whenever any inspection by the Fire Inspector or his deputies reveals a fire
hazard, the Inspector or his deputies shall serve a notice in writing upon the
owner of the property giving said owner a reasonable time in which to remove
the hazard. In the event that the fire hazard is not removed within the time
allowed, it shall be deemed a nuisance. The Fire Inspector or his deputy may
have the same removed by the Village and the cost of such removal shall be
recovered in an action by the Village against the owner of the property.
(b) The Fire Inspector shall keep a written record card of each property inspected
which shall conform to the requirements of the Industrial Commission and shall
make the quarterly report of inspections required by the Industrial Commission.
(c) No person shall deny the Fire Inspector or his deputies free access to any
property within the Village at any reasonable time for the purpose of making fire
inspections. No person shall hinder or obstruct the Fire Inspector in the
performance of his duty or refuse to observe any lawful direction given by him.
(6) Apparatus
(a) The Fire Chief shall have control of all apparatus used by the Department and
shall be responsible for its proper maintenance. Emergency repairs may be
authorized by the officer then in charge of the Department.
(b) No person shall willfully injure in any manner any hose, hydrant, or fire
apparatus belonging to the Village of Hales Corners, and no vehicle shall be
driven over any unprotected hose of a Fire Department when laid down on any
street, private driveway, or other place, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire,
without the consent of the Fire Department official in command.
(7) Effective Date. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its
passage. Until the appointment of a full-time Fire Chief, the present Assistant Fire Chief
shall assume the responsibilities and duties of the Fire Chief.
ARTICLE VIII DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
(1) Creation and Jurisdiction. There is created the Department of Public Works for the
Village of Hales Corners, which shall be charged with ministerial and administrative
functions to carry out the authority of the Village Board with respect to all streets, alleys,
highways, sidewalks, crosswalks, parks, public grounds, Village Hall, public buildings,
ditches, drains, sewers, water mains, culverts, weed cutting, garbage and rubbish
collection, incineration, dumping, snow and ice removal, street lights, street numbering,
and street signs, except as otherwise provided by law or the Hales Corners ordinances.
(2) Commission of Public Works.
(a) The Village President with the advice and approval of the Village Board, shall
appoint five (5) regular members and two (2) alternate members of the
Commission of Public Works, who shall hold office during their respective terms
and until their successors are appointed, and who shall be persons of recognized
experience and qualification. The term of said regular and alternate members
shall be fore three years starting on April 30, except that of those first regular
members appointed, one (1) shall serve until April 30, 1974, two (2) shall serve
until April 30, 1975, and two (2) shall serve until April 30, 1976. An ex-officio
member who shall be a trustee of the Village, shall be appointed by the Village
President at a regular Village Board meeting in April to serve for a term of one
year. Upon and subject to call by the Director of Public Works, an alternate
member shall be counted in a quorum determination and shall have the full
powers and duties of the five (5) regular members.
All members shall be appointed by the Village President, subject to the
confirmation of the Village Board; provided, however, that should the Village
President fail to make any such appointment and file the same in writing with the
Village Administrator no later than 60 days from the date of expiration of the
term of the position to be filled, or within any subsequent 60 day period
following a Village Board action denying or failing to approve a Village
President appointment confirmation timely made by the Village President under
this ordinance, the authority to select and appoint thereafter shall be with the
Village Board. The tenure and authority of each member appointed under this
section and all powers and duties arising from such appointment shall terminate
automatically if not previously terminated, upon the expiration of 60 days after
the expiration of the specified chronological time limit of such appointment term,
regardless of the lack of appointment of a successor and no such appointee shall
thereafter have any of the power, authority, or duties of a member, de facto,
holdover, or otherwise.
(b) The Village Board shall refer to the Commission of Public Works for its
consideration and report the following matters: the annual budget of the
Department of Public Works; the location plan and design of all ditches, culverts,
sanitary sewers, drains, water mains, culverts, street lights, street signs, and street
numbering; the plans for patching and paving of streets, alleys, and sidewalks;
such other matters as the Village Board may refer to its attention from time to
time. Said Commission is specifically empowered to determine which public
works projects should require bidder’s proof of responsibility pursuant to
§66.29(2), Wis. Stats., to prepare a standard form of questionnaire and properly
evaluate the sworn statements of bidders filed relative to financial ability,
equipment, and experience.
(3) Personnel
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
(a) Superintendent of Public Works. The Superintendent of Public Works, appointed
by the Village Board with the advice of the Commission of Public Works, shall
by virtue of his appointment as such, also be the street commissioner, weed
commissioner, engineer of sanitary facilities, and a member of the committee on
Streets, Public Works and Utilities of the Village Board but without a vote. He
shall have charge and superintendence, subject to such directions as may be
given from time to time by the Village Board of the Department of Public Works.
(b) Operator and Maintenance Man. The operator and maintenance man shall be
hired by the Village Board upon the recommendation of the Superintendent of
Public Works. He shall perform such services as may be delegated to him by the
Superintendent of Public Works.
(c) Engineer. The Engineer shall be appointed by the Village Board with the advice
of the Commission of Public Works. He shall render professional engineering
services for the Village for such jobs and projects as the Village Board shall
determine upon the recommendation of the Commission of Public Works. There
may be more than one Engineer for the several jobs and projects within the
Village. The said Commission must certify for approval to the Village Board the
compensation to be paid to the Engineer.
(d) Incidental Laborers. Incidental Laborers may be hired by the Superintendent of
Public Works at a compensation to be determined by the Commission of Public
Works. The Superintendent of Public Works must certify for approval to the
Village Board the payroll for incidental laborers.
(e) Clerical Help. The Village Clerk shall furnish all clerical help to the Department
of Public Works.
ARTICLE IX VILLAGE PERSONNEL
(1) Scope and Intent. The Village Board intends to promote personnel policies which aid in
the recruitment and retention of high quality employees. This article applies to any fulltime
employee of the Village of Hales Corners except for those whose employment is
covered by a collective bargaining agreement. It shall apply to part-time and temporary
employees as specifically indicated in each section. This article may be amended by the
Village Board from time to time as warranted by the Board.
(2) Hours of Work. All full-time employees shall normally work 40 hours per week at
straight time pay. Each employee’s work week shall be specified and agreed to between
the employee and the Village Administrator or the Administrator’s designee. Emergency
hours over 40 per week may be compensated with overtime pay or a compensatory time
agreement. Department heads are not overtime eligible under this provision.
(3) Salaries, Etc. Salaries, compensation, per diem, mileage reimbursement rates and other
allowances shall be determined by the Village Board from time to time and shall be
approved by resolution.
(4) Wisconsin Retirement Fund. Employees eligible under §66.90, Wis. Stats., shall be
covered under the State of Wisconsin Retirement Fund. In support of the employee’s
share of earnings contributions to the Wisconsin Retirement Fund, the Village will pay up
to 5% of non-protective personnel earnings and 6% of protective personnel earnings.
Effective January 1, 1986, the Village will pay up to 6% of non-protective personnel
earnings and 7% of protective personnel earnings.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
(5) Insurance Carriers. The Village Board shall have the sole authority to select the
carrier(s) for all insurance programs provided by the Village with the concurrent right to
change carrier(s) at its discretion.
(6) Insurance Continuation. If an employee is absent because of illness the Village will
pay medical and surgical insurance coverage during the period in which the employee
received wages or salary for time not worked. At the expiration of salary continuance the
Village will pay for both members and dependent hospital, medical, surgical, and
disability insurance coverage for the period of total disability but not for more than a
period of 120 days from the start of disability.
(7) Sick Leave. Employees shall be entitled to and earn sick leave at the rate of one (1) day
per months from the time of hire. Earned sick leave credits may be accumulated to 130
days. The Village Administrator may require a physician’s statement prior to authorizing
payment.
(8) Funeral Leave. Each full-time employee shall be given immediate family funeral leave
with pay. Two (2) workdays may be taken for funerals conducted Friday through
Monday and three (3) workdays for those conducted Tuesday through Thursday. Such
days must fall within a period commencing three (3) days prior and ending three (3) days
following the funeral day. The funeral day is a leave day when conducted on a workday.
Immediate family means: spouse, children, grandchildren, and either spouses’ parents,
grandparents, siblings, or sibling spouses or children. Regularly scheduled part-time
employees shall receive such leave pro rata.
(9) Jury Duty or Temporary Military Service.
(a) Any employee with more than one (1) year of service required to take leave for
military training or military service because of riot or disturbance shall receive
full salary for the workdays for the period of up to two (2) weeks in any calendar
year. An employee who has less than a year’s service as an employee of the
Village may also be absent for the reasons and periods set forth above, but shall
not be eligible for the military pay differential.
(b) Any employee of the Village who is required to serve on jury duty shall be
granted a pay differential for such period of service.
(c) In the computation of the pay differential, such items as subsistence, rental, and
travel allowance shall not be included in determining pay received from the
government. Any other payment received for such service or training shall be
assigned to the Village. Any payment for military training, military service, or
jury duty in excess of the prevailing Village salary of the employee shall be paid
over to the employee.
(10) General Leave of Absence.
(a) A leave of absence may be granted to any full-time employee who has 12
consecutive months or more of service, provided the reason given for the leave of
absence is a valid reasons in the opinion of the approving authority.
The taking of full-time employment elsewhere or part-time employment on leave
of absence without the consent of the Village Board shall be cause for discharge.
A leave of absence of up to two (2) weeks duration may be granted by the
Village Administrator.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
A leave of absence in excess of two (2) weeks duration may be granted by the
Village Board upon the recommendation of the Village Administrator and
Personnel Committee.
(b) The Village recognizes that a disability relating to pregnancy or childbearing
must be treated the same as any other sickness, illness, or disability.
Accumulated sick leave may be utilized during such disability consistent with the
provisions in the applicable collective bargaining agreements and Village
resolutions, including the provisions relating to the submission of a doctor’s
certificate.
Requests for a leave of absence without pay for childbearing purposes as well as
for adoptions, pre-adoption placement of a child, and care for an employee’s
child, spouse, or parent during a period of serious health condition will be
handled in the same manner as other requests for a leave of absence without pay.
Such requests will be handled consistent with the provisions in the applicable
collective bargaining agreements, Village bylaws, Wisconsin and Federal law.
(c) Insurance While on Leave of Absence – While on leave of absence, an employee
may continue his hospital and medical insurance coverage, both employee and
dependent coverage, and his life insurance protection provided the employee
pays the full cost of the aforesaid insurance protection.
(11) Work Rules. The Village shall have authority to establish work rules where necessary to
conduct safe, efficient operations.
(12) Normal Retirement. The normal retirement date for all Village employees shall be the
end of the month during which the employee reaches his 65th birthday, except for those
whose retirement benefits are to be received in whole or part from the protective services.
For those employees, the normal retirement age shall be 55 years of age.
(13) Terminal Leave Pay.
(a) A portion of accumulated unused sick leave time shall be paid as provided under
Section 7 of this article. Any employee covered by this article who began
employment with the Village of Hales Corners on or before January 1, 1976 shall
be entitled to a 50% pro-rata payment at separation; all other employees shall
receive a pro-rata payment of 50% or 45 days, whichever is less. In addition,
those employees shall be required to have at least seven (7) years of continuous
employment with the Village in order to be eligible for this benefit.
(b) Unused and earned vacation shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of a
duly approved resolution.
(c) The vacation time indicated in such resolution shall be paid in accordance with
prevailing pay scale at termination.
(d) In the event that retroactive pay scales have been authorized but not implemented
at time of termination, such pay scales will be used in establishing termination
pay. However, if the employee is terminated through discharge for just cause,
any terminal pay for which he may be eligible will be based on his rate prevailing
immediately prior to the retroactive rate.
ARTICLE X FINANCE
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
(1) Adopt Section 66.044. The Village Board elects the alternative system of approving
claims pursuant to Section 66.044, Wis. Stats. Payments may be made from the Village
treasury after the Clerk of the Village shall have audited and approved each such claim as
a proper charge against the treasury, and shall have endorsed his approval thereon after
having determined that the following conditions have been complied with:
(a) That funds are available therefore pursuant to the budget approved by the
governing body.
(b) That the item or service covered by such claim has been duly authorized by the
proper official, department head, or board or commission.
(c) That the item or service has been actually supplied or rendered in conformity
with such authorization.
(d) That the claim is just and valid pursuant to law. The Clerk may require the
submission of such proof and evidence to support the foregoing as in his
discretion he may deem necessary.
(2) Clerk’s Bonding and Duties: Annual Audit.
(a) The clerk shall be covered by a fidelity bond in the sum of $25,000.
(b) The clerk shall file with the Village Board not less than monthly a list of the
claims approved, showing the date paid, name of claimant, purpose, and amount.
(c) The annual audit under section 4 hereof shall be performed by a public
accountant licensed under Chapter 442, Wis. Stats.
(3) Order Checks. Payment of all accounts and demands against the Village included in
such orders, all lawful disbursements of the Village, including investments, shall be by
order checks against any Village depository signed by any two (2) of the following: the
President, the Treasurer, the Clerk, a Deputy Clerk designated by the Village Board, and
a Deputy Treasurer designated by the Village Board.
(4) Annual Audit. The financial records of the Village shall be audited annually following
the closing of the calendar year by a certified public accountant.
(5) Surplus. Any surplus funds of the Village may be segregated for a specific purpose or
purposes pursuant to a resolution adopted by a vote of 2/3 of the members of the Village
Board. Any such surplus funds so segregated may only be expended or used for a
purpose or purposes other than that designated by such resolution by a vote of 2/3 of the
members of the Village Board.
(6) Investments. The Village Administrator may determine whether any Village funds are
not immediately needed, to designate the time and amount of investments made, and to
specify the type of investment authorized by Section 66.04(2), Wis. Stats.
(7) Village Purchasing.
(a) Purchases up to $300.00, Requisitions. All Village purchases up to and including
the sum of $300.00 must be requisitioned by the authority of the Village
Administrator, Fire Chief, Police Chief, Building Inspector, Health
Administrator, Public Works Director, to be evidenced by initialing by the
issuing authority on forms supplied by the Village.
(b) Purchases over $300.00, Purchase Orders. All Village purchases exceeding the
sum of $300.00 must be made by the Village Administrator, or in his absence, by
the Deputy Clerk or Treasurer, on purchase order forms to be supplied by the
Village.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
(c) Violations Cause for Dismissal. It is a cause for dismissal for any Village
employee to attempt to purchase items for the Village in contravention of this
section.
(8) Duplicate Treasurer’s Bond. As a substitute for the filing of a bond with the
Milwaukee County Treasurer, the Village Board agrees and binds the Village to pay, in
case the Village Treasurer, or his successor in office, shall fail to do so, all taxes of any
kind, required by law to be paid by the said Village Treasurer, or his successor, to the
Milwaukee County Treasurer, or his successor in office.
(9) Special Assessment Fund.
(a) There shall be a segregated Special Assessment Fund into which all special
assessment receipts shall be deposited.
(b) Loans obtained for assessable special assessments shall be repaid from the
Special Assessment Fund.
(c) General operating funds shall be used for general budgeted items only and for the
Village’s share of special assessment levies.
(10) Tax Stabilization Fund. A Tax Stabilization fund shall be established into which shall
be transferred surplus available in cash from the Special Assessment Fund or from the
general fund.
(11) Public Construction Contracts. The Village Board elects that the provisions of Section
62.15, Wis. Stats., shall apply to Village contracts. References therein to city officials,
departments, and boards shall refer to the comparable Village officer, department, or
board.
(12) Installment Payment of Real Estate Taxes and Special Assessments.
(a) Pursuant to the authority under Sec. 74.85, Wis. Stats., commencing in the tax
levy year of 1989, payment of real estate taxes and special assessments then due
may be made to the Village Treasurer in three (3) installments as follows:
January 31, 50% of all tax and special assessment; April 30, 25%; and July 31,
25%. However, all aggregate real estate taxes not in excess of $50, all special
assessments then due not in excess of $50, all service charges for garbage and
refuse collection, and all personal property taxes shall be due and payable in full
on or before January 31 in the succeeding year of the tax levy.
(b) Any ordinances or resolutions in conflict with subsection (12) hereof are hereby
repealed, including Ordinances 83-11, 84-6, and 84-12, and Resolutions 239 and
81-35.
(c) Penalty.
1. Delinquent First Installment. If the first installment is of real property
taxes and special assessments is not paid on or before January 31, the
entire amount of the remaining unpaid taxes and special assessments on
that parcel is delinquent as of February 1.
2. Delinquent Second or Subsequent Installment. If the second or any
subsequent installment payment of real property taxes or special
assessments is not paid by the due date specified herein, the entire
amount of the taxes or special assessments that remain unpaid on that
parcel are delinquent as of the first day of the month after the payment is
due.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
3. Delinquent Annual Payment. If all special charges, special taxes, and
personal property taxes that are due under subsection (a) hereof are not
paid in full on or before January 31, the amounts unpaid are delinquent
as of February 1.
4. All general property taxes, special assessments, special charges, and
special taxes that become delinquent and are paid on or before July 31
shall be paid, together with interest and penalties charged from the
preceding February 1 to the Village Treasurer. All general property
taxes, special assessments, special charges, and special taxes that become
delinquent and are not paid to the Village Treasurer as hereinabove
provided shall be paid, together with interest and penalties charged from
the preceding February 1 to the County Treasurer.
(d) Payment Priority. If the Village Treasurer or County Treasurer receives a
payment from a taxpayer which is not sufficient to pay all general property taxes,
special charges, special assessments, and special taxes due, the treasurer shall
apply the payment to the amounts due, including interest and penalties, in the
following order:
1. Special Charges
2. Special Assessments
3. Special Taxes
4. General Property Taxes
(e) Interest. If any taxes, the payment of which shall have been postponed, shall not
be paid in full on or before the final date fixed in subsection (a) for each
installment, the unpaid portion of such postponed taxes shall be delinquent and
such taxes shall be collected together with interested thereon at one (1) percent
per month or fraction thereof, or at such higher rate up to 0.5% per month or
fraction of a month, in addition to said one (1) percent, on any delinquent general
property taxes, special assessments, special charges, and special taxes included in
the tax roll as determined by ordinance of the County Board of Milwaukee
County.
(f) Delinquent Taxes Returned; Collection by County. The Village Treasurer shall
retain the tax roll and make collections through July 31. On or before August 15,
the Village Treasurer shall return the tax roll to the County Treasurer. The
County Treasurer shall collect all returned delinquent real property taxes, special
assessments, special charges, and special taxes, together with interest and penalty
assessed from the previous February 1, as provided under Sec. 74.47, Wis. Stats.
(13) Fees for Returned Checks with Insufficient Funds; Reimbursement of Collection
Costs.
(a) There shall be a $25.00 fee for processing checks made payable to the Village of
Hales Corners that are returned because of insufficient funds in the account in
question.
(b) Collection costs and attorneys’ fees shall be added to the principal amounts of
unpaid bills owed to the Village that are placed with collection agencies.
ARTICLE XI BUDGET
(1) On or before September 10 of each year, the Village officer, department head,
commission chairman or board chairman charged with fiscal responsibility shall file with
the Village Administrator:
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
(a) An itemized statement of receipts received and disbursements made to carry out
the powers and duties of his Village functions during:
1. The preceding calendar year;
2. Estimates during the current calendar year;
3. Projections for the ensuing calendar year.
(b) A detailed accounting of any special fund under his supervision.
(c) Such statements shall be in a form prescribed by the Village Administrator, shall
be designated as “Departmental Estimates”, and shall conform as nearly as
possible for the main divisions of all departments to the “Schedule of Accounts”
established by the Wisconsin State Bureau of Municipal Audits Class A
Appropriation System for Wisconsin municipalities.
(2) The Village Administrator shall consider such departmental estimates in consultation
with the fiscally responsible person and develop a recommendation regarding the
departmental estimate. On or before the 15th day of October, he shall submit such
recommendations to the Finance Committee.
(3) The budget shall include the following information:
(a) The expense of conducting each department and activity of the Village for the
ensuing calendar year and corresponding items for the current year and last
preceding year, with reasons for increases and decreases recommended as
compared with appropriations for the current year;
(b) An itemization of all anticipated income of the Village from sources other than
the General Property Taxes and bond issues, with a comparative statement of the
amounts received by the Village for each of the same or similar sources for the
last preceding and current calendar years;
(c) An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from General Property Taxes
which, with income from other sources, will be necessary to meet proposed
expenditures;
(d) Such other information as may be required by the Village Board and by State
law.
(4) The Finance Committee shall review the recommended budget. The Finance Committee
will hold a meeting with the Village Board to review the proposed budget and draft an
appropriation resolution providing for the expenditures proposed for the ensuing year.
Upon submission of the proposed appropriation resolution to the Village Board, it shall
be deemed to have been regularly introduced therein.
(5) A summary of such budget and notice of the place where such budget in detail is
available for public inspection and notice of the time and place for holding the public
hearing thereon shall be published at least one time in the official newspaper at least 10
days prior to the time of such public hearing. The Village Board shall hold a public
hearing on the budget and the proposed appropriation resolution. Following the public
hearing, the proposed appropriation resolution may be changed or amended and shall take
the same course in the Village Board as other resolutions.
(6) Upon a recommendation of the Finance Committee, the Village Board may at any time
by a two-thirds vote of the entire membership transfer any portion of the unencumbered
balance of an appropriation to any other purpose or object. Notice of such transfer shall
be given by publication within 10 days thereafter in the official newspaper.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
(7) No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the Village nor shall any obligation for the
expenditure of money be incurred, except in pursuance of the approved annual budget, or
of any transfers as authorized by Section (6) of this bylaw. At the close of each fiscal
year any unencumbered balance of an appropriation shall revert to the General Fund and
shall be subject to reappropriation; but appropriations may be made by the Village Board
to be paid out of income of the current year, in furtherance of improvements or other
objects or works which will not be completed within such year, and any such
appropriation shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made shall have
been accomplished or abandoned.
ARTICLE XII ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW PROCEDURE
(1) Administrative Review Pursuant to Ordinance. The Village of Hales Corners elects
not to be governed by Chapter 68, Wis. Stats., in respect to any administrative
determination by the Village Board or any commission, committee, agency officer, or
employee of the Village or any agent acting on behalf of the Village where, pursuant to
an existing ordinance or an ordinance adopted after the effective date of this ordinance, a
procedure is provided by said ordinance for administrative review of the determination.
(2) Expanded Jurisdiction of Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall be the
administrative review appeals board for the Village of Hales Corners, which shall have
the duty and responsibility of hearing appeals from administrative determination or
decisions of officers, employees, agents, agencies, committees, boards and commissions
of the Village filed in accordance with this Article, and making a final determination
thereon.
(3) Other Ordinances to Remain in Effect. The provisions of this Article shall not be
deemed to repeal or supersede the provisions of any other ordinances in conflict herewith
or providing other procedures for review of administrative determination within the
Village except when otherwise specifically provided in said ordinance.
(4) Determinations Reviewable. The following determinations are reviewable under this
Article.
(a) The grant or denial in whole or in part after application of an initial permit,
license, right, or privilege, or authority, except a fermented malt beverage or
intoxicating liquor license.
(b) The suspension, revocation, or non-renewal of an existing permit, license, right,
privilege, or authority, except as provided in Section (5)(e) of this Article.
(c) The denial of a grant of money or other thing of substantial value under a statute
or ordinance prescribing conditions of eligibility for such grant.
(d) The imposition of a penalty or sanction upon any person except a municipal
employee or officer, other than by a court.
(5) Determinations not Subject to Review. Except as provided in Section (4) hereof, the
following determinations are not reviewable under this Article.
(a) A Legislative Enactment. A legislative enactment is an ordinance, resolution, or
adopted motion of the Village Board of Trustees.
(b) Any action subject to administrative or judicial review procedures under
Wisconsin Statutes.
(c) The denial of a tort or contract claim for money, required to be filed with the
Village pursuant to statutory procedures for the filing of such claims.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
(d) The suspension, removal, or disciplining or nonrenewal of a contract of a Village
employee or officer.
(e) The grant, denial, suspension, or revocation of a fermented malt beverage license
under §66.054(13)(b), Wis. Stats., or intoxicating liquor license under §176.11 or
176.12, Wis. Stats.
(f) Judgments and orders of a court.
(g) Determinations made during municipal labor negotiations.
(h) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Article, any action or determination
of a municipal authority which does not involve the constitutionally protected
right of a specific person or persons to due process in connection with the action
or determination.
(i) No department, board, commission, agency, officer, or employee of a
municipality who is aggrieved may initiate review under this chapter of a
determination of any other department, board, commission, agency, officer, or
employee of the same municipality, but may respond or intervene in a review
proceeding under this chapter initiated by another.
(6) Definitions.
(a) Municipal Authority Defined. “Municipal Authority” includes every
municipality and governing body, board, commission, committee, agency,
officer, employee, or agent thereof making a determination under Section (2)
hereof.
(b) Persons Aggrieved. A person aggrieved includes any individual, partnership,
corporation, association, public or private organization, whose rights, duties, or
privileges are adversely affected by a determination of a municipal authority.
Personal matters for Village employees shall be excluded for the provisions of
this Article in that provisions are made therefore under Article V of the bylaws.
(7) Rules for Administrative Review.
(a) Time within which to Appeal. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days of the
act or omission.
(b) Procedure on Appeal. The aggrieved party shall file with the officer from whom
the appeal is taken and with the Board of Appeals a written notice of appeal
specifying the grounds thereof. The appellant shall annex to the notice of appeal
to the Board of such exhibits which the appellant considers of probative value in
the determination of the appeal together with the name and address of the
appellant. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to
the chairman shall the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken. Failure to annex any exhibits to the appeal will not
preclude the appellant from introducing them at the hearing.
(c) Effect of Appeal. Upon the filing of notice of appeal, an appeal shall stay all
legal proceedings in the furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the
officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Appeals after
notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in a
certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property.
In such case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order
which may be granted by the Board of Appeals or by a court of record on
application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due
cause shown.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
(d) Fixing a Hearing. Upon the filing of the notice of appeal, the Board of Appeals
shall fix a time and place for the hearing of the appeal or other matter referred to
it.
(e) Date and Notice of Hearing. The hearing of the appeal shall be initiated not less
than 10 nor more than 30 days from the date of filing of the notice of appeal.
Notice of the hearing shall be given to all interested parties at least seven (7) days
prior to the hearing by registered letter addressed to their last known addresses.
The appellant shall receive with such notice a copy of the Rules of the Board of
Appeals. In addition, for at least seven (7) consecutive days prior to the date of
hearing, a notice shall be posted in the municipal building stating the time and
date of hearing together with a summary of the matters to be considered. In the
event the Board of Appeals determines that parties other than those immediately
concerned with the proceedings will be affected, the Board may send additional
notices in such manner and to such persons as the Board shall see fit.
(f) The Hearing. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by
attorney. The chairman may administer oaths to compel the attendance of
witnesses. The chairman may issue subpoenas. A majority of the Board of
Appeals shall constitute a quorum. The order of proceeding shall be as follows:
1. The appellant shall be heard. He shall state the facts of the case and the
grounds for his appeal. He shall file any exhibits which he has not
previously files. He shall present his witnesses, if any. He shall state his
argument.
2. The administrative official shall be heard. He shall amend and correct
the statement of facts, if necessary. He shall file any exhibits which he
has not previously filed. He shall present his witnesses, if any. He shall
state the basis for his act or omission.
3. The appellant shall reply.
4. Anyone present shall be given opportunity to be heard.
5. Any member of the Board at any time may ask questions of any person
present. When a person becomes repetitious, or states matters which are
irrelevant, immaterial, or incompetent, the chairman may limit the
discussion.
6. Record of Hearing. The chairman, or a person designated by him, shall
take notes of the testimony and shall mark and preserve all exhibits. The
chairman may, and upon request of the appellant shall, cause the
proceedings to be taken by a recording device, the expense thereof to be
paid by the Village. If the appellant desires the proceedings to be taken
by a stenographer, the expense thereof shall be paid by the appellant.
7. Adjournment of Hearing. For any reasonable cause after the start of the
hearing, the Board may adjourn the hearing to a day certain which shall
be not more than seven (7) days from the date of the initial hearing.
Adjourned hearings thereafter shall be set on consecutive days, excluding
Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays.
8. Determination of the Board. Within 20 days after the conclusion of the
hearing, the Board must make its final determination. The concurring
vote of a majority of the members of the Board attending the hearing
shall be necessary in the final determination. The Board may reverse,
affirm, modify, or remand the matter to the municipal authority from
which the appeal is made.
a. If there has been procedural error impairing the fairness of any
proceeding or correctness of the action, the Board must remand.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
b. If there has been an error of law the Board may reverse or
modify if law compels the particular action under a correct
interpretation, otherwise it must remand.
c. The Board may affirm, reverse, or modify if substantial rights of
the appellant have been impaired as a result of a municipal
action being contrary to constitutional rights or privileges.
d. If the municipal action depends on any determined fact, the
Board may not substitute its judgment as to the weight of the
evidence, but must set aside and remand if not supported by
substantial evidence in the records.
e. If the municipal action was made beyond the authority or
inconsistent with rule, policies, or practices, the Board may
reverse or remand if deviation is not explained to the Board’s
satisfaction
(8) Disposition of the Determination. The determination of the Board shall be in writing
and shall be final. Upon rendition of its decision, sufficient copies thereof shall be filed
with the Village Clerk so that each member of the Village Board, the affected municipal
authority, and the appellant shall receive one (1) such copy of every decision so rendered
by the Board. If a determination subject to this article does not state the reasons therefore
the Board shall, upon written request of any person aggrieved by such determination
made within 10 days of notice of such determination, reduce the determination and the
reasons therefore to writing, and mail or deliver such determination and reasons to the
person making the request. The determination shall be dated.
(9) Judicial Review. After a party seeking review of a municipal administrative
determination has had an evidentiary hearing before an impartial hearing examiner or
decision maker, he or she may seek review in the circuit court by writ of certiorari within
30 days of receipt of a final determination. Except where the reviewing court determines
that the person seeking the review is impecunious, the record of the proceeding shall be
transcribed at the expense of the person seeking the review. By stipulation the court may
order a synopsis of the proceedings in lieu of a transcript. The court may otherwise limit
the requirement for a transcript.
On review by certiorari the court may affirm or reverse the final determination or remand
the matter to the decision maker for further proceeding.
ARTICLE XIII PUBLIC RECORDS
(1) Definitions.
(a) Authority means any of the following Village entities having custody of a Village
record: an office, elected official, agency, board, commission, committee,
council, department, or public body corporate and politic created by constitution,
law, ordinance, rule, or order; or a formally constituted subunit of the foregoing.
(b) Custodian means that officer, department head, division head, or employee of the
Village designated under subsection (3) or otherwise responsible b law to keep
and preserve any Village records or file, deposit, or keep such records in his or
her office, or is lawfully in possession or entitled to possession of such public
records and who is required by this section to respond to requests for access to
such records.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
(c) Record means any material on which written, drawn, printed, spoken, visual, or
electromagnetic information is recorded or preserved, regardless of physical form
or characteristics, which has been created or is kept by an authority. Record
includes, but is not limited to, handwritten, typed, or printed pages, maps, charts,
photographs, films, recordings, tapes (including computer tapes), and computer
printouts. Record does not include drafts, notes, preliminary computations and
like materials prepared for the originator’s person use or prepared by the
originator in the name of a person for whom the originator is working; materials
which are purely the personal property of the custodian and have no relation to
his or her office; materials to which access is limited by copyright, patent, or
bequest; and published materials in the possession of an authority other than a
public library which are available for sale, or which are available for inspection
at a public library.
(2) Duty to Maintain Records.
(a) Except as provided under subsection (7), each officer and employee of the
Village shall safely keep and preserve all records received from his or her
predecessor or other persons and required by law to be filed, deposited, or kept in
his or her office or which are in the lawful possession or control of the officer or
employee or his or her deputies, or to the possession or control of which he or
she or they may be lawfully entitled as such officers or employees.
(b) Upon the expiration of an officer’s term of office or an employee’s term of
employment, or whenever the office or position of employment becomes vacant,
each such officer or employee shall deliver to his or her successor all records
then in his or her custody and the successor shall receipt therefore to the officer
or employee, who shall file said receipt with the Village Clerk. If a vacancy
occurs before a successor is selected or qualifies, such records shall be delivered
to and receipted for by the Clerk, on behalf of the successor, to be delivered to
such successor upon the latter’s receipt.
(3) Legal Custodian(s).
(a) The Village Clerk, or in his or her absence or disability or in case of vacancy, the
Deputy Clerk, is hereby designated the legal custodian of all Village records.
(b) The legal custodian shall have full legal power to render decisions and to carry
out the duties of an authority under subchapter 11 of Chapter 19, Wis. Stats., and
this section. The designation of a legal custodian does not affect the powers and
duties of an authority under this section.
(4) Public Access to Records.
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b), any person has a right to inspect a record
and to make or receive a copy of any records as provided in §19.35(1), Wis.
Stats.
(b) Records will be available for inspection and copying during all regular office
hours.
(c) If regular office hours are not maintained at the location where records are kept,
the records will be available for inspection and copying upon at least 48 hours
advance notice of intent to inspect or copy.
(d) A requester shall be permitted to use facilities comparable to those available to
Village employees to inspect, copy, or abstract a record.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
(e) The legal custodian may require supervision during inspection or may impose
other reasonable restrictions on the manner of access to an original record if the
record is irreplaceable or easily damaged.
(f) A requester shall be charged a fee to defray the cost of locating and copying
records as follows:
1. The cost of photocopying shall be 25¢ per page for hand delivery and
50¢ per copy for mail delivery. Said cost has been calculated not to
exceed the actual, necessary, and direct cost of reproduction.
2. If the form of a written record does not permit copying, the actual and
necessary cost of photographing and photographic processing shall be
charged.
3. The actual full cost of providing a copy of other records not in printed
form on paper, such as films, computer printouts, and audio and visual
tapes, shall be charged.
4. If mailing or shipping is necessary, the actual cost of postage thereof
shall also be charged.
5. There shall be no charge for locating a record unless the actual cost
therefore exceeds $50.00, in which case the actual cost shall be
determined by the legal custodian and billed to the requester.
6. The legal custodian shall estimate the cost of all applicable fees and may
require a cash deposit adequate to assure payment, if such estimate
exceeds $5.00.
7. Elected and appointed officials of the Village of Hales Corners shall not
be required to pay for public records they may reasonably require for the
proper performance of their official duties.
8. The charges for incidental fees specified in Resolution 80-20 shall apply.
However, the legal custodian may provide copies of a record without
charge or at a reduced charge where he or she determines that waiver or
reduction of the fee is in the public interest.
(g) Pursuant to §19.34, Wis. Stats., an the guidelines therein listed, the Village Clerk
shall adopt, prominently display, and make available for inspection and copying
at its offices, for the guidance of the public, a notice containing a description of
its organization and the established times and places at which the legal custodian
from whom and the methods whereby the public may obtain information and
access to records in its custody, make requests for records, or obtain copies of
records, and the costs thereof. This subsection does not apply to members of the
Village Board.
(5) Access to Procedures.
(a) A request to inspect or copy a record shall be made to the legal custodian. A
request shall be deemed sufficient if it reasonably describes the requested record
or the information requested. However, a request for a record without a
reasonable limitation as to subject matter or length of time represented by the
record does not constitute a sufficient request. A request may be made orally, but
a request must be in writing before an action to enforce the request is commenced
under §19.37, Wis. Stats. Except as provided below, no request may be refused
because the person making the request is unwilling to be identified or to state the
purpose of the request. No request may be refused because the request is
received by mail, unless prepayment of fee is required under subsection (4)(f)6.
A requester may be required to show acceptable identification whenever the
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
requested record is kept at a private residence or whenever security reasons or
federal law or regulations so require.
(b) Each custodian, upon request for any record, shall, as soon as practicable and
without delay, either fill the request or notify the requester of the authority’s
determination to deny the request in whole or in part and the reasons therefore. If
the legal custodian, after conferring with the Village Attorney, determines that a
written request is so general as to be unduly time consuming, the party making
the request may first be required to itemize his or her request in a manner which
would permit reasonable compliance.
(c) A request for a record may be denied as provided in subsection (6). If a request
is made orally, the request may be denied orally unless a demand for a written
statement of the reasons denying the request is made by the requester within five
(5) business days of the oral denial. If a written request is denied in whole or in
part, the requester shall receive a written statement of the reasons for denying the
request. Every written denial of a request shall inform the requester that if the
request for the record was made in writing, then the determination is subject to
review upon petition for a writ of mandamus under §19.37(1), Wis. Stats., or
upon application to the Attorney General or a district attorney.
(6) Limitations on Right to Access.
(a) As provided by §19.36, Wis. Stats., the following records are exempt from
inspection under this section:
1. Records specifically exempted from disclosure by State or federal law or
authorized to be exempted from disclosure by State law;
2. Any record relating to investigative information obtained for law
enforcement purposes if federal law or regulations require exemption
from disclosure or if exemption for disclosure is a condition to receipt of
aids by the State;
3. Computer programs, although the material used as input for a computer
program or the material produced as a product of the computer program
is subject to inspection; and
4. A record or any portion of a record containing information qualifying as
a common law trade secret.
(b) As provided by §43.30, Wis. Stats., public library circulation records are exempt
from inspection under this section.
(c) In responding to a request for inspection or copying of a record which is not
specifically exempt from disclosure, the legal custodian, after conferring with the
Village Attorney, may deny the request, in whole or in part, only if he or she
determines that the harm to the public interest resulting from disclosure would
outweigh the public interest in full access to the requested record. Examples of
matters for which disclosure may be refused include, but are not limited to, the
following:
1. Records obtained under official pledges of confidentiality which are
necessary and given in order to obtain the information contained in them.
2. Records of current deliberations after a quasi-judicial hearing.
3. Records of current deliberations concerning employment, dismissal,
promotion, demotion, compensation, performance, or discipline of any
Village officer or employee, or the investigation of charges against a
Village officer or employee, unless such officer or employee consents to
such disclosure.
4. Records concerning current strategy for crime detection or prevention.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
5. Records of current deliberations or negotiations on the purchase of
Village property, investing of Village funds, or other Village business
whenever competitive or bargaining reasons require nondisclosure.
6. Communications between legal counsel for the Village and any officer,
agent, or employee of the Village, when advice is being rendered
concerning strategy with respect to current litigation in which the Village
or any of its officers, agents, or employees is or is likely to become
involved, or communications which are privileged under §905.03, Wis.
Stats.
(d) If a record contains information that may be made public and information that
may not be made public, the custodian of the record shall provide the information
that may be made public and delete the information that may not be made public
from the record before release. The custodian shall confer with the Village
Attorney prior to releasing any such record and shall follow the guidance of the
Village Attorney when separating out the exempt material. If in the judgment of
the custodian and the Village Attorney there is no feasible way to separate the
exempt material from the nonexempt material without unreasonably jeopardizing
nondisclosure of the exempt material, the entire record shall be withheld from
disclosure.
(e) Whenever the Assessor, in the performance of his or her duties, requests and
obtains income and expense information pursuant to §70.47(af), Wis. Stats., or
any successor statute thereto, then, such income and expense information that is
provided to the Assessor shall be held by the Assessor on a confidential basis,
except, however, that said information may be revealed to and used by persons in
the discharge of duties imposed by law; in the discharge of duties imposed by
office, including, but not limited to, use by the Assessor in performance of
official duties of the Assessor’s office and use by the Board of Review in
performance of its official duties; or pursuant to order of a court. Income and
expense information provided to the Assessor pursuant to §70.47(af), Wis. Stats.,
unless a court determines that it is inaccurate, is not subject to the right of
inspection and copying under §19.35(1), Wis. Stats.
(7) Destruction of Records.
(a) Village officers may destroy the following nonutility financial records of which
they are the legal custodians and which are considered obsolete, after completion
of any required audit by the bureau of municipal audit or an auditor licensed
under Chapter 442 of the Wisconsin Statutes, but not less than seven (7) years
after payment or receipt of any sum involved in the particular transaction, unless
a shorter period has been fixed by the State public records board pursuant to
§196.61(3)(e), and then after such shorter period. The following records may be
destroyed within said timeframe:
1. Bank statements;
2. Cancelled checks;
3. Receipt forms; and
4. Vouchers
(b) Village officers may destroy the following utility records of which they are the
legal custodians and which are considered obsolete after completion of any
required audit by the bureau of municipal audit or an auditor licensed under
Chapter 442 of the Wisconsin Statutes, subject to State Public Service
Commission regulations, but not less than seven (7) years after the record was
effective unless a shorter period has been fixed by the State public records board
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
pursuant to §16.61(3)(e), Wis. Stats., and then after such a shorter period, except
that water stubs, receipts of current billings, and customers’ ledgers may be
destroyed after two (2) years. The following records may be destroyed within
said timeframe:
1. Contracts;
2. Excavation permits;
3. Inspection records;
4. Street opening permits; and
5. Sanitary sewer service charges.
(c) Village officers may destroy the following records of which they are the legal
custodian and which are considered obsolete, but not less than seven (7) years
after the record was effective unless another period has been set by statute, and
then after such a period, or unless a shorter period has been fixed by the State
public records board pursuant to §16.61(3)(e), Wis. Stats., and then after such a
shorter period. The following records may be destroyed within said timeframe.
1. Old insurance policies;
2. Election notices;
3. Cancelled registration cards;
4. All police records of matters which have been closed for more than seven
(7) years.
(d) Unless notice is waived by the State Historical Society, at least 60 days notice
shall be given to the State Historical Society prior to the destruction of any
records as provided by §19.21(4)(a), Wis. Stats.
(e) Any tape recordings of a governmental meeting of the Village may be destroyed,
erased, or reused no sooner than 90 days after the minutes of the meeting have
been approved and published, if the purpose of the recording was to make
minutes of the meeting.
(8) Preservation through Microfilm. Any Village officer, or the director of any department
or division of the Village government may (subject to the approval of the Village Board)
keep and preserve public records in his or her possession by means of microfilm or other
photographic reproduction method. Such records shall meet the standards for
photographic reproduction set forth in §16.61(7)(a) and (b), Wis. Stats., and shall be
considered original records for all purposes. Such records shall be preserved along with
other files of the department or division and shall be open to public inspection and
copying according to the provisions of State law and subsections (4) through (6) of this
ordinance.
(9) Severability. The provisions of this ordinance are severable. If a section, subsection,
paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase shall be adjudged by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, the decisions shall not affect the validity of this ordinance.
ARTICLE XIV SMOKING
(1) Definitions.
(a) Smoking means carrying a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other lighted
smoking materials.
(b) Village-owned building includes but is not limited to any enclosed Village
building including the Library, Fire Station, Public Works garage, Police
Department portion of the municipal building, and the Village Hall portion of the
municipal building, excepting that area within the Village Hall portion of the
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
municipal building which has been designated by the Village Board and posted
as a “smoking allowed” area, upon a finding by the Village Board that smoking
in such area will not require any building modification costs for necessary
ventilation purposes.
(c) Village-owned vehicle includes but is not limited to any Village-owned vehicle
including police marked and unmarked squad cars, fire trucks and accessory
vehicles, and public work dump trucks, pickups, and accessory vehicles.
(d) Person in charge means the Village Administrator or his or her designee.
(2) In an effort to provide a safe and healthy environment, no person shall smoke or use any
lighted tobacco smoking products in any Village-owned building or vehicle.
(3) The Village Administrator or his or her designee shall post signs identifying “Smoke-free
Workplace” and/or “No Smoking” in all Village-owned buildings.
(4) Penalties.
(a) After January 1, 1995, any person who shall violate the provisions of this Article
shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Section 19.04 of this code.
(b) After July 1, 1995, the person in charge or any affected party may institute an
action in any court with jurisdiction to enjoin repeated violations of this Article.
ARTICLE XV ETHICS CODE
(1) Statement of Purpose.
(a) The proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials and
employees be independent, impartial, and responsible to the people; that
government decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the
governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that
the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of
these goals, there is hereby established in this Chapter a Code of Ethics for all
Village of Hales Corners officials and employees, whether elected or appointed,
paid or unpaid, including members of boards, committees, and commissions of
the Village, as well as any individuals who are candidates for elective office as
soon as such individuals file nomination papers with the Village.
(b) The purpose of this Ethics Code is to establish guidelines for ethical standards of
conduct for all such officials and employees by setting forth those acts or actions
that are incompatible with the best interest of the Village of Hales Corners and by
directing disclosure by such officials and employees of private financial or other
interests in matters affecting the Village. The Village Board believes that a Code
of Ethics for the guidance of elected and appointed officials and employees will
help them avoid conflicts between their personal interests and their public
responsibilities, will improve standards of public service, and will promote and
strengthen the faith and confidence of the citizens of this Village in their elected
and appointed officials and employees. The Village Board hereby reaffirms that
each elected and appointed Village official and employee holds his or her
position as a public trust, and any intentional effort to realize substantial personal
gain through official conduct is a violation of that trust. The provisions and
purpose of this Ethics Code and such rules and regulations as may be established
are hereby declared to be in the best interests of the Village of Hales Corners.
(2) Definitions. The following definitions shall be applicable to this Chapter:
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
(a) Public Official. Means those persons serving in statutory elected or appointed
offices provided for in Chapter 61 of the Wisconsin Statutes, and all members
appointed to boards, committees, and commission established or appointed by the
Village President and/or Village Board pursuant to this Code of Ordinances,
whether paid or unpaid.
(b) Public Employee. Means any person excluded from the definition of a public
official who is employed by the Village.
(c) Anything of Value. Means any gift, favor, loan, service, or promise of future
employment, but does not include reasonable fees and honorariums, or the
exchange of seasonal, anniversary, or customary gifts among relatives and
friends.
(d) Business. Means any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, firm, enterprise,
franchise, association, organization, self-employed individual, or any other legal
entity which engages in profit-making activities.
(e) Personal Interest. Means the following specific blood or marriage relationships:
1. A person’s spouse, mother, father, child, brother, or sister; or
2. A person’s relative by blood or marriage who receives, directly or
indirectly, more than one-half (1/2) support from such person or from
whom such person receives, directly or indirectly, more than one-half
(1/2) of his support.
(f) Significant Interest. Means owning or controlling, directly or indirectly, at least
10 percent or $5,000 of the outstanding stock of at least 10 percent or $5,000 of
any business.
(g) Financial Interest. Any interest which shall yield, directly or indirectly, a
monetary or other material benefit to the officer or employee or to any person
employing or retaining the services of the officer or employee.
(3) Statutory Standards of Conduct. There are certain provisions of the Wisconsin
Statutes which should, while not set forth herein, be considered an integral part of any
Code of Ethics. Accordingly, the provisions of the following section of the Wisconsin
Statutes, as from time to time amended, are made part of this Code of Ethics and shall
apply to public officials and employees whenever applicable, to wit:
(a) §946.10. Bribery of Public Officers and Employees.
(b) §945.11. Special Privileges from Public Utilities.
(c) §946.12. Misconduct in Public Office.
(d) §946.13. Private Interest in Public Contract Prohibited.
(4) Responsibility of Public Office. Public officials and employees are agents of public
purpose and hold office for the benefit of the public. They are bound to uphold the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of this State and carry out
impartially the laws of the nation, state, and municipality, to observe in their official acts
the highest standards of morality, and to discharge faithfully the duties of their office
regardless of personal considerations, recognizing that the public interest must be their
prime concern.
(5) Dedicated Service.
(a) Officials and employees should adhere to the rules of work and performance
established as the standard for their positions by the appropriate authority.
(b) Officials and employees should not exceed their authority or breach the law or
ask others to do so, and they should work in full cooperation with other public
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
officials and employees unless prohibited from so doing by law or by officially
recognized confidentiality of their work.
(c) Members of the Village staff are expected to follow their appropriate
professional code of ethics. Staff members shall file a copy of such professional
ethics codes with the Ethics Board. The Ethics Board shall notify the appropriate
professional ethics board of any ethics violations involving Village employees
covered by such professional standards.
(6) Fair and Equal Treatment.
(a) Use of Public Property. No official or employee shall use or permit the
unauthorized use of Village-owned vehicles, equipment, materials, or property
for personal convenience or profit, except when such services are available to the
public generally or are provided as Village policy for the use of such official or
employee in the conduct of official business, as authorized by the Village Board
or authorized board, committee, or commission.
(b) Use of Village Stationery. Copies of any correspondence written on Village
stationery shall be filed with the Village Administrator, or his designee.
(c) Obligations to Citizens. No official or employee shall grant any special
consideration, treatment, or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is
available to every other citizen. No official or employee shall use or attempt to
use his or her position with the Village to secure any advantage, preference, or
gain, over and above his rightful remuneration and benefits, for himself or for a
member of his or her immediate family.
(d) Political Contributions. No official shall personally solicit from any Village
employee, other than an elected official, a contribution to a political campaign
committee for which the person subject to this Chapter is a candidate or treasurer.
(7) Conflict of Interest.
(a) Financial and Personal Interest Prohibited.
1. No official or employee of the Village, whether paid or unpaid, shall
engage in any business or transaction or shall act in regard to financial or
other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the
proper discharge of official duties in the public interest contrary to the
provisions of this Chapter or which would tend to impair independence
of judgment or action in the performance of official duties.
2. Any member of the Village Board who has a financial interest or a
personal interest in any proposed legislation before the Village Board
shall disclose on the records of the Village Board the nature and extent of
such interest; such official shall not participate in debate or vote for
adoption or defeat of such legislation. If the matter before the Board
involves a member’s personal interest with persons involved, the
member may participate in debate or discussion and vote on the matter
following disclosure, unless an ordinance or contract is involved; if an
ordinance or contract is involved, such official shall not participate in
debate or discussion or vote on the matter.
3. Any non-elected official, other than a Village employee, who has a
financial interest or personal interest in any proposed legislative action of
the Village Board or any board, commission, or committee upon which
the official has any influence or input or of which the official is a
member that is to make a recommendation or decision upon any item
which is the subject of the proposed legislative action shall disclose on
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
the records of the Village Board or the appropriate board, commission, or
committee the nature and extent of such interest. Such official shall not
participate in debate or discussion or vote for adoption or defeat of such
legislation.
4. Any Village employee who has a financial interest or personal interest in
any proposed legislative action of the Village Board or any board,
commission, or committee upon which the employee has any influence
of input, or of which the employee is a member, that is to make a
recommendation or decision upon any time which is the subject of the
proposed legislative action shall disclose on the records of the Village
Board or the appropriate board, commission, or committee the nature and
extent of such interest.
(b) Disclosure of Confidential Information. No official or employee shall, without
proper legal authorization, disclose confidential information concerning the
property, government, or affairs of the Village, nor shall such information be
used to advance the financial or other private interests of such official or
employee or others.
(c) Gifts and Favors.
1. No official or employee, personally or through a member of his
immediate family, may solicit or accept, either directly or indirectly,
from any person or organization, money or anything of value if it could
be expected to influence the employee’s official actions or judgments or
be considered a reward for any action or inaction on the part of the
official or employee.
2. No official or employee personally, or through a member of his
immediate family, shall accept any gift of greater value than $20.00,
whether in the form of money, service, loan, thing, or promise, from any
person which may tend to impair his independence of judgment or action
in the performance of his duties or grant in the discharge of his duties
any improper favor, service, or thing of value. However, it is not a
conflict of interest for any public official or employee to receive a gift or
gratuity that is an unsolicited item of nominal intrinsic value of less than
$20.00, such as a meal, and that is not intended to influence the official.
Any official or employee who receives, directly or indirectly, any gift or
gifts having an aggregate value of more than $50.00 within any calendar
year from any person who is known by said official or employee to be
interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever in business
dealings with the Village upon which the official or employee has any
influence or input or over which the official or employee has any
jurisdiction, discretion, or control shall disclose the nature and value of
such gifts to the Ethics Board by January 15 next following the year in
which the gift or gifts are received.
3. An official or employee is not to accept hospitality if, after consideration
of the surrounding circumstances, it could reasonably be concluded that
such hospitality would not be extended were it not for the fact that the
guest, or a member of the guest’s immediate family, was a Village
official or employee. Participation in celebrations, grand openings, open
houses, informational meetings, and similar events are excluded from
this prohibition. This paragraph further shall not be construed to prevent
candidates for elective office from accepting hospitality from citizens for
the purpose of supporting the candidate’s campaign.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
4. Gifts received by an official or employee or his immediate family under
unusual circumstances shall be referred to the Ethics Board within 10
days of receipt for recommended disposition. Any person subject to this
Chapter who becomes aware that he is or has been offered any gift, the
acceptance of which would constitute a violation of this Subsection,
shall, within 10 days, disclose the details surrounding said offer to the
Ethics Board. Failure to comply with this reporting requirement shall
constitute an offense under this Chapter.
(d) Representing Private Interests before Village Agencies or Courts.
1. Non-elected Village officials and employees shall not appear on behalf
of any private person (other than him or herself, his or her spouse or
minor children) before any Village agency, board, commission, or the
Village Board if the official or employee or any board, commission, or
committee of which the official or employee is a member has any
jurisdiction, discretion, or control over the matter which is the subject of
such representation.
2. Elected Village officials may appear before Village agencies on behalf of
constituents in the course of their duties as representatives of the
electorate or in the performance of public or civic obligations. However,
the disclosure requirements of Subsection (a) above shall be applicable to
such appearances.
(e) Ad Hoc Committee Exceptions. No violation of the conflict of interest
restrictions of this Section shall exist, however, where an individual serves on a
special ad hoc committee charged with the narrow responsibility of addressing a
specific issue or topic in which that individual, or the employer or a client of that
individual, has an interest so long as the individual discloses to the Ethics Board
that such interest exists.
(f) Contracts with the Village. No Village official or employee who, in his capacity
as such officer or employee, participates in the making of a contract in which he
has a private pecuniary interest, direct or indirect, or performs in regard to that
contract with such function requiring the exercise of discretion on his part shall
enter into any contract with the Village unless, within the confines of §946.13,
Wis. Stats.
1. The contract is awarded through a process of public notice and
competitive bidding or the Village Board waives the requirement of this
Section after determining that it is in the best interest of the Village to do
so.
2. The provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to the designation of a
public depository of public funds.
(8) Advisory Opinions. Any questions as to the interpretation of any provisions of this
Code of Ethics Chapter shall be referred to the Ethics Board, which, if it deems it
necessary or appropriate, may request an advisory opinion from the Village Attorney.
With prior authorization of the Village Board, the Ethics Board may utilize special legal
counsel if warranted by the facts of the case. Such requests shall be as detailed as
possible and shall be made in writing. Advisory requests and opinions shall be kept
confidential, except when disclosure is authorized by the requestor, in which case the
request and opinion may be made in public.
(9) Hiring Relatives.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
(a) This Section governs the proposed hiring of individuals for full-time or part-time
work as Village employees who are members of the immediate family of Village
employees or elected officials. “Immediate family” includes those relatives by
blood or marriage defined in Section 2(e) of this Bylaws chapter as personal
interests.
(b) Hiring an immediate family member of any current Village employee or elected
Village official is discouraged and will be considered only if that individual has
the knowledge and skills, experience or other job-related qualifications that
warrant consideration for the position. It is required that either the current
employee or the relative seeking employment will make the personal interest
relationship known to the hiring authority (department head, Village
Administrator, or Village Board) before a hiring decision is made; in every case,
the decision to hire an immediate family member or former spouse will be
subject to Village Administrator approval, with notice, before the new employee
is permitted to begin work. Marriage between two (2) individuals already
employed by the Village or their relatives will not be considered a violation of
this policy.
(c) This Section does not apply to non-elected officials who are asked to accept
appointment as members of a Village Board, commission, or committee; nonelected
officials, however, will be expected to disqualify themselves from
participation in matters under consideration which may affect the hiring,
retention, classification, or compensation of their immediate family if currently
employed or being considered for employment by the Village.
(10) Jurisdiction of Ethics Board; Investigations.
(a) Jurisdiction.
1. The Ethics Board shall have administrative jurisdiction over this Code of
Ethics Chapter. The Board may call upon the Village Administrator for
staff assistance as the need arises. The Village Attorney shall provide
such legal assistance as the Board requires. With prior authorization of
the Village Board, the Ethics Board may utilize special legal counsel if
warranted by the facts of the case.
2. The Ethics Board may make recommendations to the Village Board with
respect to amendments to this Code of Ethics Chapter.
(b) Complaints. All complaints regarding violations of this Ethics Code, including
those made by members of the Ethics Board, shall be made in writing and
submitted to the Village Administrator who shall deliver them to the Chairman of
the Ethics Board.
(c) Procedure before the Board. Upon receipt of a complaint, the Ethics Board shall:
1. Conduct an investigation of the facts of the complaint.
2. Cause notice to be given to the respondent. Such written notice shall
contain a specification of the charges against the respondent as well as a
notice that the respondent may file a written statement of his position
with the Ethics Board.
3. Schedule and hold hearings on the complaint.
4. Hear the respondent’s position and the testimony of witnesses, if any.
5. Permit the respondent and the complainant to call such witnesses as
either desires and to cross-examine the witnesses of the other.
6. Consider the evidence presented and make findings thereon.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
7. By its Chairman or his designee, make rulings on motions and objections
made by any party in such a manner as to assure due process protection
to the parties.
8. Based upon the evidence presented to it, determine whether or not to
recommend to the Village Board commencement of a censure action or
the imposition of a forfeiture pursuant to Section 19.04. If a forfeiture is
deemed advisable, the Ethics Board may direct the Village Attorney to
start an action in the name of the Village against he violator. If the
anticipated legal expense to the Village is in excess of $500.00, the
Ethics Board shall first receive authorization from the Village Board for
such expenditure.
(d) Penalties. Village officials found by the Ethics Board to be in violation of the
ethics standards of this Chapter are subject to the following penalties:
1. The Ethics Board may recommend that the Village Board censure a
Village official or recommend commencement of disciplinary
proceedings against a Village employee found in violation of this
Chapter.
2. As an alternative to censure or disciplinary action, the Ethics Board may
seek the imposition of a forfeiture. When deciding to seek the
imposition of a forfeiture, the Ethics Board shall, at the time of notifying
the Village Attorney, serve notice by mail upon the respondent to the
effect that a forfeiture will be sought against the respondent, specifying
the amount and that court action may be avoided if the amount specified
is paid within 30 days of the date of the notice. If a person against whom
the Ethics Board decides to seek imposition of a forfeiture fails to pay
the amount specified by the Board within 30 days of the date of notice,
the Village Attorney shall initiate an action for the collection of the
forfeiture.
(e) Executive Session. Pursuant to §19.85(1)(a) and (f), Wis. Stats., the Ethics
Board shall conduct its hearings in executive session unless the person
complained of requests open hearings.
(f) Employees Covered by Collective Bargaining Agreements. In the event an
employee, covered under a collective bargaining agreement, is allegedly involved
in an Ethics Code violation, the terms and conditions set forth in the applicable
collective bargaining agreement shall prevail in the administration and
interpretation of this Ethics Code.
(g) Sanctions. A determination that an employee’s actions constitute improper
conduct under the provisions of this Chapter may constitute a cause of
suspension, removal from office or employment, or other disciplinary action.
Sanctions, including any disciplinary action, that may affect employees covered
under a labor agreement will be consistent with the terms and conditions set forth
in the applicable labor agreement.
(h) Police Officers and Firefighters. When a complaint has been filed against a
police officer or firefighter or the Chief of either the Police or Fire Department,
the procedure shall be had in accordance with the provisions of §62.13, Wis.
Stats.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
CHAPTER 2
Traffic Code
2.01 State Traffic Laws Adopted
2.02 Official Traffic Map and Control Devices, Prohibited Signs, Signals, and Markers
2.03 Speed Limits
2.04 Through Highways and Controlled Intersections
2.05 Weight Limits and Heavy Traffic Controls
2.06 Parking Regulations
2.07 Abandoned Vehicles
2.08 Accident Reports
2.09 Motor Power to be Shut Off when Vehicle is Unattended
2.10 Leaving Keys in Vehicle
2.11 Operation of Motor Vehicle in Public Parking Lot
2.12 Applicability of Traffic Regulations to Snowmobiles
2.13 State Standards for Motor Vehicle Equipment Adopted
2.14 Display of Power Prohibited
2.15 Registration and Regulation of Bicycles
2.16 Regulations of Play Vehicles
2.17 Enforcement
2.18 References to Wisconsin Statutes
2.19 Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances
2.20 Severability
2.21 Penalties
2.22 Cruising
2.23 Where Turns Prohibited
2.1 STATE TRAFFIC LAWS ADOPTED
(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, the statutory provisions in
Chapters 340 and 348 of the Wisconsin Statutes, describing and defining regulations with
respect to vehicles and traffic, exclusive of any provisions therein relating to penalties to
be imposed and exclusive of any regulations for which the statutory penalty is a fine or
term of imprisonment are here by adopted and by reference made a part of this code as f
fully stet forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute
incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this Code. Any further
amendments, revisions, or modifications of the statutes incorporated herein are intended
to be made part of this code in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of traffic on
the highways, streets, and alleys of the State of Wisconsin.
(2) Other Laws Adopted. There are also hereby adopted by reference the following
sections of the Wisconsin Statutes, but the prosecution of such offenses under this
ordinance shall be as provided in Chapters 340 to 348 of the Wisconsin Statutes, and the
penalty for violation thereof shall be limited to a forfeiture as provided in Section 2.16 of
this ordinance:
§941.01 (Negligent operation of vehicle off highway.)
2.02 OFFICIAL TRAFFIC MAP AND CONTROL DEVICES; PROHIBITED SIGNS,
SIGNALS, AND MARKERS.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
(1) Duty of Superintendent of Public Works to Erect and Install Uniform Traffic
Control Devices. Whenever traffic regulations created by this Code, including a State of
Wisconsin traffic regulation adopted by reference in Section 2.01, require the erection of
traffic control devices for enforcement, the Superintendent of Public Works shall procure,
erect, and maintain uniform traffic control devices conforming to the Uniform Traffic
Control Device Manual promulgated by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation,
giving notice of such traffic regulations to the users of the streets and highways on which
such regulations apply. Whenever State law grants discretion to local authorities in
erecting or placement of a uniform traffic control device, devices shall be erected in such
locations and in such a manner as in the judgment of the Superintendent of Public Works
will carry out the purposes of this code and give adequate warning to users of the streets
and highways of the Village of Hales Corners.
(2) Code Numbers to be Affixed to Official Traffic Control Devices. The Superintendent
of Public Works shall cause to be placed on each official traffic control sign, guide board,
mile post, signal, or maker erected under subsection (1) a code number assigned by the
Wisconsin Department of Transportation, and shall also place or direct the placing of
code numbers on all existing official traffic control devices as required by the laws of the
State of Wisconsin.
(3) Official Traffic Map.
(a) Official Traffic Map Established. There is hereby established an Official Traffic
Map for the Village of Hales Corners upon which shall be indicated no parking
areas, restricted parking areas, stop signs, arterial intersections, yield signs,
special speed limits, one-way highways, school crossings, and all other
restrictions or limitations contained in this Code, as from time to time amended
or modified by the Village Board when the laws of the State of Wisconsin require
the erection or use of official traffic control devices to enforce such restrictions
or limitations.
(b) Violations Prohibited. When official traffic control devices giving notice of the
restrictions, prohibitions, and limitations shown on the Official Traffic Map are
erected and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this section, a
violation of the restriction, prohibition, or limitation shown on the Official
Traffic Map shall be a violation of the provisions of this Code.
(c) Map to be Maintained. A copy of the Official Traffic Map shall be maintained
and displayed in the office of the Police Department and the Municipal Judge.
(d) Additions to the Map. The Village Board may from time to time make additions
to or deletions from the Official Traffic Map, and the Chief of Police shall keep
such Official Traffic Map current.
(4) Prohibited Signs and Markers on Highways. No person other than an officer
authorized by this Code to erect and maintain official traffic control devices or his or her
designee shall place within the limits of any street or highway maintained by the Village
of Hales Corners any sign, signal, marker, mark, or monument unless permission is first
obtained from the Village Board. Any sign, signal, marker, mark, or monument placed or
maintained in violation of this subsection shall be subject to removal as provided in
subsection (5).
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
(5) Removal of Unofficial Signs, Markers, Signals, and Traffic Control Devices. The
Superintendent of Public Works may remove any sign, signal, marking, or other device
which is placed, maintained, or displayed in violation of this Code or State law.
2.03 SPEED LIMITS. The Village Board of the Village of Hales Corners hereby determines
that the statutory speed limits on the following streets or portions thereof are
unreasonable, unsafe, and imprudent, and modifies such speed limits as follows:
(1) Speed Limits Increased. Speed limits are increased as follows upon the following
designated streets or portions thereof:
30 miles per hour:
On West Grange Avenue between South 92nd Street and South 124th Street
On South 124th Street between West Grange Avenue and West Edgerton Avenue
(2) Speed Limits on State Trunk Highway 24. The speed limits on State Trunk Highway
24 shall be as follows:
(a) 35 miles per hour from Waukesha-Milwaukee County Line easterly to West
Grange Avenue.
(b) 40 miles per hour from West Grange Avenue northeasterly to the east limits of
the Village.
(3) Speed Limits on State Trunk Highway 100. The speed limits on State Trunk Highway
100 shall be as follows:
(a) 35 miles per hour from a point .25 miles south of its intersection with West
Forest Home Avenue north to its intersection with West Edgerton Avenue.
(b) 45 miles per hour from its intersection with West Edgerton Avenue north to the
Village limits.
(c) 45 miles per hour from south Village limits north to a point .25 miles south of its
intersection with West Forest Home Avenue.
(4) Speed Limits on County Trunk Highway OO. The speed limits on County Trunk
Highway OO shall be as follows: 35 miles per hour.
2.04 THROUGH HIGHWAYS AND CONTROLLED INTERSECTIONS.
(1) Through Highways Designated. In the interest of public safety and pursuant to
authority granted by Wisconsin law, the following highways or portions there of are
declared to be through highways:
(a) South 92nd Street except at its intersection with West Grange Avenue.
(b) South 104th Street from Froemming Drive to West Scharles Avenue except at its
intersection with West Ridge Road and West Grange Avenue.
(c) South 108th Street except at its intersection with West Edgerton Avenue, West
Grange Avenue, West Janesville Road, and West Forest Home Avenue.
(d) South 110th Street except at its intersection with West Abbott Avenue, West
Copeland Avenue, West Grange Avenue, West Godsell Avenue, and West
Janesville Road.
(e) South 116th Street except at its intersection with West Edgerton Avenue, West
Woodside Drive, West Grange Avenue, West Parnell Avenue, West Godsell
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
Avenue, South New Berlin Road, West Janesville Road, Haleco Lane, and
Parkview Lane.
(f) West Edgerton Avenue except at its intersection with South 108th Street and
South 116th Street.
(g) West Forest Home Avenue except at its intersection with West Grange Avenue,
West Janesville Road (westbound only), and South 108th Street.
(h) West Godsell Avenue between South 108th Street and its intersection with South
116th Street except at its intersection with 110th Street.
(i) West Grange Avenue except at its intersection with West Forest Home Avenue,
South 108th Street, and South 110th Street.
(j) West Janesville Road except at its intersection with South 108th Street and South
116th Street.
(k) South Kurtz Road from West Grange Avenue to West Janesville Road except at
its intersection with West Godsell Avenue.
(l) South Lilac Lane from West Forest Home Avenue to Whitnall Park Drive.
(m) South New Berlin Road from West Grange Avenue to its intersection with West
Godsell Avenue and South 116th Street.
(n) West Parkview Lane except at its intersection with South 116th Street.
(o) West Parnell Avenue between South 108th Street and New Berlin Road except at
its intersection with South 110th Street and South 116th Street.
(2) Controlled Intersections Designated. In the interest of public safety, the following
intersections are declared controlled intersections and traffic control signals shall be
installed thereon in conformity with the Wisconsin Official Traffic Control Device
Manual and the provisions of this Code:
(a) The intersection of West Edgerton Avenue and South 108th Street.
(b) The intersection of West Grange Avenue and South 108th Street.
(c) The intersection of West Janesville Road and South 108th Street.
(d) The intersection of West Forest Home Avenue and South 108th Street.
(e) The intersection of West Grange Avenue and West Forest Home Avenue.
(f) The intersection of West Janesville Road and South 116th Street.
(3) Designation of Location of Stop Signs. In the interest of public safety, stop signs shall
be installed at the following locations to control traffic on highways over which the
Village of Hales Corners has exclusive jurisdiction:
(a) On South 92nd Street and West Grange Avenue at their intersection.
(b) On South Allenwood Lane and West Brookside Drive at their intersection.
(c) On South 104th Street and West Ridge Road at their intersection.
(d) On West Edgerton Avenue at its intersection with Old West Forest Home
Avenue.
(e) On South 108th Street Public Service Road at its intersection with West Ridge
Road.
(f) On South 110th Street and at its intersection with West Abbott Avenue.
(g) On South 110th Street and West Copeland Road at their intersection.
(h) On South 110th Street and West Grange Avenue at their intersection.
(i) On South 110th Street and West Godsell Avenue at their intersection.
(j) On South 113th Street at its intersection with West Abbott Avenue.
(k) On South 113th Street and West Copeland Avenue at their intersection.
(l) On South 116th Street and West Edgerton Avenue at their intersection.
(m) On South 116th Street and West Woodside Drive at their intersection.
(n) On South 116th Street and West Parnell Avenue at their intersection.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
(o) On South 116th Street, West Godsell Avenue, and South New Berlin Road at
their intersection.
(p) On South 116th and Haleco Lane at their intersection.
(q) On South 116th Street and Parkview Lane at their intersection.
(r) On Bridget Lane and Parkview Lane at their intersection with Haleco Lane.
(s) On South 118th Street and Timberline Lane at their intersection.
(t) On West Edgerton Avenue at its intersection with South 124th Street.
(u) On Kay Parkway at its intersection with Whitnall Park Drive.
(v) On West College Avenue at its intersection with Whitnall Park Drive.
(w) On South 113th Street and West Abbott Avenue at their intersection.
(x) On South 113th Street and West Parnell Avenue at their intersection.
(y) On the public service drive abutting South 108th Street between West Grange
Avenue and West Ridge Road, for northbound traffic at a point in the east curb
470 feet north of the centerline of West Grange Avenue, and for southbound
traffic at a point in the west curb 365 feet south of the centerline of West Ridge
Road.
(z) On South 110th Street and West Parnell Avenue at their intersection.
(aa) On South 106th Street at its intersection with West College Avenue.
(bb) On Palmersheim Drive at its intersection with West College Avenue.
(cc) On South 111th Street at its intersection with West Abbott Avenue.
(dd) On West Woodside Drive at its intersection with South 113th Street.
(ee) On South Kurtz Road and West Godsell Avenue at their intersection.
(ff) On West College Avenue at its intersection with Palmersheim Drive.
(gg) On Seneca Trail at its intersection with Haleco Lane.
(hh) On Arrowhead Trail at its intersection with Haleco Lane.
(ii) On South 106th Street at its intersection with Kay Parkway
(jj) On West Woodside Drive at its intersection with South 111th Street.
(kk) On Brandons Court at its intersection with West Edgerton Avenue.
(4) Designation of Location of Yield Signs. In the interest of public safety, yield right-ofway
signs shall be installed at the following intersections to control traffic on the
highways over which the Village of Hales Corners has exclusive jurisdiction:
(a) On South 98th Street at its intersection with West Brookside Drive and West
Ridge Road.
(b) On South 100th Street at its intersection with West Brookside Drive.
(c) On South 104th Street at its intersection with South Froemming Drive and West
Scharles Avenue.
(d) On South 106th Street at its intersection with West Parnell Avenue.
(e) On South 107th Street at its intersection with West Ridge Road, West Parnell
Avenue, and West Scharles Avenue.
(f) On South 111th Street at its intersection with West Copeland Avenue and South
110th Street.
(g) On South 112th Street at its intersection with West Copeland Avenue.
(h) On South 114th Street at its intersection with West Copeland Avenue.
(i) On the southwest corner of South 115th Street at its intersection with West Abbott
Avenue and on South 115th Street at its intersection with West Copeland Avenue.
(j) On West Abbott Avenue at its intersection with South 104th Street.
(k) On Arrowhead Trail at its intersection with Bridget Lane.
(l) On Bridget Lane at its intersection with Seneca Trail.
(m) On West Conrad Street at its intersection with South Allenwood Lane.
(o) On West Forest Park Drive at its intersection with South Bonnie Lane.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
(p) On West Green Court at its intersection with South 121st Street.
(q) On Indian Trail at its intersection with South 118th Street and South 120th Street.
(r) On West Liberty Court at its intersection with South 121st Street.
(s) On West Mallory Avenue at its intersection with South 113th Street and West
Copeland Avenue.
(t) On Monaco Place at its intersection with West Denis Avenue.
(u) On North Ridge Trail at its intersection with Timberline Lane, South 121st Street,
and South 122nd Street.
(v) On West Rockne Avenue at its intersection with South 121st Street.
(w) On Seneca Trail at its intersection with Haleco Lane and Arrowhead Trail.
(x) On West Upham Avenue at its intersection with South 100th Street, South 111th
Street, South 113th Street, and South Froemming Drive at its junction with South
107th Street.
(y) On both exists from the Municipal Building parking lot at their intersections with
South New Berlin Road.
(z) On Parklane Court and Palmersheim Drive with their intersections with South
106th Street.
(5) Designation of Location of No Right Turn on Red Signal Signs. In the interest of
public safety, “no right turn on red signal” signals shall be installed at the following
intersections to control traffic on the highways and streets within the Village and within
the Village of Hales Corners jurisdiction:
(a) On West Edgerton Avenue at its intersection with South 108th Street, specifically
regulating westbound traffic only at the northeast corner of such intersection
from 8:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. only.
(6) Operators to Obey Traffic Control Devices. Every operator of a vehicle approaching
an intersection at which an Official Traffic Control Device is erected in accordance with
this section shall obey the direction of such Official Traffic Control Device as required by
the Wisconsin Statutes incorporated by reference in §2.01 of this Code. Operators of
vehicles approaching a stop sign shall stop before entering a highway as required by
§346.46, Wis. Stats. Operators approaching intersections at which a yield sign has been
installed shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles as required by §346.18(6).
2.05 WEIGHT LIMITS AND HEAVY TRAFFIC ROUTES.
(1) Streets Designated Class “B” Highways. All highways within the Village of Hales
Corners, Wisconsin are hereby designated class “B” highways subject to the weight
limitations imposed on class “B” highways by the Wisconsin Statutes adopted by
reference in §2.01 of this Code except the following enumerated highways or parts of
highways:
(a) State Trunk Highway 24.
(b) State Trunk Highway 100.
(c) County Trunk Highway OO.
(2) Special and Season Weight Limitations. The Superintendent of Public Works shall
have the authority to impose special or seasonal weight limits on any highway, bridge, or
culvert maintained by the Village of Hales Corners to prevent injury to the roadway or
for the safety of the users of such highway, bridge, or culvert and shall be responsible for
erecting Uniform Traffic Control Devices giving notice thereof in accordance with the
provisions of §2.02 of this Code.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
(3) Heavy Traffic Routes. Restrictions on Use of Streets by Heavy Traffic. No person shall
operate or move a vehicle, except a motor bus, which is not equipped with pneumatic
tires or has a combined vehicle load weight exceeding 6,000 pounds on any street or alley
not part of the State Trunk Highway or County Highway System, within the Village,
except for the purpose of obtaining orders for, moving, or delivering supplies or
commodities to or from a place of business or residence facing thereon, provided that in
no event shall the weight of vehicle and load on any street not defined or designated as a
heavy traffic route exceed the limitations of the Wisconsin Statutes adopted by reference
on 2.01 of this Code pertaining to class “A” highways or deliveries on class “B”
highways.
2.06 PARKING REGULATIONS.
(1) Parking, Stopping, or Standing Prohibited. No person shall park, stop, or leave
standing any vehicle, for any purpose upon the following highways or parts of highways
at any time:
(a) On both sides of South 108th Street within the entire Village.
(b) In the south lane of West Janesville Road from South 118th Street to a point 104
feet west of South 118th Street.
(c) On the southerly side of West Forest Home Avenue between the southerly corner
of its intersection with South Lilac Lane and a point 90 feet southwesterly
thereof.
(d) On the north side of West Ridge Road between South 107th Street and South
108th Street.
(e) For a distance of 80 feet from any public bus stop sign.
(f) On the northwest side of West Forest Home Avenue between West Ridge Road
and West Grange Avenue.
(g) On the northwest side of West Forest Home Avenue from the most easterly
access drive to tax key number 659-9927-003 to its merger with West Janesville
Road.
(h) On the north side of West Janesville Road between West Forest Home Avenue
and South 108th Street.
(i) On the south side of West Janesville Road from South 108th Street to a point 150
feet west of South 108th Place.
(j) On the south side of West Edgerton Avenue between West Brookside Drive and
Old West Forest Home Avenue.
(k) On the west side of the South 108th Street Public Service Road between West
Grange Avenue and West Ridge Road.
(l) On the north side of West Scharles Avenue between South 104th Street and South
108th Street.
(m) On the south side of West Godsell Avenue from 112th Street to the most easterly
access drive to the Hales Corners Elementary School property.
1. On the north side of West Godesll Avenue from a point 95 feet east of
the centerline of South 114th Street easterly 60 feet, to a point 155 feet
east of the centerline of South 114th Street.
(n) On the west side of South 113th Street between West Godsell Avenue and West
Parnell Avenue.
(o) On both sides of South New Berlin Road between West Godsell Avenue and
West Parnell Avenue; on the east side of South New Berlin Road, 50 feet north
and 50 south of the centerline of Denis Avenue; and on the west side of South
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
New Berlin Road, 50 feet north and 60 feet south of the centerline of West Denis
Avenue; and on the southwest side of South New Berlin Road from a point 500
feet southeast of the centerline of the intersection of South New Berlin Road and
South 116th Street to a point 600 feet southeast of the centerline of the
intersection of south New Berlin Road and South 116th Street.
(p) On the north side of West Rockne Avenue from South 108th Street to a point 150
feet west.
(q) On both sides of South 104th Street from West Scharles Avenue to a point 260
feet north.
(r) On the southeast side of West Forest Home Avenue from West Grange Avenue
to a point 165 feet east.
(s) On the east and west side of Allenwood Lane from Frontage Road (Old West
Forest Home Avenue) to a point 100 feet north of Frontage Road.
(t) On the east and west side of South 104th Street from West Grange Avenue to a
point 100 feet south of West Grange Avenue.
(u) On the north side of West Grange Avenue from South 104th Street to a point 100
feet east of South 104th Street.
(v) On the north and south side of West Abbott Avenue from South 108th Street to a
point 300 feet west of South 108th Street.
(w) On the southeast side of West Forest Home Avenue from a beginning point 140
feet southwesterly of its intersection with West Grange Avenue to a point 95 feet
southeasterly of said beginning point.
(x) On the southeast side of West Forest Home Avenue between a point 500 feet
northeast of the center of South 108th Street and a point 970 feet northeast of the
center of South 108th Street.
(y) On the north and south side of West Edgerton Avenue between South 108th Street
and South 110th Street.
(z) On the south side of West Parnell Avenue from South 108th Street to a point 50
feet west.
(aa) On West Forest Home Avenue from the east corporate limits of the Village to its
intersection with West Janesville Road with the following exceptions:
1. On the northwest side starting 110 feet southwest of the centerline of
West Scharles Avenue, and then extending 475 feet southwest.
2. On the northwest side starting 130 feet northeast of the centerline of
West Scharles Avenue and then extending 515 feet northeast.
3. On the northwest side starting 250 feet southwest of the centerline of
West Grange Avenue and then extending 390 feet to the southwest.
4. On the southeast side starting 135 feet southwest of the centerline of
South Lilac lane and then extending 390 feet southwest.
5. On the southeast side starting 550 feet northwest of the centerline of
West Grange Avenue and then extending 100 feet southwest.
6. On the southeast side starting 30 feet southwest of the centerline of West
Kelly Place and then extending 305 feet southwest.
7. On the northwest side abutting the west 210 feet of tax key number 659-
9997-003.
8. On the southeast side abutting the east 150 feet of tax key number 660-
9969-002.
9. On the southeast side, beginning approximately 800 feet northeast of the
centerline of West Grange Avenue and extending approximately 540 feet
northeast along the northwest side of tax key number 653-9976-001,
excluding the length required for a bus stop.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
10. On the northwest side starting 120 feet northeast of the centerline of
pavement of West Ridge Road and then extending 400 feet to the
northeast.
(bb) On the south side of West Kelm Road abutting tax key numbers 701-9959-007
and 701-9959-001 Parcel 1, from West Forest Home Avenue 370 feet (±) east to
the westerly entrance to tax key number 701-9957-001, Parcel 1.
(cc) On South 92nd Street between West College Avenue and West Grange Avenue.
(dd) On Garden Court.
(ee) On West Janesville Road from its intersection with West Forest Home Avenue to
the west corporate limits of the Village with the following exceptions:
1. On the north side starting from 140 feet west of the center line of South
108th Street then extending to South 110th Street, excepting on the north
side and within 215 feet of the intersection of West Janesville Road and
State Trunk Highway 100, in which area parking shall be restricted to a
maximum of 20 minutes per vehicle, from 8:00 a.m. to 8:30 p.m.,
Monday through Saturday.
2. On the north side starting 180 feet southwest of the centerline of South
Kurtz Road and then extending 300 feet southwest.
3. On the south side starting from 30 feet east of the centerline of South
111th Street and then extending 150 feet east.
4. On the south side starting 640 feet east of the centerline of South 116th
Street and then extending 220 feet east.
5. On the south side starting 150 feet southwest of the centerline of South
118th Street and then extending 500 feet southwest.
(ff) On the east and west side of Meadowlark Lane, south of Meadowlark Court.
(gg) On the south side of Kay Parkway between South 106th Street and South 108th
Street and on the West side of South 106th Street from Kay Parkway to a point 40
feet south of Kay Parkway.
(hh) On the east and west side of South 107th Street, north of Parnell Avenue, to a
point 160 feet north of the centerline of Parnell Avenue.
(ii) On the north side of West Denis Avenue from South 108th Street to a point 180
feet west of South 108th Street.
(2) No Parking Except for Authorized Vehicles. No person shall park, stop, or leave
standing any vehicle on the Village property used as a fire and rescue station located at
10000 West Forest Home Avenue, except by personnel of the Hales Corners Fire
Department or person there on official business.
(3) Limited Time Parking. When official traffic control devices are erected in any block
giving notice thereof, no persons shall park, stop, or leave standing any vehicle, whether
attended or unattended, for more than the following time periods between the hours of
6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays on any of the following
highways or parts thereof:
(a) One (1) Hour Parking Limit.
(b) On the north side of West Janesville Road between South 108th Street and South
109th Street.
(4) Parking Prohibited during Certain Periods. No person shall park or leave standing
any vehicle upon any of the following highways or part of highways at the time indicated,
except temporarily for purposes of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging
passengers:
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
(a) On the south side of West Godsell Avenue from the east to the west property line
of Hales Corners Elementary School between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 5:00
p.m. on regular school days.
(b) On the north side of West Janesville Road beginning at a point 385 feet west of
the centerline of South 112th Street and continuing west 395 feet between the
hours of 7:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on regular school days.
(c) On the north side of West Copeland Avenue between South 110th Street and
South 111th Street, and between South 112th Street and South 114th Street
between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 12:00 p.m.
(d) On the west side of South 112th Street between West Grange Avenue and West
Copeland Avenue on Sundays between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 12:00 p.m.
(e) On the south side of West Luther Avenue between South 110th Street and South
111th Street on Sundays between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 12:00 p.m.
(f) On the north side of West Parnell Avenue between South 108th Street and South
110th Street, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. daily, except: Sundays
and holidays.
(g) Between 2:00 a.m. and 8:30 a.m. on the east side of the service drive abutting the
Wisconsin Electric Company right-of-way immediately east of South 108th Street
between West Grange Avenue and West Ridge Road, except 295 feet north of
Grange Avenue centerline which shall be posted “No Parking Anytime”.
(h) On the W. Ben Hunt Community Center parking lot at the northwest corner of
West Janesville Road and South 116th Street, unless attending a Villagesponsored
function.
(i) On the south side of West Edgerton Avenue between West Brookside Drive and
the Old West Forest Home Avenue between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m.
on regular school days at St. Mary’s School.
(j) On the west side of South 113th Street between W. Parnell Avenue and West
Godsell Avenue between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. on regular school
days at the Hales Corners Elementary School.
(k) On the south side of West Luther Avenue between the southwest corner of its
intersection with South 108th Street and a point 175 feet westerly thereof between
the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Mondays through Fridays, both
inclusive.
(l) On the west side of South 111th Street a distance of 130 feet from its intersection
with West Copeland Avenue on regular school days between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
(m) On the east side of South 111th Street between West Copeland Avenue and West
Luther Avenue on regular school days between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 3:30
p.m.
(n) On the west side of South 112th Street between West Grange Avenue and West
Copeland Avenue between 8:00 a.m. and noon on Sundays.
(o) On both sides of West Copeland Avenue between South 111th Street and South
112th Street on regular school days between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m.,
and on Sundays between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and noon.
(p) On the east side of South 116th Street, Woodside Drive to Edgerton Avenue
between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 5:00 pm. on regular school days.
(5) Night Parking Restrictions.
(a) When signs have been erected at or reasonably near the corporate limits of the
Village of Hales Corners as provided in §349.13, Wis. Stats., no person shall
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
park any vehicle for a period of time longer than one-half hour between the hours
of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(b) Determination of Prohibited Area. Any vehicle may be parked during such hours
provided it is completely off the paved roadway for a minimum distance of three
(3) feet, is parked within the publicly dedicated right-of-way, and is allowed to
remain in such location at the sole risk of the owner or operator of the vehicle.
The Village assumes no responsibility for any damages arising from such
parking.
(6) Miscellaneous Parking Restrictions.
(a) Parking in Driveways. No person shall park or leave standing any motor vehicle
in any private driveway without the permission of the owner or lessee of the
property upon which such driveway is located, whether or not such driveway is
posted to limit or restrict parking.
(b) Parking Heavy Vehicles in Residential Districts. No operator of a motor truck,
truck-tractor, trailer, or semi-trailer or any other vehicle or combination of
vehicles other than motorbuses weighing more than 6.000 pounds shall park such
vehicles on any highway other than a routed State Trunk Highway in any
residential districts except for such time as is reasonably necessary to facilitate
the loading or unloading of the vehicle.
(c) Snow Emergency Parking Restrictions. Whenever the Village President shall, by
reason of heavy snow storm or blizzard, proclaim a snow emergency pursuant to
§66.325, Wis. Stats., no person shall park, stop, or leave standing any vehicle
upon the streets or any portion of the streets during the hours set forth in said
proclamation.
(d) No Parking in Fire Lanes. No person shall park, stop, or leave standing any
vehicle, whether attended or unattended at any time within a fire lane consisting
of the following:
1. The driveway between the front doors of the Village Fire Station and the
public street.
2. In such places property designated and marked as ordered by the Fire
Chief by authority granted in the Village of Hales Corners Fire Code,
Chapter 6.04(2).
3. See §6.04(2)(a) of this Code prohibiting certain motor vehicle operation
upon the Fire Department access drive.
(e) Parking Restrictions Near Fire Hydrant. No person shall stop or leave any
vehicle standing with 10 feet of a fire hydrant which is on the City of Milwaukee
water supply system, unless a greater distance is indicated by an official traffic
sign, except temporarily for the purpose and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading or in receiving or discharging passengers and while the vehicle is
attended by a licensed operator so that it may promptly be removed in case of an
emergency or to avoid obstruction of traffic.
(f) Restrictions on Displaying Vehicles for Sale. No person shall stop or leave
standing upon any highway, street, or alley within the Village of Hales Corners
any vehicle displayed for sale. No person other than an owner and/or operator of
a business located on business zoned property engaged in the regular business of
selling vehicles may display a vehicle for sale upon private premises unless the
following conditions are met:
1. Consent to display the vehicle has been given by the owner or lessee of
the premises; and
2. The owner of the vehicle is on the premises or resides there; and
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
3. The vehicle displayed for sale is parked entirely on the premises; and
4. The premises contains only one (1) vehicle displayed for sale; and
5. The advertisement or sign for sale of the vehicle is not larger than two
(2) square feet.
(7) Unlawful Removal of Parking Citation. No person other than the owner or operator
thereof shall remove a municipal parking violation citation from a motor vehicle.
(8) Removal of Illegally Parked Vehicles. Any vehicle parked or left standing upon a
highway, street, or alley or other public grounds in violation of any of the provisions of
this code is declared a nuisance and a hazard to traffic and public safety. Such vehicle
shall be removed by the operator, upon request of any police officer, to a position where
parking, stopping, or standing is not prohibited. Any police officer after issuing a citation
for illegal parking, stopping, or standing of an unattended vehicle in violation of this code
is authorized to remove such vehicle to a position where parking is not prohibited.
The officer may order a motor carrier holding a permit to perform vehicle towing
services, a licensed motor vehicle salvage dealer, or a licensed motor vehicle in any
storage garage or rental parking grounds or any facility of a person providing the towing
services. In addition to other penalties provided by §2.16 of this Code, the owner or
operator of a vehicle so removed shall pay the cost of towing and storage.
(9) Registration Record of Vehicles as Evidence. When any vehicle is found upon a street
or highway in violation of any provisions of this Code regulating the parking, stopping,
or standing of vehicles and the identity of the operator cannot be determined, the owner
as shown by the ownership registration of the vehicle supplied by the Wisconsin
Department of Transportation, or a comparable authority of any other State, shall be
subject to appropriate penalty.
(10) Penalties.
(a) Parking Violation; Notice to Appear; Submission of Admission. Any person to
whom a police notice or summons has been issued to appear at the police station
for violating the provisions of §2.06 or the provisions of any other ordinance
regulating the stopping, standing, and parking on any street or alley may, within
seven (7) days after 6:00 p.m. on the day of the violation, deliver by mail or in
person to the police station of the Village of Hales Corners, a written admission
and consent to judgment (hereinafter called “admission”) signed by such person
of the charges set forth in the notice or summons, together with his check, money
order, or cash for $10.00. No violator of §2.06 or such other ordinance shall be
tried in court until after the time allowed the violator by this section for filing
such admission has expired, unless the admission is signed by the defendant and
filed as herein provided, in which case the trial shall be had as soon as possible.
When a case is tried upon such admission, no witnesses shall be sworn for the
prosecution or the defense. If after signing the admission, the defendant at the
time of trial insists that witnesses be sworn for the defense, the case shall
immediately be adjourned to a day certain, and witnesses may be subpoenaed on
behalf of the prosecution and the defense. The trial of the case shall the proceed
in the usual manner, and the provisions of this chapter shall not apply.
(b) Parking Violation; Failure to Pay when Due; Penalty. Any person who fails to
pay the stipulated forfeit penalty of as set forth upon the parking citation
authorized pursuant to §2.17(b) of this Code within seven (7) days after 6:00 p.m.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
on the day of violation shall pay a stipulated forfeit penalty of such stipulated
forfeit penalty plus an additional $15.00 for a parking violation as hereinabove
provided. Any person who fails to pay the stipulated forfeit penalty as set forth
upon the parking citation authorized pursuant to §2.17(b) of this Code within 30
days after 6:00 p.m. on the day of violation shall pay a stipulated forfeit penalty
plus an additional $30.00, which includes court costs, for a parking violation as
hereinabove provided.
(c) Parking Violation; Privilege of Stipulation Denied to Repeated Violators. The
privilege of stipulation granted to violators by this Chapter shall not be available
to any person found guilty by stipulation or otherwise of four (4) or more traffic
violations during the 12 months preceding his last arrest.
2.07 ABANDONED VEHICLES. The provisions of Section 15.06, Village Code, shall
control the disposition of abandoned vehicles.
2.08 ACCIDENT REPORTS. The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting
in injury to or death of any person, or property damage to an apparent total extend of
$400.00 or more, shall within 10 days after such accident file with the Village of Hales
Corners Police Department a copy of the report required by §366.70, Wis. Stats. If the
operator is unable to make such report, any occupant of the vehicle at the time of the
accident capable of making such report shall have the duty to comply with this section.
Such reports shall be subject to the provisions and limitations in §346.70(4)(f) and
346.73, Wis. Stats.
2.09 MOTOR POWER TO BE SHUT OFF WHEN VEHICLE IS UNATTENDED. All
motor power shall be stopped on any automobile or other similar motor vehicle when the
same is left unattended on any public highway.
2.10 LEAVING KEYS IN VEHICLE. All ignition keys shall be removed from the ignition
switch in any automobile or other similar motor vehicle when the same is left unattended.
2.11 OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLE IN PUBLIC PARKING LOT.
(1) Unlicensed Operators Prohibited. No person who does not hold a valid operator’s
license shall operate a vehicle in any pubic parking lot or in any private parking lot held
out for the use of parking for the general public.
(2) Traffic Regulations Applicable. All provisions of 2.01 of this Code and of the
Wisconsin Statutes and laws incorporated herein by reference shall be applicable on any
public parking lot and on any private lot held out for the use of the general public for
parking or vehicular traffic.
2.12 APPLICABILITY OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS TO SNOWMOBILES. No
person shall operate a snowmobile upon any street, highway, or alley within the Village
of Hales Corners in violation of the provisions of Chapter 350 or §346.04, 346.05,
346.11, 346.14(1), 346.18, 346.19, 346.20, 346.21, 346.26, 346.27, 346.33, 346.35,
346.37, 346.39, 346.40, 346.44, 346.46. 346.47, 346.48, 346.50(1)(b), 346.51, 346.52,
346.53, 346.54, 346.55, 346.87, 346.88, 346.89, 346.90, 346.91, 346.92(1), and
346.94(1), (6), (6m), and (9), Wis. Stats.
2.13 STATE STANDARDS FOR MOTOR VEHICLE EQUIPMENT ADOPTED.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
(1) Administrative Regulations Adopted. The Administrative rules and regulations
adopted by the Secretary of the Wisconsin Department of Transportation and published in
Chapter TRANS 305 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, exclusive of any provisions
therein relating to the penalties to be imposed, are hereby adopted by reference and made
part of the Code as if fully set forth herein.
(2) Noncompliance Prohibited. No person shall operate or allow to be operated on any
highway, street, or alley within the Village of Hales Corners a vehicle that is not in
conformity with the requirements of subsection (1) or the equipment provisions of
Chapter 347, Wis. Stats., incorporated by reference in 2.01 of this Code.
(3) Owner’s Liability. Any owner of a vehicle no equipped as required by this Section who
knowingly causes or permits such vehicle to be operated on a highway in violation of this
Section is guilty of the violation the same as if he or she had operated the vehicle. The
provisions of §347.04, Wis. Stats., relating to non-applicability of demerit points, shall
apply to owners convicted of violation of this Section.
(4) Safety Checks.
(a) Operators to Submit to Inspection. When directed to do so by any law
enforcement officer, the operator of any motor vehicle shall stop and submit such
vehicle to an inspection and such tests as are necessary to determine whether the
vehicle meets the requirements of this Section, or that the vehicle’s equipment is
in proper adjustment or repair. No person, when operating a motor vehicle, shall
fail to stop and submit such vehicle to inspection when directed to do so by any
enforcement officer as herein provided.
(b) Authority of Officer. Any law enforcement officer of the Village of Hales
Corners is hereby empowered whenever he or she shall have reason to believe
that any provision of this Section is being violated to order the operator of the
vehicle to stop and to submit such vehicle to an inspection with respect to brakes,
lights, turn signals, steering, horns and warning devices, glass, mirrors, exhaust
systems, windshield wipers, tires, and other items f equipment.
(c) Vehicle to be Removed from Highway. Whenever, after inspection as provided
by this Section, a law enforcement officer determines that a vehicle is unsafe for
operation, he or she may order it removed from the highway and not operated;
except for purposes of removal and repair until the vehicle has been repaired as
directed in a repair order. Repair may be in the form prescribed by the Secretary
of the Department of Transportation under §110.075(5), Wis. Stats., and shall
require the vehicle owner or operator to obtain such repairs as required.
2.14 DISPLAY OF POWER PROHIBITED. No person shall make unnecessary and
annoying noises with a motor vehicle, by squealing tires, excessive acceleration of
engine, or by emitting unnecessary and loud muffler noises.
2.15 REGISTRATION OF BICYCLES.
(1) Registration of Bicycles.
(a) Registration of Bicycles Required. No person who resides within the Village of
Hales Corners shall operate or propel a bicycle, as described in §340.01, Wis.
Stats., upon any public highway, bicycle way, or bicycle path within the Village
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
which has not been duly registered and an identification tag attached thereto as
provided in this Section.
(b) Application. Application shall be made by filing with the Hales Corners Police
Department on form provided by the Village, giving the name and address of the
owner and a complete description of the bicycle including ht name of
manufacturer, style, model, frame number, color, and other information as
required.
(c) Inspection. The Chief of Police or any officer or agent assigned such
responsibility, shall inspect each bicycle before registering the same and shall
refuse registration for any bicycle which he or she determines to be in unsafe
mechanical condition.
(d) Registration Fee. The fee for registration of a bicycle shall be $4.00 for four
years or fraction thereof, $3.00 for three years or fraction thereof, $2.00 for two
years or fraction thereof, and $1.00 for one year or fraction thereof. Any bicycle
owner whose registration tag is lost, destroyed, or stolen, shall within 20 days
make application for a new registration tag and pay a fee of $1.00.
(e) Period of Registration. All bicycle registrations shall expire on the same date.
All bicycle registrations shall be issued for a period of four (4) years or fraction
thereof and initially shall expire on the 31st day of December 1990 and every
fourth anniversary year thereof.
(f) Registration Tag. Upon application, inspection, and payment of the registration
fee, the Police Department shall issue a registration tag, serially numbered to
correspond with the registration file number and shall be firmly affixed to the
main support bar below the operator’s seat on the left side for visibility and
uniformity. The tag is not transferable.
(g) Change of Ownership. All bicycles must be registered within 10 days of
purchase. Within 10 days after any bicycle is registered as provided herein is
sold or transferred to a new owner or dismantled and taken out of operation, the
person in whose name the bicycle is registered shall report such information to
the Police Department. The Police Department shall thereupon cancel the
registration of the bicycle and the new owner, if any, shall be responsible for
obtaining a new registration. In the case of dismantling or taking out of
operation, the owner shall return the registration tag to the Police Department.
(2) Responsibility of Parent or Guardian. Where the licensee is under the age of 14, the
parent or guardian of any child shall be responsible for the registration of any bicycle
operated by such child. No parent or guardian of any child shall authorize or knowingly
permit such child to violate any of the provisions of this Section or any ordinance or State
law applicable to the registration or operation of bicycles.
(3) Equipment of Bicycles. No person shall propel, ride, or operate a bicycle upon the
streets or public highway in the Village unless such bicycle shall comply with the
requirements of §346, Wis. Stats., adopted and made a part hereof by reference relating to
the equipment of bicycles.
(4) Rules for Operation. No person operating a bicycle upon any street or highway, bicycle
way or path within the Village of Hales Corners shall fail to observe all applicable traffic
regulations of this Village and State or to comply with the following regulations:
(a) Carrying Extra Passengers. Bicycle operators shall not use a bicycle, except a
tandem, to carry another person; provided, a bicycle operator may carry a child
securely attached to his or her person in a back pack or sling and may carry
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
another person on a bicycle if it is equipped with a child’s seat securely attached
to and properly designed for use on a bicycle.
(b) Stunt or Trick Riding. No person operating or pedaling a bicycle shall participate
in any trick or stunt riding or racing on any highway within the Village of Hales
Corners unless such race or contest is held pursuant to permission granted by the
authority having jurisdiction over the highway.
(c) Towing with Bicycle. No person riding or operating a bicycle shall tow, drag, or
cause to be drawn behind the bicycle, any person on roller skates, coaster sled, or
any other type of conveyance not designated to be towed by a bicycle.
(d) Obedience to Traffic Control Devices. Any person operating a bicycle shall obey
the instructions of official Traffic Control devices applicable to vehicles unless
otherwise directed by a law enforcement officer.
(e) Stopping, Turning, and Signaling.
1. Signal Required. No bicycle operator shall suddenly stop, slow down, or
turn without giving an arm signal required by State law for the operation
of motor vehicles.
2. Prohibited Turns. Whenever a Uniform Traffic Control Device is
erected indicating that no right or left turn or U-turn is permitted, no
person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of such Device,
except after dismounting from the bicycle to make such turn, in which
event said person shall then obey the regulations.
3. Right Turns. Every person operating a bicycle intending to turn to the
right at an intersection, alley, or driveway shall approach the turning
point in the line of traffic nearest the right hand curb of the street.
4. Left Turns. Every person operating a bicycle intending to turn left at an
intersection or to enter an alley or driveway shall approach the point of
turning in the line of traffic nearest to the center of the roadway and shall
pass to the left of the center of the intersection before turning unless
otherwise directed by Official Traffic Control Devices. At intersections
where traffic is moving in the opposite direction, if it is not safe for the
operator to make a left turn as above described, he or she shall stay in the
right hand lane and drive to the opposite corner, dismount, and walk the
bicycle to the left hand corners and proceed. A bicycle operator may
also make a left turn by driving to the opposite corner and then turning
left and driving in a normal driving position.
5. Use of Crosswalks. Crosswalks shall be used when walking a bicycle
through an intersection.
(f) Speed. No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable
and prudent under existing conditions or in excess of any posted speed limit.
(5) Bicycle Parking. No person shall park any bicycle against windows or in the main
traveled portion of any sidewalk or highway nor in such manner as to constitute a hazard
to pedestrians, traffic, or property. If there is no bicycle rack or other facility intended to
be used for parking of bicycles in the vicinity, the operator may park a bicycle on the
sidewalk in an upright position parallel to and within 24 inches of the curb.
(6) Enforcement.
(a) Juvenile Offenders Under Age 14. Any offender under the age of 14 years who
shall disregard the rules and regulations governing the operation of bicycles in
this Code may be:
1. Directed to appear before the Juvenile Court of Milwaukee County.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
2. Directed to appear before the Hales Corners Police Department Juvenile
Officer.
3. Issued a written warning thereof which will be forwarded to the Hales
Corners Police Department Juvenile Officer for disposition.
(b) Offenders Age 14 and Older. Any person having attained the age of 14 years
may be issued a Municipal Court citation and dealt with in accordance with 2.16
of this Code.
2.16 REGULATION OF PLAY VEHICLES.
(1) Skateboards and Roller Skis.
(a) No person shall operate or ride a skateboard or roller skis:
1. On any roadway.
2. On any Village sidewalk or alley in any business district. For the
purposes of this Ordinance, the business district shall be those areas
zoned and used for business purposes.
3. In any public parking ramp or public parking lot.
4. On any public property where signs prohibit it.
5. On any private property unless permission has been given from the
owner, lessee, or person in charge of that property.
(b) It shall be lawful for operators or riders of skateboards or roller skis to use this
equipment on non-business sidewalks and alleys provided they yield the right-ofway
to pedestrians using Village sidewalks and do not otherwise endanger or
interfere with pedestrian traffic on those sidewalks and yield the right-of-way to
vehicles using the alleys. Notwithstanding any other provision herein, it shall be
unlawful for any operator or rider of such skateboard or roller skis to use a
skateboard or roller skis on any public property, street, alley, sidewalk, or other
public right-of-way later than one-half (1/2) hour after sunset or one-half (1/2)
hour before sunrise.
2.17 ENFORCEMENT. This code shall be enforced in accordance with the applicable
provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes and this Section.
(1) Applicable Court Procedures. Except where otherwise specifically provided by the
laws of the State of Wisconsin or this code, the traffic regulations in this code shall be
enforced in the Municipal Court of the Village of Hales Corners in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 800 and §345.20(2)(b), Wis. Stats.
(2) Citations.
(a) Uniform Citation and Complaint. The Wisconsin Uniform Traffic Citation and
Complaint described and defined in the Wisconsin Statutes shall be used for
enforcement of all provisions of this code except those provisions which describe
or define nonmoving traffic violations and violations of §346.71 and 346.73,
Wis. Stats. Violations of §346.71 through 346.73, Wis. Stats., shall be reported
to the District Attorney and the Wisconsin Uniform Traffic Citation shall not be
used in such cases except upon written request of the District Attorney.
(b) Parking Citations. The Village Attorney shall recommend a citation for use in
enforcing the non-moving traffic offenses of this Code. When approved by the
Village Board of Trustees, such citation shall be used in enforcing the
nonmoving traffic regulations created or adopted by this Code, including
violations of nonmoving traffic regulations defined and described in the
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
Wisconsin Statutes, adopted by reference in 2.01 and all provisions of Sections
2.06, 2.09, 2.10, and 2.15 of this Code. The citation for nonmoving traffic
violations shall contain a notice that the person cited may discharge the forfeiture
for violation of a nonmoving traffic regulation and penalty thereof by complying
with subsection (3)(b) of this Section. Nonmoving traffic citations may be issued
by law enforcement officers or by civilian employees of the Police Department.
(3) Deposits and Stipulations.
(a) Uniform Traffic Offenses.
1. Who May Make. Persons arrested or cited for violation of moving traffic
offenses created by this Code shall be permitted to make deposits and
stipulations of no contest or released by the arresting officer in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes.
2. Delivery or Mailing of Deposit and Stipulations. The deposit and
stipulation shall be delivered personally to the person cited or mailed to
the office of the Hales Corners Police Department.
3. Receipt Required. The official or person receiving the deposit shall
furnish and deliver or mail an original receipt for such deposit to the
alleged violator and shall deliver the deposit and stipulation and a copy
of the receipt within five (5) days to the Village Treasurer.
(b) Nonmoving Traffic Offenses.
1. Direct Payment of Penalty Permitted. Persons cited for violation of
nonmoving traffic offense described and defined in this code may
discharge the penalty thereof and avoid court prosecution by forwarding
within 10 days of the issuance of the citation to the Police Department
the minimum penalty specified for the violation. When payment is made
as provided in this paragraph, no court costs shall be charged.
2. Court Prosecution. If the alleged violator does not deliver or mail a
document as provided in subsection 1, within 10 days of the date of
citation, the Chief of Police shall forward a copy of the citation to the
Village Attorney for prosecution pursuant to law.
3. Deposits Returned to the Treasurer. Officers receiving deposits for
nonmoving traffic violations under this subsection shall pay over such
deposits to the Village Treasurer within seven (7) days of receipt. Such
payment shall be accompanied by an itemized statement for each deposit
of the offense charged and the name of the depositor.
2.18 REFERENCE TO WISCONSIN STATUTES.
(1) Statutes Specifically Incorporated by Reference. Whenever this code incorporated by
reference specific sections of the Wisconsin Statutes, such reference shall mean the
Wisconsin Statutes of 1979 as from time to time amended, repealed, or modified by the
Wisconsin Legislature.
(2) General Purpose. General references in this code to Wisconsin statutory sections or
chapters describing or defining procedures or authority for enactment or enforcement of
local traffic regulations shall be deemed to refer to the most recent enactments of the
Wisconsin Legislature describing or defining such procedures or authorities.
2.19 REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES. All ordinances regulating traffic upon
the streets, alleys, or highways of the Village of Hales Corners, Wisconsin, and all
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
ordinances or parts of ordinances heretofore enacted by the Village Board of the Village
of Hales Corners, Wisconsin, are hereby repealed.
2.20 SEVERABILITY. The provisions of this Code shall be deemed severable and it is
expressly declared that the Village Board would have passed the other provisions of this
Code irrespective of whether or not one or more provisions may be declared invalid and
if any provision of this Code or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is
held invalid, the remainder of the Code and the application of each provision to other
persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
2.21 PENALTIES.
(1) Forfeiture Penalty. The penalty for violation of any provision of this Code shall be a
forfeiture as hereinafter provided together with the costs of prosecution and the penalty
assessment imposed by §165.87, Wis. Stats., where applicable. Payment of the judgment
may be suspended by the sentencing judge for not more than 60 days. Any person who
fails to pay the amount of the forfeiture, costs of prosecution, and penalty imposed for
violation of any provision of this Code may, upon order for the court entering judgment
therefore and having jurisdiction on the case, be imprisoned until such forfeiture, costs,
and assessment are paid, but not exceeding 90 days.
(2) Other Sanctions. Nothing herein shall preclude or affect the power of the sentencing
court to exercise additional authorities granted by the Wisconsin Statutes to suspend or
revoke the operating privileges of the Defendant to submit to assessment and
rehabilitation or attend traffic safety sch0ol in addition to payment of a monetary penalty
or in lieu of imprisonment.
(3) Forfeitures for Uniform Traffic Offenses. Forfeitures for violations of any traffic
regulation set forth in the Wisconsin Statutes adopted by reference in 2.01 of this code
shall conform to the forfeiture penalty permitted to be imposed for violations of the
comparable State Statute, including any variations or increases for subsequent offenses;
provided, however, that this Subsection shall not permit prosecution under this Code of
any offense for which an imprisonment penalty or fine may be imposed upon the
defendant.
(4) Special Local Regulations. The forfeiture for violation of sections 2.09, 2.10, 2.11,
2.12, 2.13, 2.14, and 2.15 of this Code shall be not less than $5.00 nor more than $200.00
for the first offense and not less than $10.00 nor more than $400.00 for the second
offense within two (2) years.
(5) Miscellaneous. The forfeiture for violation of parking regulations in Section 2.06(10) of
this Code.
(6) Parking. The forfeiture for violation of parking regulations in Section 2.06(10) of this
Code.
(7) Minimum Forfeitures. Minimum forfeitures for violations of this Code shall conform
to and correspond to the Uniform State Traffic Deposit Schedule issued pursuant to
§345.26(2)(a), Wis. Stats., by the Wisconsin Judicial Conference, notwithstanding the
provisions of this Section.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
2.22 CRUISING.
(1) Finding and Purpose. It is hereby found that a threat to public health, safety, and
welfare arises from the congestion created by the repetitive unnecessary driving of motor
vehicles, also know as cruising, at certain times on certain highways within the Village of
Hales Corners. The purpose of this ordinance is to reduce the dangerous traffic
congestions, as well as the noise, air pollution, obstruction of streets, sidewalks, and
parking lots, impediment of access to shopping centers or other buildings open to the
public, interference with use of property or conduct of business resulting from cruising,
and to insure access for emergency vehicles to and through the said highways.
(2) Definitions.
(a) Cruising shall mean driving a motor vehicle past a traffic control point, on a
highway in the designated area, more than twice in any two (2) hours period
between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. Passing a designated control point
a third time under the aforesaid conditions shall constitute unnecessary repetitive
driving and cruising and, therefore, a violation of this Section.
(b) Designated Area shall mean South 108th Street from the North Village limits to
the South Village limits; West Forest Home Avenue from the East Village limits
to the South Village limits; West Janesville Road from South 108th Street to the
West Village limits.
(c) Traffic Control Point shall mean a reference point within or adjacent to a
designated area selected by a police officer for the purpose of enforcing this
section.
(3) Cruising Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for anyone to engage in cruising. For the
purposes of this Section, the person having control or ownership of a motor vehicle shall
be considered the person cruising, without regard as to whether that person was actually
driving the motor vehicle each time it passed the traffic control point. Having control or
ownership of a motor vehicle shall mean either the owner of said vehicle, if present in the
vehicle at the time of the violation, or, if the owner is not present, the person operating
the vehicle at the time of violation.
(4) Exclusions. This section shall not apply to:
(a) Any publicly owned vehicle of any city, county, state, federal or other
governmental unit, while such vehicle is being used for the official purposes of
said governmental unit.
(b) Any authorized emergency vehicle.
(c) Any taxicabs for hire, buses, or other vehicles being driven for business
purposes.
(5) Penalty. The penalties provided herein shall supersede the provisions of Section 2.21,
Village Code, in the event of any conflict. Any person violating the provisions of this
ordinance shall forfeit:
(a) The sum of $50.00 upon the first conviction under this ordinance within a one (1)
year period.
(b) The sum of $100.00 upon the second conviction under this ordinance in a one (1)
year period.
(c) The sum of $200.00 upon the third and each subsequent conviction under this
ordinance within a one (1) year period.
Village of Hales Corners Village Code
2.23 WHERE TURNS PROHIBITED. The operator of a vehicle shall not turn his vehicle
so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon a highway at any of the following places:
(1) At all places set forth in §346.33, Wis. Stats., with the addition of the following places
where the Village expressly exercises its authority over a street within its corporate
limits:
(a) In mid-block or at any intersection on the roadway between the hours of 8:00
p.m. and 5:00 a.m.:
1. On South 108th Street from the North Village limits to the South Village
limits.
2. On West Forest Home Avenue from the East Village limits t the South
Village limits.
3. On West Janesville Road from South 108th Street to the West Village
limits.
CHAPTER 3
Building Code
Chapter I. General
3.00 Scope
3.01 Title
3.02 Application of “Wisconsin Administrative Building and Heating, Ventilating and Air
Conditioning Code”
3.025 Application of “Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code”
3.03 Application of “Wisconsin Uniform Building Code”
Chapter II. Building Inspector and Permits
3.04 Building Inspector
3.05 Permits
3.06 Approved Plans
3.07 Regulations for Moving Buildings
3.08 Razing of Buildings
3.09 Inspections
3.10 Stop Work Order
3.11 Certificate of Occupancy
Chapter III. Definitions
3.14 General
Chapter IV. Design
3.15 General
Chapter V. Soils, Excavations
3.16 Soils
3.17 Excavations
Chapter VI. Footings and Foundations
3.18 Footings
3.19 Foundations
Chapter VII. Masonry and Concrete Construction
3.20 Masonry and Hollow Masonry Units
3.21 Basements and Basementless Buildings
3.22 Concrete Construction
3.23 Masonry Construction
3.24 Mortar and Concrete Mixes
3.25 Mass Concrete Proportions
3.26 Lintels and Arches
3.27 Corbeling, Projected Masonry, Pilasters, or Piers
3.28 Erection Precautions
Chapter VIII. Frame Construction
3.29 General
3.30 Wall and Roof Sheathing, Building Paper, and Exterior Wall Weatherproof Covering
3.31 Roof Decking
3.32 Sub-flooring
Chapter IX. Exterior Coverings, Roofing, Interior Finishings
3.33 Exterior Coverings
3.34 Wall and Ceiling Finish
3.35 Nailing to Connecting Wood Members
Chapter X. Heating, Flammable Liquids Storage, Air Conditioning, Chimneys, Fireplaces,
Gas Vents, and Incinerators
3.36 Heat Producing Apparatus for Heating, Incineration, and Allied Appurtenances
3.37 Flammable Liquids, Storage, and Equipment
3.38 Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Systems
3.39 Chimneys
3.40 Fireplaces
3.41 Gas Vents
3.42 Domestic Type Incinerators
Chapter XI. Garages
3.43 General Requirements
Chapter XII. Miscellaneous and Violations
3.44 New Materials and Methods
3.45 Tests
3.46 Prefabricated Dwellings or Accessory Buildings
3.47 Identification of Products
3.48 Invalidity of Part
3.49 Violations
3.50 Failure to Obtain Permit
Chapter XX. Provisions Applicable to Hales Corners
3.100 Scope
3.101 Building Site Area
3.102 Fire Limits: Classes of Construction
3.103 Adjacent Buildings
3.104 Street Required
3.105 Permit Not Necessary for Minor Repairs
3.106 Village-owned Building
3.107 Curb, Driveways, and Sidewalks – Permits
3.108 Yard for Attached Private Garage
3.109 Air Conditioning Units
3.110 Further Regulations for Moving Buildings
3.111 Condemnation of Unsafe Structures
3.112 Removal of Building Rubbish
3.113 Sanitary Sewer
3.114 Uniform Numbering System
3.115 Excavations, Filling, and Grading
3.116 Swimming Pools
3.117 Liability Not on Village
3.118 Appeal from Inspector’s Ruling
3.119 Building Board
3.120 When a Use or Occupancy Shall be Discontinued and a Building or Portion Thereof
Vacated
3.121 Certificate of Occupancy by Fire Chief
3.122 Accessory Buildings
3.123 State Uniform Dwelling Code Adopted
3.124 Installation and Operation of Heating Units Adjunct to Warm Furnaces
3.125 Installation and Operation of Room Heaters, Stoves, and Free Standing Fireplaces
Chapter XXL. Penalties
3.200 Violations; Penalties





Chapter I. General
3.00 SCOPE. The provisions of this Code shall govern the design, construction, alteration,
demolition, and moving of all buildings and structures.
3.01 TITLE. These regulations shall be known and cited as Municipal Building Code”; and
shall be construed to secure their expressed intent to ensure public safety, health, and
welfare insofar as they are depended upon building construction.
3.02 APPLICATION OF “WISCONSIN ADMINISTRATIVE BUILDING AND
HEATING, VENTILATING AND AIR CONDITIONING CODE”. The Wisconsin
Administrative Building and Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning Code, Chapters
IND. 50 through 57, both inclusive and all amendments thereto are hereby made a part of
this Code by reference with respect to those classes of buildings to which such provisions
apply. A copy of said code is on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk.
3.025 APPLICATION OF “WISCONSIN UNIFORM DWELLING CODE”.
(1) The Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code, Chapters 20 through 25 inclusive, and all
amendments thereto, are hereby made a part of this Code by reference and shall apply to
all one and tow family dwellings and alterations and additions thereto, the initial
construction of which was commenced after the effective dates of the various Chapter of
the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code. A copy of said code is on file in the office of the
Municipal Clerk.
3.03 APPLICATION OF “WISCONSIN UNIFORM BUILDING CODE”. All buildings
and structures hereafter erected, altered, repaired, moved, or demolished that are used or
designed to be used for the purpose herein defined shall comply in full with the
requirements of this Code.
(1) Zoning Laws. No provision of this Code shall be construed to repeal, modify, or
constitute an alternative to any lawful zoning regulations.
(2) New Buildings. The construction requirements shall also apply to buildings and
conditions described in this section.
(3) Existing Buildings. This Code shall also apply to buildings and conditions described in
this Section.
(a) An existing building to be occupied as a one or two family dwelling, which
building was not previously so occupied.
(b) An existing structure that is altered or repaired, when the cost of such alterations
or repair during the life of the structure exceeds 50% of the equalized value of
the structure, said value to be determined by the Assessor of the municipality.
(c) Additions and alternations, regardless of cost, made to an existing building, shall
comply with the requirements of this Code. The provisions of subsection (4) of
this Section shall also apply.
(d) Roof Coverings. Whenever more than 25% of the roof covering of a building is
replaced in any 12-month period, all roof covering shall be in conformity with
applicable sections of this Code.
(e) Additions and Alterations. Any addition, or alteration, regardless of cost, made
to a buildings, hall be made in conformity with applicable Sections of this Code.
(4) Alterations and Repairs. The following provisions shall apply to buildings altered or
repaired.
(a) Alterations. When not in conflict with any regulations, alterations to any existing
building or structure, accommodating a legal occupancy and use but of
nonconforming type of construction, which involves either the structural
members of floors or roofs, beams, girders, columns, bearing, or other walls,
room, heating, and air conditioning systems, arrangements, light, and ventilation
changes in location of exist stairways or exits or any or all of the above, then
such existing construction shall be made to conform to the minimum
requirements of this Code applicable to such occupancy and use and given type
of construction.
(b) Repairs. Repairs for purposes of maintenance, or replacements in any existing
building or structure which do not involve the structural portions of the building
or structure, or which do not affect room arrangement, light, and ventilation,
access to or efficiency of any exit stairways or exits, fire protection, or exterior
aesthetic appearance and which do not increase a given occupancy and use, shall
be deemed minor repairs.
(c) Alternations When Not Permitted. When any existing building or structure,
which for any reasons whatsoever does not conform to the regulations of this
Code, has deteriorated from any cause whatsoever to an extent greater than 50%
of the equalized value of the building or structure, no alterations or moving of
such building or structure shall be permitted. Any such building or structure
shall be considered a menace to public safety and welfare and shall be ordered
vacated and thereafter demolished and debris removed from the premises.
(d) Alterations and Repairs Required. When any of the structural members of any
building or structure have deteriorated from any cause whatsoever to less than
their required strength, the owner of such a building or structure shall cause such
structural members to be restored to their required strength; failing in which the
building or structure shall be considered a menace to public safety and shall be
vacated and thereafter no further occupancy of use of the same shall be permitted
until the regulations of this Code are complied with.
(e) Extent of Deterioration. The amount and extent of deterioration of any existing
building or structure shall be determined by the Building Inspector.
(f) Use of Unsanitary Building. It shall be unlawful to occupy or use or permit the
occupancy or use of any building or structure that is unsanitary or dilapidated, or
deteriorated, or out of repair, thereby being unfit for human habitation,
occupancy, or use until the regulations of this Code have been complied with.
Chapter II. Building Inspector and Permits
3.04 BUILDING INSPECTOR. There is hereby created the Department of Building
Inspection. The Building Inspector appointed by the Municipality shall act as head of
this Department.
(1) Duties. The Building Inspector is vested with the authority and responsibility to enforce
all laws controlling safe building construction. He shall make periodic inspection of
existing public buildings to determine their safety. He shall make inspections at the site
of buildings damaged by any cause whatsoever to determine the safety of buildings
affected thereby.
(2) Rights. The Building Inspector or his authorized agent shall have the power and
authority at all reasonable hours, for any proper purpose, to enter upon any public or
private premises and make inspection thereof and to require the production of the permit
for any building, plumbing, electrical, or heating work being done or the required license
therefore. No person shall interfere with or refuse to permit access to any such premises
to the above described representatives of the municipality while in the performance of
their duties.
(3) Records. There shall be kept in the Department of Building Inspection a record of all
applications for building permits in a book for such purpose and each permit shall be
regularly numbered in the order of its issue. Also, a record showing the number,
description, and size of all buildings erected indicating the kind of materials used and the
cost of each building and aggregate cost of all buildings in the various classes, shall be
kept. There shall be kept in the Department of Building Inspection, a record of all
inspections made and of all removal and condemnation of buildings, and a record of all
fees collected showing the date of their receipt. The Building Inspector shall make a
written annual report to the governing body of the municipality relative to these matters.
3.05 PERMITS.
(1) Permits Required. No building or structure or any part thereof shall hereafter be built,
enlarged, altered, or demolished within the municipality or moved into, within, or out of
the municipality except as hereinafter provided, unless a permit therefore shall first be
obtained by the owner or his agent from the Building Inspector. Permits required are as
follows:
(a) Building.
(b) Air Conditioning “Section 3.38(1)(b)”.
(c) Wrecking or razing.
(d) Heating.
(e) Moving of Buildings.
(f) Occupancy.
(g) Other permits as required by governing municipality.
(2) Application for Permits. Application for a building permit shall be made in writing
upon a blank form to be furnished by the Building Inspector and shall state the name and
address of owner of the building and the owner of the land on which it is to be erected,
the name and address of the designer, and shall set forth a legal description of the land on
which the building is to be located, the location of the building, the house number there
of, and such other information as the Building Inspector may require. With such
application, there shall be submitted to the Building Inspector three (3) complete sets of
plans, specifications, and three (3) copies of a survey.
(a) Survey. The survey shall be prepared and certified by a surveyor registered by
the State of Wisconsin; shall be made in no case prior to one (1) year prior to the
issuance of a building permit; and shall bear the date of the survey. The certified
survey shall also show the following:
1. Location and dimension of all buildings on the lot, both existing and
proposed.
2. Dimensions of the lot.
3. Dimensions showing all setbacks of all buildings on the lot.
4. Proposed grade of proposed structure, to City of Village datum.
5. Grade of lot and of road opposite lot.
6. Grade and setback of adjacent buildings. If adjacent lot is vacant, submit
elevation of nearest buildings on same side of road.
7. Type of monuments at each corner of lot.
8. Water courses or existing drainage ditches.
9. Seal and signature of surveyor.
(b) Plans and Specifications. All plan shall be drawn to a scale not less than onefourth
inch per foot, on paper o cloth in ink, or by some other process that will
not fade or obliterate, and shall disclose the existing and proposed provisions for
water supply, sanitary sewer connections, and surfacing water drainage. All
dimensions shall be accurately figured. Drawings that do not show all necessary
detail shall be rejected. A complete set of plans for residential construction shall
consist of:
1. All elevations.
2. All floor plans.
3. Complete construction details.
4. Fireplace details (3/4 inch per foot) showing cross section of fireplace
and flues.
5. Plans of garage when garage is to be built immediately, or location of
garage when it is to be built at a later date.
All plans shall remain on file in the office of the Building Inspector until at least
one (1) year after the completion of the building, after which time the Building
Inspector may return the same to the owner, may keep them for public record, or
may destroy them.
(3) Waiver of Some Requirements. At the option of the Building Inspector, plants, data,
specifications, and survey need not be submitted with an application for permit to execute
minor alterations and repairs to any building, structure, or equipment, provided the
proposed construction is sufficiently described in the application for permit.
(4) Seal of Registered Engineer or Architect. All plans, data, and specifications for the
construction of any building or structure or for any construction in connection with
existing buildings and structures, other than one and two family residences, containing
more than 50,000 cubic feet, total volume, submitted with an application for permit, shall
bear the seal of the registered architect or registered engineer. The plans shall also be
stamped as approved as required by the Department of Industry, Labor, and Human
Relations of the State of Wisconsin. Such building or structure shall be constructed
under the supervision of an architect or engineer who shall be responsible for its erection
in accordance with the approved plans. No permit shall be granted for such structure
unless such construction will be under the supervision of an architect or engineer, as
required by the Wisconsin Statutes. A written statement to this effect shall be filed by the
architect or engineer, with the Building Inspector with the application for permit.
(5) Drainage.
(a) Grading of Lots. The plans shall show the present and proposed grades of the lot
on which it is proposed to erect the building for which a building permit is sought
and of the immediately adjoining property insufficient detail to indicate the
surface water drainage before and after the completion of grading. No permit
shall be issued if the erection of the building and the proposed grades shall
unreasonably obstruct the natural flow of water from the surface of adjoining
property or obstruct the flow of any existing ravine, ditch, drain, or storm water
sewer draining neighboring property, unless suitable provision for such flow by
means of an adequate ditch or pipe, which shall be shown on the plans and shall
be constructed so as to provide continuous drainage at all times.
(b) Storm Water Drains. No dwelling shall be erected nor shall existing provisions
for conveyance of water from the roof of any dwelling be altered or replaced
unless provision is made to convey water from the roof of the dwelling in such a
manner that such water will not, directly or indirectly, pass thence into the
sanitary sewer system. No storm water or surface water drains may be connected
with the sanitary sewer system, whether installed above or below the surface of
the ground.
(c) Sump Pump Collection System. Where there is a Village-approved sump pump
collection system or a pipe to a storm sewer system located between the near
edge of pavement and the subject property, the applicant for a newly constructed
residence shall include on the plans the proposed connection to such drainage
system, and the final inspection of the Building Inspector shall require
completion of such connection. Such plan shall not permit connection of roof
drainage to such collection system.
(6) Building Inspector to Issue Permit.
(a) If the Building Inspector finds that the proposed building will comply in ever
respect with this Code, other municipal ordinances, and all laws of the State of
Wisconsin, and lawful orders issued pursuant thereto, he shall issue a building
permit. After being approved, the plans and specifications shall not be altered in
any respect which involves any of the abovementioned ordinances, laws, or
order, or which involves the safety of the building, except with the written
consent of the Building Inspector filed with such application.
(b) In case adequate plans are presented, the Building Inspector, at his discretion,
may issue a permit for a part of the building before receiving the plans and
specifications of the entire building. It shall be unlawful to commence work on
any building or alteration before the building permit has been issued. The
issuance of a permit upon the plans and specifications shall not prevent the
Building Inspector form thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said plans
and specifications or from preventing building operations being carried on
thereunder when in violation of any ordinances of the municipality or laws of the
State of Wisconsin or lawful orders issued pursuant thereto.
(c) For the construction of building requiring approval of the Department of
Industry, Labor, and Human Relations of the State of Wisconsin, no permit shall
be issued until such approved plans are received by the Building Inspector.
(7) Inspector May Revoke Permits.
(a) The Building Inspector may revoke any permit, certificate of occupancy, or
approval issued under the regulations of this Code, and may stop construction or
use of approved new materials, equipment, methods of construction, devices, or
appliances for any of the following reasons:
1. Whenever there is a violation of any regulation of this Code or any other
ordinance, law, or lawful orders or Wisconsin Statue relating to the same
subject matter.
2. Whenever the continuance of any construction becomes dangerous to life
or property.
3. Whenever there is any violation of any condition or provisions of the
application for permit, or of the permit.
4. Whenever in the opinion of the Building Inspector there is inadequate
supervision provided on the job site.
5. Whenever any false statement or misrepresentation has been made in the
application for permit, plans, drawings, data specifications, or certified
lot or plot plan on which the issuance of the permit or approval was
based.
6. Whenever there is a violation of any of the conditions of an approval or
occupancy given by the Building Inspector for the use of any new
materials, equipment, methods of construction, devices, or appliances.
(b) The notice revoking a permit, certificate of occupancy, or approval shall be in
writing and may be served upon the applicant for the permit, owner of the
premises, and his agent, if any, and on the person having charge of construction.
(c) A revocation placard shall also be posted upon the building, structure, equipment,
or premises in question by the Building Inspector.
(d) After the notice is served upon the persons as aforesaid and posted, it shall be
unlawful for any person to proceed thereafter with any construction operation
whatsoever on the premises, and the permit which has been so revoked shall be
null and void, and before any construction or operation is again resumed, a new
permit, as required by this Code, shall be procured and fees paid therefore, and
thereafter the resumption of any construction or operation shall be in compliance
with the regulations of this Code.
(8) Fees. Before receiving a permit, the owner or his agent shall pay the fee specified in
Table 1. In applying the provisions of this Code in respect to new work, existing
buildings, alterations, and repairs, the physical value of the work shall be determined by
the Building Inspector on the basis of current costs, or as otherwise provided in the local
ordinances.
Table No. 1
Building Permit Fee Schedule
MINIMUM FEES
Building Permit $50.00
Electrical Permit $60.00
Plumbing Permit $60.00
HVAC Permit $50.00
Occupancy Permit – Commercial $150.00
Occupancy Permit – Residential $50.00 + $25/unit
OTHER FEES
Residence
1-2 Family, accessory building, garage $0.26/sf
3 or more units, institutional building $0.26/sf
Additions $0.26/sf
Businesses or additions thereto $0.24/sf
Manufacturing or Industrial $0.19/sf
Construction of Footings & Foundations
Multifamily & Industrial/Commercial $150.00
1 & 2 family units $100.00
All others per $1,000 valuation $8.00
Heating & Incinerator Units $50.00 per unit + $10.00/50,000
Air Conditioner other than wall unit $50.00
Air Conditioner wall unit $50.00
Wrecking or Razing Minimum $50.00 + $0.05/sf
Fences, Swimming Pools, Decks, Sheds
Plus Per $1,000 valuation
$50.00
$8.00
Moving Building over Public Ways $150.00 + $0.05/sf
Reinspections $35.00
Plan Examinations
Commercial/Industrial & Additions to same $150.00
Wisconsin Uniform Building Permit Seal (State
Charge)
$10.00
Plumbing Permit Fees
Street Repair to 50% of width $750.00
Street Repair over 50% of width $1,000.00
Connection with Public or Private Sewer $60.00
Water Connection 2” or under $50.00
Water Connection over 2” $60.00
Relay of Existing Sewer or Drain Field $50.00
Each Fixture $9.00
Well Pump $50.00
Building Drain $45.00
Plumbing Survey $50.00
Sprinkler Main Connection $75.00
Sprinkler Head (each) $0.35
Reinspection Fee $35.00
Minimum Permit Fee $60.00
Electrical Permit Fees
Light Switch & Outlet $0.70
Light Fixture and Florescent Tube $0.60
Mercury, HPS, LPS, Metal Halide Fixtures $3.00
Range and Clothes Dryer $8.00
Garbage Disposal $7.00
Dishwasher $7.00
Water Heater, Gas Burner, Oil Burner $11.00
Refrigeration and Air Cooling - .25 per HP $11.00
Feeders – N.4 AWG or Larger $14.00
Temporary Service $25.00
Service Conductor and Switch
0-400 amps $25.00
401-1,000 amps
Each additional 1,000 amps
$35.00
$35.00
Ventilation Fan $5.00
Motor over ¼ HP $1.00/HP
Fuel Dispensing Pump $10.00
Transformer, Rectifier, Generator $0.50/KW
Space Heating System $5.00/circuit
Miscellaneous Heating Device $6.00
Dimmer – 1.000 watts or more $4.00
Power Receptacles – 230 volts or more $8.00
Wireway, Busway, Raceway, Gutter $0.40/ft.
Strip Lights, Plug-in Strip, Trol-E-Duct $0.50/ft.
X-ray Machine, Motion Picture Machine $80.00
Hot Tubs $60.00
Minimum Permit Fee $60.00
3.06 APPROVED PLANS.
(1) A weatherproof card signed by the Building Inspector indicating the permit has been
issued shall be posted at the job site during construction. After issuance of a building
permit, the approved plans shall not be altered unless any proposed change is first
approved by the Building Inspector as conforming to the provisions of this Code.
(2) The building permit shall become void unless operations are commenced within four (4)
months from the date thereof, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is
suspended at any time after work is commenced, for a period of 60 days. The period of
time may be extended by the Building Inspector if the delay was due to conditions
beyond the control of the applicant.
(3) Before any work is commenced or recommenced after the permit has lapsed, a new
permit shall be issued at the regular fee rate. In any event, all work shall be completed
within 18 months from the date of issuance of the permit.
3.07 REGULATIONS FOR MOVING BUILDINGS.
(1) General. No person shall move any building or structure upon any of the public ways of
the municipality without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Building Inspector and
upon the payment of the required fee. Every such permit issued by the Building
Inspector for the moving of a building shall designate the route to be taken, the conditions
to be complied with, and shall limit the time during which said moving operations shall
be continued.
(2) Moving Damaged Buildings. No building shall be repaired, altered, or moved within or
into the municipality that has deteriorated or has been damaged by any cause (including
such moving and separation from its foundation and service connections in case of
moved buildings), 50% or more of its equalized value, and no permit shall be granted to
repair, alter, or move such building within or into the municipality.
(3) Continuous Movement. The movement of buildings shall be a continuous operation
during all the hours of the day, and day by day and at night, until such movement is fully
completed. All of such operations shall be performed with the least possible obstruction
to thoroughfares. No building shall be allowed to remain overnight upon any street
crossing or intersection or so near thereto as to prevent easy access to any fire hydrant or
any other public facility. Lighted lanterns shall be kept in conspicuous places at each end
of the building during the night.
(4) Street Repair. Every person receiving a permit to move a building shall within one (1)
day after said building reaches its destination, report the fact to the Building Inspector,
who shall thereupon in the company of the municipal highway commissioner, inspect the
streets and highways over which said building has been moved, and ascertain their
condition. If the removal of said building has caused any damage to any street or
highway, the person to whom the permit was issued shall forthwith place them in good
repair as they were before the permit was granted. On the failure of the said permittee to
do so within 10 days thereafter to the satisfaction of the governing body, said body shall
repair the damage done to such streets and hold the person obtaining such permit and the
sureties on his bond responsible for the payment of same.
(5) Conforming with Code. No permit shall be issued to move a building within or into the
municipality and to establish it upon a location within the said municipality until the
Building Inspector has made an investigation of such building at the location from which
it is to be moved, and is satisfied from such investigation that said building is in a sound
and stable condition and of such construction that it will meet the requirements of this
Building Code in all respects. A complete plan of all further repairs, improvements, and
remodeling with reference to such building shall be submitted to the Building Inspector,
and he shall make a finding of fact to the effect that all such repairs, improvements, and
remodeling are in conformity with the requirements of this Building Code, and that when
same are completed, the building as such will so comply with said Building Code. In the
event a building is to be moved from the municipality to some point outside the
boundaries thereof, the provisions with respect to the furnishing of plans and
specifications for proposed alterations to such building may be disregarded.
(6) Bond.
(a) Before a permit is issued to move any building over any public way in this
municipality, the party applying therefore shall give a bond to the municipality in
a sum to be fixed by the Building Inspector and which shall not be less than
$1,000.00; said bond to be executed by a corporate surety or two personal
sureties to be approved by the governing body or designated agent conditioned
upon, among other things, the indemnification to the municipality for any costs
or expenses incurred by it in connection with any claims for damages to any
persons or property, and the payment of any judgment together with the costs and
expenses incurred by the municipality in connection therewith, arising out of the
removal of the building for which the permit is issued.
(b) Unless the Building Inspector, upon investigation, shall find it to be a fact that
the excavation exposed by the removal of such building from its foundation shall
not be so close to a public thoroughfare as to permit the accidental falling therein
of travelers or the location, nature, and physical characteristics of the premises
and the falling into such excavation of children under 12 years of age unlikely,
the bond required by (a) shall be further conditioned upon the permittee erecting
adequate barriers and within 48 hours, filling in such excavation or adopting and
employing such other means, devices, or methods approved by the Building
Inspector and reasonably adopted or calculated to prevent the occurrences set
forth herein.
(7) Insurance. The Building Inspector shall require in addition to said bond above
indicated, public liability insurance covering injury to one person in the sum of not less
than $100,000.00, and for one accident in the sum of not less than $200,000.00, together
with property damage insurance in a sum not less than $50,000.00, or such other
coverage s deemed necessary.
(8) Plan Commission or Other Assigned Board or Commission.
(a) No such permit shall be issued unless it has been found as a fact by the Plan
Commission of the municipality by at least a majority vote, after an examination
of the application for the permit which shall include exterior elevations of the
building and accurate photographs of all sides and views of the same, and in case
it is proposed to alter the exterior of said building, plans and specifications of
such proposed alterations and after a view of the building proposed to be moved
and of the site at which it is to be located, that the exterior architectural appeal
and functional plan of the building to be moved or moved and altered, will not be
so at variance with either the exterior architectural appeal and functional plan of
the buildings already constructed or in the course of construction in the
immediate neighborhood, of the character of the applicable district established by
the zoning ordinances of the municipality, or any ordinance amendatory thereof
or supplementary thereto, as to cause a substantial depreciation on the property
value of said neighborhood within said applicable district. In case the applicant
proposes to alter the exterior of said building after moving the same, he shall
submit with his application papers complete plans and specifications for the
proposed alterations. Before a permit shall be issued for a building to be moved
and altered, the applicant shall give a bond to the municipality’s Plan
Commission, which shall not be less than $1,000.00 to be executed in the manner
provided in subsection (6) hereof to the effect that he will within a time to be set
by the Plan Commission, complete the proposed exterior alterations to said
building in the manner set forth in his plans and specifications. This bond shall
be in addition to any other bond or surety which may be required by other
applicable ordinances of the municipality. No occupancy permit shall be issued
for said building until the exterior alterations proposed to be made have been
completed.
(b) Upon application being made to the Building Inspector, he shall request a
meeting of the Plan Commission to consider applications for moving permits
which he has found comply in all respects with all other ordinances of the
municipality. The Plan Commission may, if it desires, hear the applicant for the
moving permit in question and/or the owner of the lot on which it is proposed to
locate the building in question, together with any other persons, either residents
or property owners, desiring to be heard, giving such notice of hearing as they
may deem sufficient. Such hearing may be adjourned for a reasonable length of
time, and within 48 hours after the close of the hearing, the Plan Commission
shall, in writing, make or refuse to make the finding required in subsection (8)
hereof, and file it in the office of the Clerk, who shall send a copy of it to the
Building Inspector.
(9) Board of Appeals.
(a) On an appeal to the Board of Appeals, in the absence of proof to the contrary
adduced before the Board of Appeals, a refusal to grant the moving permit
because of refusal of the Plan Commission to make the finding required by
subsection (8) thereof, such refusal shall be deemed to be passed upon facts
supporting a conclusion that the exterior architectural appeal and functional plan
of the building to be moved, or to be moved and altered, for which a permit was
refused, would, when moved or altered, be so at variance with all of the exterior
architectural appeal and functional plan of buildings already constructed or in the
course of construction in the immediate neighborhood, or the character of the
applicable district, as to cause substantial depreciation in the property values of
the neighborhood within said applicable district.
(b) Any person entitled to appeal from the grant of or refusal of the Building
Inspector to grant said moving permit may appeal to the Board of Appeals in the
same manner and with the same force and effect as if this ordinance had not been
adopted and the Building Inspector had taken such action independently of the
Plan Commission.
3.08 RAZING OF BUILDINGS.
(1) Razing of Buildings. The Building Inspector is hereby authorized to act for the
municipality under the provisions of §66.05, Wis. Stats., relating to the razing of
buildings and all acts amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto. The municipal
treasurer is authorized to place the assessment and collect the special tax as therein
provided.
(2) Before a building can be demolished or removed, the owner or agent shall notify all
utilities having service connections within the building, such as water, electric, gas,
sewer, and other connections. A permit to demolish or to remove a building shall not be
issued until it is ascertained that service connections and appurtenant equipment, such as
meters and regulators, have been removed or sealed and plugged in a safe manner.
Excavations shall be filled with solid fill to match lot grade within five (5) days of
removal of the structure. Any excavation shall be protected with appropriate fences,
barriers, and/or light.
3.09 INSPECTIONS.
(1) Notification. Upon notification from the permit holder or his agent, required inspections
of the construction of any buildings, structures, or equipment shall be made as follows:
(a) Inspection to determine if the location on the premises is in compliance with
approved certified lot or plot plan of the premises and the terms of the permit.
(b) Inspection to determine if the construction of footings as to thickness, width,
placing of reinforced steel, if required, and foundation walls is in compliance
with applicable plans, data, and terms of the permit. Recertification of the
footings and foundation location and elevation shall be provided to the Building
Inspector prior to pouring concrete.
(c) Inspection of all wall, floor, and roof framing, fire stopping, and bracing when
completed, and of all pipes, chimneys, ventilating and other ducts, shafts, and
equipment when in place, but before any such work is covered, enclosed, or
concealed by other construction.
(d) Inspection prior to laying concrete for basement floor to inspect subgrade, drain
tile, and forms.
(e) Final Inspection. Upon completion of any building, structure, equipment, or
construction for which a permit was issued and before the same is occupied or
used, a final inspection shall be made by the Building Inspector, and until such
building, structure, or equipment is in compliance with all the requirements of
this Code and terms of the permit, no occupancy shall be maintained. If the
construction conforms to the requirements of this Code, a certificate of
occupancy shall be issued.
(2) Coordinated Inspections. All provisions of the laws and regulations of the
municipality, and of legally adopted rules of local fire and health officials in respect to
the operation, equipment, housekeeping, fire protection, handling and storage of
flammable materials, liquids, and gases, and the maintenance of safe and sanitary
conditions of use in occupancy in all buildings shall be strictly enforced by the
administrative officials to whom such authority is delegated. Whenever inspection by
any authorized enforcement officer discloses any violation of the provisions of this Code,
or of any other rules, regulations, or laws, he shall immediately notify the administrative
official having jurisdiction of the violation.
(3) Certified Report. The Building Inspector may require a certified report of all required
inspections as regulated by this Code from the registered architect or registered engineer
supervising the construction of any building, structure, or equipment requiring their
supervision. Such certified report shall state in detail that all construction work has been
executed in accordance with all of the regulations of this Code, approved plans,
specifications, terms of the permit; and further, that such construction work was executed
in accordance with accepted architectural and engineering standard procedures.
(4) Board of Appeals or Other Assigned Board or Commission. Any person feeling
himself aggrieved by any order or ruling of the Building Inspector may appeal form such
ruling to the Board of Appeals within 20 days after written notice of such ruling shall
have been delivered to him. Such appeal is to be in writing, setting forth the order
appealed from, and the respects in which said person feeling himself aggrieved claims
that said order or ruling is erroneous or illegal. Said notice of appeal shall be filed with
the Clerk, who shall thereupon notify the Building Inspector of said appeal, and the
appeal shall be heard at the next meeting of the Board of Appeals. The said Board of
Appeals, after consideration thereof, shall affirm, reverse, or modify said ruling as is just
in the premises. The ruling or order of the inspection shall be enforced until changed by
said Board of Appeals.
3.10 STOP WORK ORDER. Whenever the provisions of this Code or of the plans approved
thereunder are not complied with, a stop work order shall be served on the owner or his
representative, and a copy thereof shall be posted at the site of the construction. Such
stop work order shall not be removed except by written notice of the Building Inspector
after satisfactory evidence has been supplied that the violation has been corrected.
3.11 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
(1) Inspections.
(a) The Building Inspector shall make a final inspection of all new buildings,
additions, and alterations. If no violations of this or any other ordinance be
found, the Building Inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy, stating the
purpose for which the building is to be used.
(b) No building nor part thereof shall be occupied until such certificate has been
issued, nor shall any building be occupied in any manner which conflicts with the
conditions set forth in the certificate of occupancy.
(2) Use Discontinued.
(a) Whenever any building or portion thereof is being used or occupied contrary to
the provisions of this Code, the Building Inspector shall order such use or
occupancy discontinued, and the building or portion thereof vacated, by notice
served on any person using or causing such use or occupancy to be continued,
and such person shall vacate such building or portion thereof within 10 days after
receipt of the notice, or make the building or portion thereof comply with the
requirements of this Code.
(b) Any building, structure, or premises, or any part thereof, hereafter vacated or
damaged by any cause whatsoever so as to jeopardize public safety or health,
shall not hereafter be occupied or used under an existing certificate of occupancy
or without the same, until an application has been filed and a new certificate of
occupancy issued.
(3) Change. It shall be unlawful to change the use of any building, structure, premises, or
part thereof without first obtaining from the Building Inspector an approval of such
change in the occupancy or use, and a certificate of occupancy therefore.
(4) Hardship. The Building Inspector shall have the authority and power to permit the
occupancy of any building or structure in the municipality, prior to issuance of an
occupancy certificate, in all such cases of hardship as in his judgment and discretion
warrant occupancy before final stage of completion as set forth in this Code. Before
granting such permission, the Building Inspector shall first examine the premises and
determine if it safe and sanitary. The Building Inspector shall determine the time within
which such building or structure can be complete, such time not to exceed 120 days.
Chapter III. Definitions
3.14 GENERAL. For purposes of this Code, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings assigned to them in this section. Words and phrases are herein otherwise
defined shall have the meaning accepted by common usage.
(1) Accessory Building. A part of a principal building, or a supplemental building located
on the same lot with a principal building and generally used for storage, private garage,
or other use customarily incident to a residence use.
(2) Addition. Any new construction whereby an existing building or structure, or building
or structure in course of construction, is increased in area, or cubical content.
(3) Adjoining Lot Line. The line between adjoining lots, plots of land, or parcels of land of
different or same ownership.
(4) Alley. A right-of-way which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting
properties. A street shall not be considered an alley.
(5) Alteration. Any change or modification in construction or occupancy.
(6) Apartment. A room or suite of rooms which is occupied or which is intended or
designed to be occupied by one family for living and sleeping purposes.
(7) Approved. As to materials and types of construction refers to approval by the Building
Inspectors Association as the result of investigation and tests conducted by said
association or by reason of accepted principals or tests by national authorities or technical
or scientific organizations.
(8) Area. As applied to dimensions, means the maximum horizontal projected area of a
building, structure, room, apartment, or open space, not including overhangs.
(9) Attic. A space, not suitable for human occupancy, under the roof and above the ceiling
of the topmost story of any building or part thereof.
(10) Basement. That portion of a building the floor line of which is below lot grade and the
ceiling of which is not more than four (4) feet above lot grade. Same for cellar.
(11) Bearing. That area of any structural unit of a building or structure which is in direct
contact with the supports which receive the loads from that unit.
(12) Building. Any structure built for the support shelter or enclosure of persons, animals,
chattels, or property of any kind.
(13) Building, Existing. A building erected prior to the adoption of this Code or one for
which a legal building permit has been issued.
(14) Building Inspector. The officer charged with the administration and enforcement of this
Code or his regularly authorized deputy. Same for Building Official.
(15) Cement or Cement Lime Mortar. See Section 3.24.
(16) City. Any political subdivision which adopts this Code for regulation within its
jurisdiction.
(17) Cubic Contents. The actual cubic space enclosed within the outer surfaces of the
outside or enclosed walls, outer surfaces of the roof, and finished surfaces of the lowest
floors of a building or structure. Does not include the contents of courts which are open
to the sky.
(18) Dwelling. A building which is designed to be used or which is intended to be used as a
residence or place of abode.
(19) Equipment. As specifically regulated by this Code, includes heating, cooling, air
conditioning, and ventilating systems; plumbing and sanitary systems; electric light and
power systems; telephone, electronic, and radio signal and annunciator systems; dry
cleaning, dyeing, and washing machines; elevators and dumb waiters; gas pipe systems;
standpipes; sprinkler systems; fire protection apparatus, fire extinguishers, and pumps; oil
burners, stokers, and conveyors; refrigerating systems; devices; machinery and apparatus
of every description; furnaces; boilers; high or low pressure steam systems; gasoline
pumps; all movable or portable containers of every description; all air pressure or other
tanks; and all other self-contained systems used in conjunction with buildings or
structures.
(20) Established Grade. A grade of the street as established by ordinance at the center line
of the street.
(21) Existing. A building, structure, equipment, or premises completed or in course of
construction or used or occupied, and for which a legal permit has been issued prior to
the effective date of this Code.
(22) Family. An individual or two or more persons related by blood or marriage, or a group
of not more than two (2) persons (excluding servants) who need not be related by blood
or marriage living together in a dwelling unit.
(23) Fire District. Zoned areas of the city within which wood frame construction is
prohibited except otherwise provided for in this Code.
(24) Floor Area. The net area of any floor space, enclosed by exterior walls, fire walls, or
absolute fire separation exclusive of open spaces.
(25) Footings. That portion of the foundation of a structure which spreads and transmits loads
directly to the soil or the piles.
(26) Foundation. The supporting structure as a whole, below the lowest floor upon which
rests the superstructure of a building or structure.
(27) Garage. A building or portion thereof in which a motor vehicle containing gasoline,
distillate, or other volatile, flammable liquid in its tank is stored, repaired, or kept.
(28) Garage, Private. A building or a portion of a building in which only motor vehicles
used by the tenants of the building or buildings on the premises are stored or kept.
(29) Grade, Building. Elevation of ground adjacent to the structure.
(30) Grade, Lumber. The classification of lumber in regard to stress and grade.
(31) Habitable Rooms. Rooms for human occupancy; for example, but not confined to the
following:
(a) Bedroom. A habitable room in a dwelling unit intended for the use primarily for
sleeping purposes.
(b) Kitchen. A habitable room or space in a dwelling unit in which meals are cooked
or prepared.
(c) Living Room. The principal habitable room in a dwelling unit designed for or
appropriated to the general occupancy or use of a family or household.
(32) Lintel. The beam or girder placed over an opening in a wall which supports the wall
construction above.
(33) Loads.
(a) Dead Load. The weight of the walls, floors, partitions, roofs, and other structural
parts of a building or structure.
(b) Live Load. All imposed, transient, moving loads, or loads due to impact, and
including movable partitions in a building or structure other than dead loads.
(34) Lot. A parcel of land in a single ownership occupied or to be occupied by not more than
one principal or main building and the accessory buildings or uses customarily incident to
it, including such open spaces as are required by this or other codes, and having its
principal frontage upon a street.
(35) Lot Line. A line or lines dividing one lot, plot of land, or parcel of land from an
adjoining lot, plot of land, or parcel of land.
(36) Masonry. A construction composed of separate units such as brick, block, hollow tile,
stone, or approved similar units or a combination thereof, laid up or building unit by unit
and bonded by mortar.
(37) Masonry, Solid. Masonry built without hollow spaces.
(38) Nonconforming Buildings, etc. A lawfully existing building, premises, structure, use,
materials, or equipment which do not conform to the requirements of this Code.
(39) Occupancy or Use. The purpose for which a building, structure, equipment, materials,
or premises or part thereof is used or intended to be used as regulated by this Code.
(40) Person. The word “person” shall mean any individual, persons, partnerships, firm,
organization, association, or corporation, their agents, heirs, or assigns.
(41) Pilaster. A projection of masonry, or other construction being an integral part of a wall
to provide bearing for concentrated loads or to compensate for a reduction of wall section
by openings or to stiffen a wall against lateral forces.
(42) Principal Building. A single main building or structure on a lot for specific use or
occupancies.
(43) Repair. The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building for the purpose
of its maintenance. The word “repair” or “repairs” shall not apply to any change of
construction.
(44) Required. Mandatory by provisions of this Code.
(45) Room. A space within a building or structure completely enclosed with walls, partitions,
floor, and ceiling except for necessary openings for light, ventilation, ingress, and egress.
(46) Shall. As used herein is mandatory. Same for must.
(47) Stairway. Three (3) or more risers shall constitute a stairway.
(48) Story. The space in a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface
of the next above or below, or roof next above.
(49) Structure. As specifically regulated by this Code, anything which is constructed,
erected, and framed of component parts and which is fastened, anchored, or rests on any
permanent foundation or on the ground for any occupancy or use whatsoever, excluding
fencing.
(50) Walls. Walls shall be defined as follows:
(a) Bearing Wall. A wall which supports any load in addition to its own weight.
(b) Cavity Wall. Wall built of masonry units or of plain concrete, or a combination
of these materials, so arranged as to provide an air space within the wall, and in
which the facing and backing (inner and outer parts) of the wall are tied together
with metal ties.
(c) Curtain Wall. A nonbearing wall between columns or piers.
(d) Exterior Wall. An outer enclosing wall of a building or structure.
(e) Faced Wall. A wall in which the masonry facing and backing are so bonded as to
exert common action under load.
(f) Nonbearing Wall. A wall which supports no load other than its own weight.
(g) Panel Wall. A nonbearing wall in skeleton construction, built between columns
or piers and wholly supported at each story.
(h) Partition. An interior vertical structure usually of light construction serving to
enclose an area, room, space, or division, extended from the floor to ceiling, and
having wall surfaces of approved materials as permitted by this Code.
(i) Retaining Wall. Wall used to resist laterally imposed pressures.
(j) Veneered Wall. Wall having masonry facing which is attached to the backing
but not so bonded as to exert common action under load; also having outer facing
for the purpose of providing ornamentation, protection, or insulation.
(51) Square Footage of Building. The actual area in square feet enclosed by the exterior
perimeter of the building walls on each separate floor level.
(52) Unusual Construction. Any construction methods or materials not covered in this Code.
Chapter IV. Design
3.15 GENERAL. See detail (a) Typical House Section.
(1) Application. All one and two family dwelling shall conform to the requirements of this
Chapter. A building which contains a use or occupancy other than one and two family
units shall follow the applicable requirements of the Wisconsin Administrative Building
Code.
(2) Repairs. Every building and all parts thereof shall be kept in good repair and the roof
shall be maintained to prevent leakage. All rainwater shall be so drained and conveyed
therefrom to prevent dampness in the walls and ceilings.
(3) Cleanliness. Every building shall be kept reasonably clean and shall also be kept
reasonably free from any accumulation of dirt, filth, rubbish, garbage, or other matter in
or on the same, or in the yards, courts, passages, areas, or alleys connected with or
belonging to the same.
(4) Street Exposure. Every building shall front on at least one (1) street, unless otherwise
permitted by local regulations.
(a) Existing buildings not fronting on a street shall be provided with an unobstructed
fire access land not less than 15 feet in width from a public thoroughfare.
(5) Room Areas. Room sizes for one and two family dwelling shall be equal to or greater
than those listed in Table No. 2. Multiple family buildings shall have room sizes as
approved by the municipality.
(a) Minimum dimension of living rooms shall be 11 feet, and of kitchens six (6) feet.
Minimum room areas shall not include areas used for storage or closet purposes.
(b) Rooms and spaces not herein regulated as to area shall be connected to a living or
other habitable room. Rooms and spaces not herein regulated and of areas less
than the minimum areas herein required shall not be used for living, dining,
sleeping, or kitchen purposes.
(c) No habitable rooms shall be permitted in basements unless ceiling line of the
room is at least four (4) feet above grade line.
(d) No additional dwelling units shall be created or maintained by rearranging room
suites, by subdividing rooms, or by alterations in any existing building or
structure unless such dwelling units have been authorized by permit an comply
with this and other applicable regulations.
(6) Ceiling Heights.
(a) Except as otherwise permitted by local requirements the minimum clear ceiling
height of all habitable rooms in once and two family homes shall have a
minimum ceiling height of seven (7) feet six (6) inches. Basement ceiling height
shall be a minimum of six (6) feet 10 inches under joists.
(b) Sloping roofs may penetrate rooms provided that any portion of any room under
a sloping roof having a height of less than five (5) feet shall not be considered as
part of the floor area in computing areas o volume of such rooms. Rooms under a
sloping roof shall have a minimum ceiling height of seven (7) feet six (6) inches
for not less than one-half of the required area.
(c) Rooms in any building or structure having ceiling heights or areas which do not
conform to the regulations of this section shall not be used for human habitation
(For ceiling heights of bath and toilet rooms, see 3.15(9)(d).)
(7) Light and Ventilation.
(a) Every room in which one or more persons live, sleep, work, or congregate shall
have a window or windows with sash areas which shall be at least 10% of all the
floor area of the room. Such windows shall be constructed so as to permit a
window area of at least five percent of the floor area of the room to be open to
the outside, unless ventilation is provided by louvers, other openings, or artificial
means.
(b) Windows shall be provided in all basements having a minimum openable total
area of not less than one (1) percent of the basement floor area, excluding crawl
space area.
(8) Stairways, Landings, Platforms, and Roof Decks. Every exit stairway shall be not less
than three (3) feet in width and not more than four (4) inches on one side may be used for
handrails. Every platform shall be at least as wide as the stairway, measured at right
angles to the direction of travel. Whenever a door opens onto a stairway, a platform shall
be provided extending at least the full width of the door in the direction of travel.
(a) If stairways are provided in addition to those required by this Code, such
additional stairways need not conform to the width requirements of this Code.
(b) All stairway landings, platforms, roof decks, or similar elevations or depressions
more than two (2) feet above or below adjacent grade or floor level shall have a
guard rail on the open sides thereof, at least 32 inches in height, with an
intermediate rail at midheight or vertical rails at 11 inches maximum spacing on
center.
(c) Stairways on the outside of buildings and an integral part thereof, having more
than three (3) risers, shall have a handrail on each side.
(d) Risers and Treads. All stairways and steps shall have a uniform rise of not more
than eight (8) inches, and a minimum tread width of nine (9) inches. Risers shall
be measured from tread to tread, and treads shall be measured from rise to rise.
There shall be no more than 18 risers in any one run.
(e) The continuous clear head room measured perpendicularly from the nosing shall
be not less than six (6) feet eight (8) inches, except that for basement stairways
such head room may be six (6) feet four (4) inches.
(f) Windows may be used provided that such winders are designated so the tread
width 18 inches from the converging end will not be less than nine (9) inches.
(g) Handrails. All stairways and steps of more than three (3) risers shall have at least
one (1) handrail. The handrail around stairways shall not be less than two (2)
feet eight (8) inches high, measured above the stair nosing. The handrail shall be
installed on the open side, if any, and this shall meet the minimum requirements.
(9) Toilets, Bathrooms, and Kitchens.
(a) In every dwelling there shall be provided in each dwelling unit and connected to
a plumbing system at least one kitchen sink, one water closet, one bathtub or
shower, and one lavatory.
(b) Wherever public water supply is not available, there shall be provided on the
premises, for each dwelling unit, means for a sanitary disposal of sewerage
without health hazards or nuisances, and in conformity with general accepted
standards.
(c) Plumbing fixtures as stated above shall be smooth, nonabsorbent, resistive to
detrimental action of conveyed wastes, and free from concealed fouling surfaces.
(d) Bathrooms for required toilets, tubs or showers, or lavatories shall have a
minimum floor area of not less than 12 square feet for each water closet and each
tub, and 10 square feet for each shower, lavatory, or other sanitary plumbing
fixture or equipment installed therein. The ceiling height of the required
bathroom shall not be less than seven (7) feet. Powder room or second baths are
not subject to the above, but shall have a minimum floor area of 14 square feet
with a minimum dimension of three (3) feet in one direction.
(e) Each bathroom or toilet room shall be provided with a door. No bathroom or
toilet room shall open directly into a kitchen, nor shall such room provide sole
access to any other room.
(f) Bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with means of ventilation as
required by this Code for habitable rooms, or positive mechanical ventilation,
providing one air change every five minutes.
(10) Exits and Openings.
(a) Exterior stairways other than to the first floor and basement shall not be allowed.
Every residential home shall have two (2) exits on the first floor. Duplexes shall
have two (2) separate stairways or one stairway and an outside porch not more
than 10 feet above the ground.
(b) Access to each dwelling unit shall be provided without passing through any parts
of any other dwelling unit. In dwelling units, every habitable room shall have
access to every other habitable room without passing through a bathroom or toilet
room.
(c) Doors or Openings.
1. Exterior Doors. The minimum size for at least one main entrance door to
a residence shall be three (3) feet wide by six (6) feet eight (8) inches
high. The rear or side door shall be two (2) feet eight (8) inches wide, by
six (6) feet eight (8) inches high.
2. Interior Doors. Minimum size door serving as exit from any habitable
rooms shall be two (2) feet six (6) inches wide by six (6) feet six (6)
inches high. Bathrooms and closets other than linen and broom closets
can be served by a door a minimum of two (2) feet wide.
3. An opening used without a door shall be the same size as the required
minimum size of door.
(d) Corridors and hallways between rooms shall be not less than 36 inches wide.
(11) Attics, Access Thereto. In every building and structure having an attic, there shall be
provided permanent access thereto by means of a scuttle, disappearing or permanently
installed stairway; minimum size opening shall be 24 inches by 20 inches.
(12) Vents in Attics. Unheated space above heated spaces must be ventilated. Such vents
shall be located to provide proper circulation of air. The area of the clear openings of the
vents shall total at least one five hundredth (1/500) of the projected ceiling area of the
heated spaces below.
Chapter V. Soils, Excavations
3.16 SOILS.
(1) Loads. The permissible loads in tons per square foot on natural earth shall not exceed
the bearing capacity shown in the following table:
TABLE A
Type of Soil or Rock Bearing Capacity
Tons/Square Foot
Quicksand, alluvial, and filled soils,
determined by test but not more than ½
Soft clay, sandy loam, or silt 1
Ordinary clay 2
Clay or find sand, firm and dry 3
Sand, compact, and well cemented; dry hard
clay 4
Gravel and coarse sand, well packed 5
Hard pan or shale 6
Rock
Not more than 20% of the ultimate crushing
strength of such rock
(2) Borings and Tests.
(a) When Required. In the absence of satisfactory data from immediately adjacent
areas, the owner or applicant shall make borings, test pits, or other soil
investigations at such locations and to sufficient depths of the bearing materials
to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector.
(b) Soil Samples. Samples of the strata penetrated in test borings or test pits,
representing the natural disposition and conditions at the site, shall be available
for examination of the Building Inspector.
(c) Varying Soil Values. When test borings indicate non-uniformity of bearing
materials, a sufficient number of additional borings shall be made to establish
strata levels of equal bearing capacity.
(d) Cost of Tests. When the safe sustaining power of the soil is in doubt, the
Building Inspector shall direct that the necessary borings or test be made by and
at the expense of the applicant and under the supervision of the Building
Inspector to determine the safe value.
(3) Soil test Procedure.
(a) Soil Test Method. The test procedure and testing apparatus shall be approved by
the Building Inspector before they are used; and a complete record of the tests
together with a record of the soil profile shall be filed by the licensed engineer or
architect.
(b) Loaded Area. If results of soil tests by boring are in doubt as to safe sustaining
power, the Building Inspector may require tests by loaded area method. The
loaded area shall be approximately four (4) square feet for all bearing materials;
except that when the footing overlies wet clay or other soft materials, the test
load shall be applied to an area of not less than 10 square feet.
(c) Recorded Settlements. Loads shall be applied in continuous increments of not
more than one-quarter (1/4) of the proposed safe load. When the proposed load
has been reached, it shall remain undisturbed and reading shall be recorded to
determine the rate of settlement until the settlement in eight (8) consecutive hours
is less than one-hundredth (.01) inches. A 50% excess load shall then be applied
and allowed to remain in place until the rate of settlements is less than onehundredth
(.01) inches in 24 hours.
(d) Accuracy of Loading. Test loads applied by mechanical devices shall be
automatically controlled so as to insure not more than five (5) percent variation
in applied load. Such devices shall be calibrated prior to the test.
(e) Test Acceptance. The load settlement shall be represented diagrammatically, and
no test shall be deemed satisfactory if the net settlement after removal of the test
loads exceeds one-hundredth (.01) inches per ton of gross load applied.
3.17 EXCAVATIONS.
(1) General.
(a) All excavations for buildings and structures and parts thereof shall be protected
and guarded against danger to life or injury to persons or property.
(b) No trench for sewer or other excavations shall be made below any foundation
wall nearer than three (3) feet to any corner of said foundation. No trench for
sewer or other excavations shall be made nearer to any column or pier footing
than one and one-half (1½ ) times the depth of the excavation below the footing.
(c) When the owner of any lot or plot of land or the municipality in making
improvements is about to excavate or cause an excavation to be made, which
excavation in any way affects any building or structure on any adjoining lot, a
notice shall be given to all owners of adjoining lots at least 10 days prior to
commencing the excavation. Such notice shall describe the extent and character
of the excavation work about to be done, and the adjoining owners shall
thereafter be given a reasonable opportunity to protect their property in
compliance with the regulations of this Code.
(d) Whenever an excavation or foundation for building purposes has remained open
for a period of 30 days with no work having been done at the site for said period,
the Building Inspector shall serve a notice upon the owner of the property that
work at the site be commenced forthwith or that the excavation be filled to grade.
The order shall be served upon the owner or his agent and upon the holder of any
encumbrance of record as provided in §66.05, Wis. Stats. If the owner fails to
comply with the order within 15 days after the service thereof, upon him, the
Building Inspector shall cause the excavation to be filled to grade and the cost
charged against the real estate as a special charge as provided by §66.05(2), Wis.
Stats. In addition to filling the excavation, any person who violates this section is
subject to the provisions of 3.49.
Chapter VI. Footings and Foundations
3.18 FOOTINGS. See Detail (a) Typical House Section.
(1) General.
(a) Concrete footings for load bearing walls shall be of adequate dimensions to
distribute the load. Minimum thickness shall be eight (8) inches. Footing width
shall extend six (6) inches on each side of the wall above. All footings shall be
cast in forms upon undisturbed earth, unless the design of the footings and
foundation is approved by the Building Inspector.
(b) Pier and Column Footings. Concrete footings for piers and columns shall be a
minimum of two (2) feet square and a minimum thickness of 12 inches, and shall
be designed to carry the superimposed load. Columns shall be centered on
column footings.
(c) Chimney Footings. Concrete chimney footings shall have a minimum projection
of six (6) inches beyond the chimney foundation and a minimum thickness of 12
inches, and shall be designed to carry the superimposed load.
(2) Drain Tiles. All foundation walls of basements/cellars or other occupied spaces shall
have drain tiles on each side of such walls. (See Section 3.21(2)(c) for basementless
spaces.) Bleeder tiles shall be placed in the foundation footing at not more than eight (8)
foot centers. Tiles shall be connected to a sump pit provided with a pump to discharge
the water at grade or be connected to the storm sewer house drain. Drain tiles shall be
covered with 12 inches of #2 washed stone or other approved porous material. Tile and
stone shall be in place prior to starting the fourth foundation block course.
(3) Stepped Footings. Where variations in the elevations of the bottom of wall footings are
necessary, the vertical connection between the footings at the step shall be constructed of
concrete eight (8) inches thick and of the same width as the footing, if there is less than
two (2) foot difference in elevation. If over two (2) foot difference in elevation, span
with an approved lintel.
3.19 FOUNDATIONS.
(1) General. Foundation walls shall be continuous under all habitable areas of principal
buildings. Overhanging bays and projected floors are permitted provided that such
cantilevered floors are adequately returned to sustain such loads as they may carry.
(a) The top of foundation walls of any building or structure of wood frame
construction shall be at least four (4) inches above lot grade at all exterior walls
and no exterior wood construction shall be exposed less than three (3) inches
above grade. Where the elevation of the lot grade adjoining the exterior walls of
such buildings or structure varies and the four (4) inch requirement above such
grade cannot be maintained, the joist skirt shall be protected with waterproof
building paper or flashing.
In no case shall joists be lower than the grade. All footings shall set at least 24
hours before foundation wall or wall forms shall be built.
(2) Foundation Wall Thickness.
(a) Foundation walls for one and two story frame buildings and which are
constructed of brick and solid or hollow concrete masonry units shall be of the
following thickness:
TABLE B
Minimum Thickness (inches
Foundation Wall
Construction
Maximum Height
Unbalanced Fill in
Feet Frame
Masonry or
Masonry Veneer
Masonry 3 10 10
5 10 12
7½ 10 12
Plain Concrete 3 8 8
5 8 10
7½ 8 10
*When foundation wall is balanced with fill on both sides, foundation wall thickness may be
reduced by two (2) inches but shall not be less than eight (8) inches in thickness. All masonry
foundation walls shall be capped with solid masonry units.
(b) Foundation walls of poured monolithic concrete shall be eight (8) inches thick
whether reinforced or not. IF the superstructure is to be of solid brick or masonry
construction, the foundation wall shall be 10 inches thick.
(3) Pilasters.
(a) When a girder whose span exceeds 12 feet frames into a masonry wall, pilasters
of a minimum size of four (4) by 12 inches built integrally with the wall shall be
provided.
(b) Pilasters shall be required where the unsupported length of any foundation wall
exceeds 30 T, where T is the thickness of the foundation wall. Such pilasters
shall be not less than 16 inches wide and at least one and one-third (1 1/3) times
the thickness of the wall of which it is a part. Except pilasters shall not be
required in poured monolithic plain or reinforced concrete foundations walls of
buildings.
(4) Girder Bearing. Four (4) inches of end bearing shall be provided for girders framing
into foundation walls and when wood girders are used, an air space shall be provided
between the foundation walls and the ends and sides of the girders.
(5) Dampproofing. Masonry foundation walls of basements and crawl spaces shall be made
dampproof by the application to the exterior surfaces thereof of a continuous coat of
three-eighths (3/8) inch thick waterproof cement mortar or portland cement mortar plus a
coat of bituminous dampproofing material over the parging from top of stone to final
grade. One coat of bituminous dampproofing material shall be applied to concrete
foundations walls from top of stone to finish grade.
(6) Storage and Materials. Cement and aggregates shall be stored in such a manner as to
prevent deterioration or the intrusion of foreign matter. Any material which has
deteriorated or which has been damaged shall be removed completely from the premises.
Chapter VII. Masonry and Concrete Construction
6.20 MASONRY AND HALLOW MASONRY UNITS.
(1) Building Brick. By building brick is meant a structural unit of burned clay or shale, sand
lime, or concrete.
(a) All building brick shall be free from cracks, laminations, or other defects which
may interfere with proper laying of the brick or impair the strength or
permanence of the structure.
(b) Concrete building brick shall be manufactured from a mixture of Portland cement
and approved aggregates, such as sand, gravel, crushed stone, bituminous or
anthracite cinders, burned clay or shale, or blast furnace slag.
(c) All building brick shall be of a distinctive design or appearance, or marked so
that the identity of the manufacturer may be known at any time.
(d) The strength and absorption of all building brick manufactured from burned clay
or shale shall conform to the minimum requirements of Section IND 53.05(5)(a),
Wis. Admin. Code.
(2) Hollow Building Units.
(a) Hollow tile are the product of surface clay, shale, fireclay, or admixtures thereof,
molded to permanent hollow form for use as masonry units in building
construction.
(b) Hollow concrete masonry units are the products of Portland cement and suitable
aggregates such as sand, gravel, crushed stone, bituminous or anthracite cinders,
burned clay, or shale or blast furnace slog, molded to permanent hollow form for
use as masonry units in building construction.
(c) All hollow concrete masonry units and all hollow tile shall conform to the
provisions of IND 53.06, Wis. Admin. Code.
3.21 BASEMENTS AND BASEMENTLESS BUILDINGS.
(1) General. All basements/cellars shall be provided with a minimum of three (3) inch
concrete floor placed on a minimum of three (3) inches of three-quarters (3/4) inch
crushed road gravel. An inspection shall be called for and made prior to laying concrete
to construct the basement floor.
(2) Basementless Spaces. Basementless spaces may be used or constructed according to the
following specifications:
(a) The ground level shall be at least two (2) feet below any part of the wood
construction.
(b) In such spaces all debris, sod, tree stumps, and other organic materials shall be
removed and smooth surfaces free of pockets shall be provided. A minimum two
(2) inches thick concrete slab shall be installed.
(c) Where the floor level within the foundation walls is below the outside grade,
drain tile shall be provided around the exterior of the walls and connected to the
house drain tile. Special consideration shall be given by the Building Inspector if
water conditions exist that would require an interior drain tile.
(d) Foundation wall vents shall be provided located near the corner of such space.
Such vents shall have an aggregate free ventilation area equal to two (2) square
feet per 100 lineal feet of wall enclosing such space or a minimum aggregate area
of two (2) square feet. All basementless spaces shall be provided with a
minimum access opening of four (4) square feet. If access opening is in
basement wall and is kept clear and open except for screening which allows for
air movement, this opening may be substituted for the above required ventilation
area.
(3) Slab Construction. The entire area shall consist of a base of three (3) inches in
thickness of gravel or other approved material well tampered in place, over which there
shall be placed a vapor barrier covered with a layer consisting of four (4) inches in
thickness of concrete.
3.22 CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION.
(1) General. All building materials shall be of good quality conforming to general accepted
standards, including the following:
(a) Portland Cement shall conform to the “Standard Specifications for Portland
Cement” (A.S.T.M. Designation C150-62.) Air-Entraining Portland Cement
shall conform to “Standard Specifications for Air-Entraining Portland Cement”
(A.S.T.M. Designation C175-61).
(b) Concrete aggregates, except light weight aggregates, shall conform to the
“Tentative Specifications for Concrete Aggregates” (A.S.T.M. Designation C33-
61T) including the methods of sampling and testing.
(c) Lightweight aggregate for concrete shall conform to the “Tentative
Specifications for Light Weight Aggregates (A.S.T.M. Designation C300-60T),
including the methods of sampling and testing.
(d) The maximum size of the aggregates shall not be larger than one-fifth (1/5) of the
narrowest dimension between sides of the forms of the member for which the
concrete is to be used nor larger than three-fourths (3/4) of the minimum clear
spacing between reinforcing bars.
(e) Water used in mixing concrete shall be clean, and free from injurious oil, acid,
organic matter, or other harmful substances.
(f) Metal reinforcements shall conform to the requirements of the “Tentative
Specifications for Billet-Steel Bars for Concrete Reinforcement” (A.S.T.M.
Designation A15-62T), or for “Tentative Specification for Rail-Steel Bars for
Concrete Reinforcement” (A.S.T.M. A16-62T).
(2) All A.S.T.M. Designation or other standards mentioned herein shall mean that standard
or its current succeeding standards or designation.
(3) Air Entrained Cement. Air entrained cement shall be used when concrete is to be
exposed to the elements.
3.23 MASONRY CONSTRUCTION.
(1) General. All masonry walls above grade shall be of the type as specified in Wisconsin
Administrative Code, Building Code, Section IND 53.03 through and including Section
IND 53.07.
(2) Masonry Veneers.
(a) Materials used for masonry veneering shall have minimum dimensions as shown
in the following table:
TABLE C
Materials Minimum Dimension in Inches
Stone 3
Celular Architectural Terra Cotta 3
Architectural Terra Cotta Slabs 1¼
Brick (Clay, concrete, or sand-lime) 2¼
Cast Stone 1½
Structural Clay Tile 1¾
Other Approved Masonry or Thin Veneers As approved by the Building Inspector
In no case shall any type of veneering be considered a part of the required thickness of any
masonry wall or be considered a part of the wall in computing the strength of bearing walls.
Masonry veneer shall carry no weight except its own.
Such veneering on masonry shall be bonded into the masonry backing by a full header for every
300 square inches of wall surfaces, or by approved substantial noncorrodible metal tiles space no
farther apart than 15 inches vertically and 32 inches horizontally. When sheathing, other than
wood is used, the tiles shall be secured through to the studs. When veneering is used, special care
shall be taken to fill all joints flush with mortar around all openings.
No veneering in masonry shall exceed a height of 35 feet above foundation walls or other
approved support.
3.24 MORTAR AND CONCRETE MIXES.
(1) General. All masonry shall be laid up in mortar with cement, lime, and aggregates
mixed to a workable consistency in the proportions by volume herein specified.
Materials used in preparing gypsum mortar shall be measured by weight.
(a) Cement Mortar. Cement mortar shall be composed of one (1) part masonry
cement to three (3) parts of approved sand aggregates, or one (1) part of
approved Portland cement and a maximum of three (3) parts of approved sand
aggregates to which may added hydrated lime or lime putty not to exceed 15% of
the cement content by volume. All foundations and other masonry in contact
with the ground and cavity walls shall be laid up in cement mortar or masonry
mortars approved for this purpose.
(b) Cement-Lime Mortar. Cement-lime mortar shall be composed of one (1) part of
approved Portland cement to nor more than one (1) part of approved lime putty
or hydrated lime and a maximum of six (6) parts of approved sand aggregate or
shall be an approved masonry mortar.
(c) Lime Mortar. Lime mortar shall be composed of one (1) part of approved lime
putty or hydrated lime and a maximum of three (3) parts of approved aggregate.
Cement may replace equal volumes of lime in lime mortar, provided the cement
gaging is uniformly distributed by approved methods of mixing. Lime mortar
may be used in bearing walls not more than 35 feet in height.
(d) Gypsum Mortar. Gypsum mortar shall be composed of one (1) part unfibered
calcined neat gypsum plaster, and not more than three (3) parts of approved sand
aggregate. Gypsum mortar shall be used in all gypsum block masonry partitions.
3.25 MASS CONCRETE PROPORTIONS. Concrete for al construction shall contain as a
minimum five (5) bags of cement per cubic yard of concrete mix or design to produce a
minimum compressive strength of 3,000 pounds per square inch at 28 days. Concrete
exposed to weathering elements shall be air entrained. Concrete shall conform to the
latest edition of “Guide Specifications for Ready-Mixed Concrete Section of Concrete
Specifications” as developed by the Construction Specifications Institute, Inc.,
Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
3.26 LINTELS AND ARCHES. All openings in masonry walls shall be spanned by plain or
reinforced arches, steel lintels, or other approved noncombustible supports with not less
than four (4) inch bearing on the wall at each end. Plain stone lintels shall not be used on
spans greater than four (4) feet nor to support load concentrations on the wall less than
two (2) feet above the top of the lintel unless supplemented by structural lintels or arches.
All lintels shall be sufficient strength to support the superimposed load with a deflection
of not more than one three-hundred sixtieth (1/360) of clear span; and arches shall be
signed to support the load with provisions to resist the lateral thrust.
3.27 CORBELING, PROJECTING MASONRY, PILASTERS, OR PIERS.
(1) Limiting Projections. No masonry wall less than 12 inches thick shall be corbelled
except to support fire stopping around combustible door framing. The maximum
horizontal projection of corbels shall be not more than one-third (1/3) the thickness of the
wall nor shall the projection of any single course of masonry exceed one-third (1/3) the
height of the masonry unit.
(2) Hollow Walls. Corbeling of hollowing masonry or masonry built of hollow units shall
be supported on one full course of solid masonry not less than 12 inches deep.
(3) Changes in Block Size. In hollow masonry construction, if the size of the masonry unit
is decreased as the wall is constructed, the block course supporting the smaller unit must
be solid or filled with concrete.
(4) Pilasters and Piers. All wall pilasters and piers shall be built into the wall with a
masonry bond.
(a) Isolated piers shall be not less than 12 inches square nor more than 12 times the
least dimension in height when of solid masonry construction nor more than four
(4) times the least dimension when of hollow masonry unless filled solidly with
approved concrete.
(b) Isolated masonry piers shall be bonded as required for solid walls of he same
thickness and shall be provided with a cap stone or bearing plate of the full
dimension of the pier or with other adequate means for distributing the load on
the top.
(c) Pilasters shall be not less than four (4) inches thicker than the supported wall.
(5) Bearing and Anchorage of Structural Members. All structural beams and girders
producing concentrated loads shall have a bearing on solid masonry of not less than four
(4) inches thickness and shall project not less than four (4) inches into masonry walls
with adequate wall bearing plates provided.
3.28 ERECTION PRECAUTIONS. All masonry shall be protected against freezing for not
less than 48 hours after installation and shall not be constructed below 28 degrees F. on
rising temperatures or below 36 degrees F on falling temperatures without temporarily
heated enclosures or without heating materials or other approved precautions necessary to
prevent freezing. No frozen materials shall be used or shall frozen materials be built
upon. In warm weather, all clay or shale units of high absorption characteristics shall be
thoroughly wet before laying in the wall. All other masonry units, except gypsum units,
laid in other than lime mortar, shall be wetted before laying in the wall if the absorption
resulting from partial immersion in one-eighth (1/8) inch of water for one (1) minute is
less than one (1) percent. All masonry construction shall be adequately braced and
supported to insure its stability during construction.
Chapter VIII. Frame Construction
3.29 GENERAL. Wood frame construction shall be of either balloon, post and beam,
platform, or other approved system. (See Detail a.)
(1) Grades and Sizes. All lumber and timber used in local bearing members shall be sound,
free from rot and large or loose knots, and damaging diagonal or spiral grain; and shall be
of the structural grade corresponding to the stresses used in design. When the grade of
lumber is not identified in accordance with national design specifications for stress grade
lumber, the maximum allowable working stress for the species of lumber used shall not
exceed the lowest stress value given for that specie. All lumber sizes herein specified are
nominal sizes; and American Standard Lumber for dress sizes shall be accepted as the
corresponding minimum net dimensions on which all structural designs shall be based.
Except as herein provided for composite or built-up integrated units, or when approved
after test as specified in Section IND. 50.12, Wis. Admin. Code, no wood floor beam,
roof beam, joist, rafter, or framing timber shall be less than two (2) inches in nominal
thickness.
(2) Stress and Loading Requirements. For ordinary conditions of use and live loads, the
spans of joists and rafter shall be limited by Tables J-1, J-4, R-8, and R-10. See Section
3.29(3).
(a) Allowable Stresses. Allowable lumber stresses used in construction shall not
exceed the allowable stresses as established by the Department of Industry,
Labor, and Human Relations.
(b) Live Loads. The following live load shall be used in the design of structural
members for one and two family residential constructions:
Floor Joists – 40 pounds per square foot
Rafters – 30 pounds per square foot (slope 3 in 12 or less), 20 pounds per square
foot (slope over 3 in 12)
(c) Structural members shall not be spliced between bearing points. Where
structural strength is impaired by cutting, drilling, or inherent defects, such
member shall be reinforced in a manner acceptable to the Building Inspector.
(d) Girders. Girders may be of structural steel, reinforced concrete, solid wood, or
built-up wood members. Joints of girders shall be made over pier or column
supports only. Girder spans shall not be more than that allowed in Table No. 5.
(3) Wood Structural Design Data.
(a) The information contained in “Span Tables for Joists and Rafters”, American
Softwood Lumber Standard Sizes, PS 20-70, by National Forest Products
Association, Washington, DC, is an acceptable design authority under the
provisions of this Code.
(b) Plywood. All plywood when used structurally, including among others used for
siding, roof and wall sheathing, subflooring, diaphragm, and built-up members,
shall conform to the performance standards for its type in U.S. Products
Standards PS 1-74 for stoftwood plywood construction and industrial. Each
panel member shall be identified for grade and the type of grade mark of an
approving testing grading agency. In addition, all plywood when permanently
exposed, shall be of the exterior type.
(4) Stress, Grade Materials. Working stresses must conform to those established by the
Department of Industry, Labor, and Human Relations, State of Wisconsin.
(5) Bridging. In all ceilings, floors, attic, and flat roof joist framing, there shall be not less
than one line of bridging for each eight (8) feet of span and the bridging shall not be less
than one by three (1x3) inch lumber double-nailed at each end, or equivalent metal lateral
bracing of equal rigidity secured at the intersections. A line of bridging shall also be
required at supports where adequate lateral stiffness is not otherwise provided. Solid
bridging is also acceptable. Where two by six (2x6) inch ceiling joist are used, a
minimum two by four (2x4) inch stay-lathe may be substituted for required bridging.
Such stay-lathe shall be spiked securely at each joist and at each end to either stud or
rafter.
(6) Cutting and Notching. Bore holes in joists, girders, or beams shall be no greater than
two and one-half (2½) inches in diameter, and shall be located in the end one-quarter
(1/4) of span, and shall not be more than one-quarter (1/4) of joist depths. The top or
bottom edges of joists may be notched in the outer one-quarter (1/4) of the length not to
exceed one-sixth (1/6) of the joist depth. Notching the top or bottom edge of joists will
not be permitted in the middle half of the length of any joist. In studs of walls or
partitions, holes and notches made to receive piping or duct work, or for other fabrication
purposes, shall be cut not more than one-half (1/2) the depth of the stud. No more than
two (2) successive studs shall be so cut or bored unless they are doubled or otherwise
reinforced as required by the Building Inspector.
(7) Construction and Fastenings. All structural member shall be connected and fastened at
their junctions with connectors, bolts, lag screws, spikes, nails, straps, or other approved
devices or by approved gluing and in accordance wit ht eh recommended nailing
schedule in Table No. 4.
(8) Plates and Ribbon Boards. All walls shall be provided with a single bottom plate and
double top plate. Top plates shall be lapped no closer than 32 inches and at all
intersecting walls and corners. Plates shall be of the same width as the supporting stud
and each not less than two (2) inches thick. Plates shall be spliced above studs. Ribbon
boards which support floor or roof joists shall not be less than one by four (1x4) inches in
size, and shall be notched into the studs and nailed thereto as required by the nailing
schedule.
(9) Roof Rafters. Roof rafters shall be vertically supported at the ridge when the slope of
the roof is less than four (4) inches per foot. When the slope is more than four (4) inches
per foot roof rafters shall be vertically supported at the ridge or shall be adequately
trussed or tied together with not less than one by six (1x6) inch collar beams spaced not
more than 32 inches on centers and each rafter shall be fastened to the wall plate or
special plate provided. Roof rafter shall be framed opposite each other on the ridge.
(a) When collar beams are above the lower third of the rafters and ties are not
provided at the plate line, provision shall be made for tying the lower end of the
rafters to ceilings or wall construction.
(b) Ridge Boards. The depth of ridge boards shall not be less than the cut end of the
rafter.
(c) The depth of valley or hip rafters shall not be less than the cut end of the rafter.
The thickness of valley or hip rafters shall not be less than two (2) inches.
(d) Where dormers or gables are over six (6) feet in width the valley rafters shall run
through the ridge of the main roof. Where the ridge of the dormer or gable is
below the ridge of the main roof, one valley rafter shall run through the ridge of
the main roof.
(e) Factory constructed trusses approved by the State of Wisconsin Department of
Industry, Labor, and Human Relations may be used as an approved roof framing
system. The building plans shall indicate the approval number assigned by the
Department of Industry, Labor, and Human Relations.
The maximum spacing of trusses shall be two (2) feet on centers.
Roof sheathing shall be as specified in Section 3.30.
Ceiling finish shall be as specified in Section 3.34.
(10) Multiple Joists and Rafters. Floor joists under terrazzo, tile, bathtubs, or other unusual
loading conditions shall be doubled or otherwise reinforced to support the load. Floor
joists under partitions running parallel thereto shall be doubled or formed of built-up
sections or may be replaced by a solid section of adequate strength to support he loads.
Dormer windows and other opening sin roofs shall be framed with double rafters and
headers. Valley rafters on spans over 12 feet, measured horizontally, shall be doubled.
(11) Bearings and Anchorage. Floor joists framing into walls or girders hall be anchored,
tied, or nailed to secure continuity. The ends of all beams or joist resting on walls or
girders shall bear not less than four (4) inches or shall be supported in approved metal
stirrups or on wood clips or ribbon strips not less than two by two (2x2) inches in size.
Beams or joists framing from opposite sides shall either lap not less than six (6) inches
nor more than 12 inches and be securely bolted or spiked together. When framing end to
end, all joists, beams, and girders shall be secured together by approved metal ties, straps,
or scabs. Anchorage of wood joist into masonry walls shall be in accordance with IND
53.28, Wisconsin State Building Code.
(12) Joints in Girders and Beams. The joints of solid or built-up beams or girders shall be
made over columns or pier supports.
(13) Hung Ceiling. Ceiling joists when parallel to roof joists shall be two by four (2x4)
inches at the same spacing as the joists above and hung by not less than one by four (1x4)
inch hangers spaced at not more than six (6) feet. Ceiling joists, when at right angels to
roof joist, shall be two by four (2x4) inches spaced 16 inches on center and hung by not
less than two by two (2x2) inch hangers spaced at not more than six (6) feet.
(14) Joist Headers and Trimmers. All joist headers more than four (4) feet in length and
their trimmers shall be doubled. All tail beams or joists which are more than six (6) feet
in length shall be hung, in approved joist or beam hangers, or shall be fastened by
approved metal connectors. All double trimmer joists shall be spiked together. A
minimum two by two (2x2) inch ledger strip may be used in lieu of hangers or
connectors.
(15) Walls, Partitions, and Posts. The load-bearing value of the frame walls and partitions
or isolated post or struts shall be limited by “Wood Structural Design Data”, N.L.M.A.
All wood posts used in basements or cellars shall have concrete bases which extend not
less than three (3) inches above the finished floor and bear directly on the post footing.
In cellars or basements, all wall plates or stair stringers shall rest on top of the finished
concrete floor.
(a) Studs. All walls and partitions shall be constructed using studs of continuous
length. Such studs shall not be less than two by four (2x4) inches in size, not
more than 20 feet in length, and not more than 16 inches on center and a
minimum two (2) inch fire stopping shall be provided for every eight (8) feet of
height or at all floor levels. Nonbearing partitions only may be constructed with
the smaller dimension perpendicular to the wall.
Studs cut so as to impair their structural strength shall be reinforced as required
by the Building Inspector.
(16) Bracing. Corner posts shall be the equivalent of not less than three (3) pieces of two by
four (2x4) inch studs braced with not less than one (1) piece of one by four (1x4) inch
diagonal let into the studs. Diagonal bracing may be omitted when one-half (1/2) inch
plywood sheathing is provided in four by eight (4x8) foot sheets, or when one (1) inch
board sheathing is placed diagonally.
(17) Framing of Opening. All windows and door openings shall have double studs for the
full height of the door opening at jambs, with double headers or truss construction over
the opening, or by other approved methods or connection devices to support the
superimposed loads. The jamb studs shall be minimum two by four (2x4) inch studs
double with the inner stud extending in one piece from header to bearing securely spiked
to the outer stud.
Lintels over openings in bearing walls or partitions shall consist of double joists on edge
not less than herein specified or truss construction bearing on jack studs or other
approved construction affording adequate strength.
Spans less than four (4) feet two 2” x 4”
Spans four (4) feet to five feet-six inches (5’6”) two 2” x 6”
Spans five feet-six inches (5’6”) to seven (7) feet two 2” x 8”
Spans seven (7) feet to eight feet-six inches (8’6”) two 2” x 10”
Spans eight feet-six inches (8’6”) to 10 feet two 2” x 12”
Where headers support greater or lesser uniform or concentrated loads, or are subject to
other unusual loading conditions, calculations shall be submitted to prove acceptable
performance.
3.30 WALL AND ROOF SHEATHING, BUILDING PAPER, AND EXTERIOR WALL
WEATHERPROOF COVERING.
(1) Wood Boards. Except as otherwise regulated herein, the outside of all exterior wall and
roof structural framing of all buildings and structures shall be covered with wood board
sheathing one (1) inch in thickness and not more than eight (8) inches wide, over studs
and rafters spaced not more than 16 inches on centers. Wider sheathing may be used if
triple nailed to studs and rafters. All joints of such wood sheathing shall be centered on
studs and rafters unless end matched, tongued and grooved wood sheathing is used, in
which case no two (2) vertical joints of adjoining boards shall occur in the same space
between studs or rafters. All board shall be applied with tight joints except that under
wood shingles one by three (1x3) or one by four (1x4) inch board spaced center to center
according to shingle exposure may be used. Boards shall be tongue and groove,
shiplapped, or square edge with ends cut parallel to and over center of studs, rafters, or
roof joists with not more than two (2) adjacent boards breaking joints over the same
supported except at ends and at openings.
(2) Other Sheathing. In lieu of wood board sheathing on exterior walls and roofs of
buildings and structures as herein regulated, materials as shown in Tables D and E may
be used.
TABLE D – WALLS
Exterior Wall Sheathing
Minimum Thickness (inches) Maximum Stud Spacing on
Centers (inches)
(No edge blocking required)
Plywood 3/8 16
Approved Fiber Board 1/2 16
Gypsum 1/2 16
Expanded Polystyrene 1 16
TABLE E – ROOFS
Roof Covering and Type of
Roof
(No edge blocking required)
Plywood Roof Sheathing
Minimum Thickness (inches)
Maximum Rafter Spacing on
Centers (inches)
Wood & Asphalt Shingles ½ 16
Slate, Tile, & Asbestos
Cement Shingles ½
16
Flat Roofs (under 2½ : 12
pitch) 5/8 16
Truss Roofs (over 2½ pitch) ½ 24
(3) Building paper shall be used on all sheathing not water resistant, including plywood,
wood boards, and gypsum. All water resistant sheathing shall be identified with the
manufacturer’s label on each board and shall be approved by the Building Inspector. In
all other cases, sheathing papers, such as minimum 15 pound saturated felt or paper, or
other approved water resistant material shall be applied over all exterior surfaces of
exterior wall sheathing. Sheathing papers of high vapor resistance shall not be used as a
covering on exterior walls unless a material of high vapor resistance is used on the inside
of such exterior walls.
Building papers shall be applied with a lap of four (4) inches.
3.31 ROOF DECKING.
(1) Wood Roof Decking.
(a) Planks shall be tongue and groove or splined, minimum thickness shall be two
(2) inches. Maximum width shall be eight (8) inches.
(b) Planks shall be continuous over at least two (2) spans. All joints shall be cut
parallel to an over center of roof beans with not more than two (2) adjacent
planks breaking joints over the same support except at ends and at openings.
(c) Maximum span of two (2) inch plank shall not exceed the following:
1. Planks continuous over two supports eight (8) feet.
2. Planks over single span, six (6) feet.
3. Other spans or thicknesses may be used when calculated according to
standard engineering practice. Deflection shall be limited to 1/240 of
span.
(d) Tongue and groove planks having end matched end joints may be used to break
joints between roof beams provided:
1. Each plank bears upon at least two supports.
2. End joints between supports shall not occur in adjacent planks.
(e) Roof deck shall be blink and face nailed to roof beams in accordance wit the
nailing schedule – Table No. 5.
(f) When roof deck is also the finished ceiling surface, an approved vapor barrier
shall be installed between deck and roof insulation.
(2) Fiberboard Roof Deck.
(a) Thickness and joist spacing shall comply with manufacturer’s specifications and
be designed in accordance with roof loads designated therein.
(b) End joint shall be staggered and shall occur over supports at least three (3) inches
in width. Side joints shall be supported at eaves, ridge, and openings. Nails shall
penetrate supporting member at least one and one-half (1½) inches and shall be
spaced maximum five (5) inches apart.
3.32 SUB-FLOORING.
(1) Boards, Supporting Wood Strip Flooring.
(a) Minimum thickness, one (1) inch (nominal) for joists spaced a maximum of 16
inches o.c.
(b) Maximum width eight (8) inches.
(c) Subfloor may be installed diagonal to or at right angles to joists. If installed at
right angles to joists, finish floor shall be installed across subfloor.
(d) Board shall have ends cut parallel to and over center of joists with not more than
two adjacent boards breaking joints on same joist except at ends and at openings.
End matched T and G boards may break joints between joists provided two end
joints do not occur in same joist space in adjoining boards and each board bears
on at least two joists.
(e) Where header joist is not used, installed blocking between ends of joists at wall
for nailing ends of diagonal subfloor. Blocking shall also be provided where
subfloor is cut away for plumbing and heating.
(f) Provide at least one-half (1/2) inch clearance between subflooring and masonry
or concrete walls.
(2) Boards Supporting Other Flooring.
(a) Subfloor used as a base for wood block flooring applied by nailing shall comply
with paragraph (1) of this section.
(b) Subfloor used as a base for ceramic tile applied over concrete setting bed shall
comply with paragraph (1) of this section. Floor joists may be beveled and
ledger strips used to support subfloor as support for concrete setting bed.
(c) Resilient flooring, wood block flooring applied by adhesive and ceramic tile
applied by adhesive shall be installed over an underlayment in compliance with
paragraph (4) of this section. Board subfloor when used shall comply with
paragraph (1) of this section.
(3) Plywood.
(a) Material shall be at least Structural-Interior C-D or Exterior C-C sheathing grade.
Exterior type shall be used when any surface or edge is exposed to weather.
(b) Minimum thickness and maximum joist spacing shall comply with Table F.
1. Exterior C-C or Structural-Interior C-D sheathing grades only.
(c) Plywood shall be installed with outer plies at right angles to joists, and be
staggered so that end joints in adjacent panels break over different joists.
(d) Provide at least one-half (1/2) inch clearance between subfloor and masonry or
concrete wall.
TABLE F
Minimum Joist Spacing (Inches O-O)
Species of Plywood
Minimum Thickness
(inches)
Woodstrip & Block
flooring with T&G
edges
Woodstrip & block
flooring with square
edges & resilient
flooring
Douglas fir, Western
Larch, Southern Pine,
& Groups 1, 2, 3
Western Softwood ½ minimum
5 Ply
16 16
(4) Underlayment for Resilient Flooring.
(a) Underlayment shall be minimum one-half (1/2) inch structural-interior type or
exterior type plywood, or hardboard. Particle board may not be used for
underlayment except under carpeting. Other materials may be used as
underlayment when determined suitable by the Building Inspector.
(b) Top ply of plywood shall be at least “C plugged” grade.
(c) Hardboard shall be installed with smooth surface up.
(d) Nail to subfloor using the type of nail and spacing recommended by the
underlayment manufacturer.
(5) Plank Subfloor.
(a) Planks shall be T and G or splined; minimum thickness two (2) inches.
Maximum width eight (8) inches. Square edge planks may be used where strip
flooring with T and G edges is installed at right angles to plank or where a
separate underlayment is provided.
(b) Where practicable, planks shall be continuous over at least two spans. All joints
shall be cut parallel to and over center of floor beams with nor more than two
adjacent planks breaking joints over same support except at ends and at openings.
(c) Maximum span of two (2) inch plank deck shall not exceed the following:
1. Planks continuous over two spans, seven (7) feet.
2. Planks over single span only, five (5) feet.
3. Other spans may be used when calculated according to standard
engineering practice. Deflection shall be limited to 1/360 of span.
(d) Plank deck shall be blink and face nailed to floor beams in accordance with the
nailing schedule, Table 4.
(e) Loads from bearing partitions, interior columns, or other concentrated loads shall
be supported independent from plank deck.
(6) Finished Floor. Subfloor shall be covered with a minimum of one-half (1/2) inch thick
approved finished flooring material.
(7) Combination Subfloor-Underlayment. Plywood designed for a single floor system,
three quarters (3/4) of an inch thick may be used under the following conditions:
(a) Stamp indicating use of exterior glue.
(b) Tongue and groove provided.
(c) Nailing as per code schedule.
(d) Maximum joist spacing 16 inches on center.
(e) Outer plys laid at right angle to joists.
Chapter IX. Exterior Coverings, Roofing, Interior Finishings
3.33 EXTERIOR COVERINGS.
(1) General Requirements. All exterior wall coverings shall be of approved moisture and
weather-resisting materials of sufficient stiffness and properly attached to resist rain and
wind. All exterior intersections between wood or metal and masonry veneer shall be
caulked with elastic waterproofed material, except where metal flashed.
The bottom edge of the exterior siding immediately over any exterior wall opening shall
be so located as to permit the headflashing to extend under the siding and to be turned up
behind the siding.
(2) Types of Weather Wall Coverings. The following materials shall be accepted as
approved weather coverings of nominal minimum thickness specified:
Brick Masonry Veneers 4 inches
Stone Veneers 2 inches
Clay Tile Veneers 3/8 inch
Stucco or Exterior Plaster ¾ inch
Wood Siding – Bevel ½ inch at the butt
Wood Siding – Board 1 inch
Pre-cast Stone Facing 5/8 inch
Protected Combustible Siding Required Approval
Wood Shingles and Shakes 3/8 inch at the butt
Exterior Plywood 3/8 inch
Asbestos Shingles 5/32 inch
Asbestos Cement Boards 1/8 inch
Formed Metal Siding 28 gauge
(3) Aluminum Siding. Aluminum siding shall be allowed subject to the following
conditions:
(a) Such siding shall have a minimum thickness of .025 inch; provided however,
where insulation board is used as backing, the minimum thickness shall be .020
inch. Furthermore, the minimum thickness shall be .002 inch less to allow for
rolling tolerance.
(b) All siding or material being covered by such aluminum siding shall be in sound
condition.
(c) Horizontal aluminum siding shall not exceed nine (9) inches in width.
(d) All aluminum siding not backed shall be coated on both sides.
(4) Nailing Weather Boarding, Wall and Roof Covering. All weather boarding and wall
and roof covering shall be securely nailed with aluminum, copper, zinc, zinc coated, or
other approved corrosion-resistive nails into the supporting structure in accordance with
the recommended nailing schedule or the approved manufacturer’s standards. Shingles
and other weather covering attached directly to sheathing less than one (1) inch thick
shall be secured with barbed or other mechanically bonding nails of approved type; or
other common nails on furring strips attached to studs.
(5) Exterior Stucco. All stucco work shall be reinforced with approved metal lath or wire
fabric as herein specified; except when applied directly to a masonry base. The
reinforcing fabric shall be coated with zinc or other approved rust-resistive coating, or
shall be manufactured from corrosion-resistive alloys.
Type of
Reinforcement
Minimum U.S.
Gauge
Minimum Mesh
Inches
Minimum Weight
Pounds per Square
Yard
Metal Lath - - 1.80
Expanded Metal - - 3.40
Woven Wire 18 1 1.74
Woven Wire 17 1½ 1.41
Woven Wire 16 2 1.47
Welded Wire 18 4 square inches 0.67
Welded Wire 17 4 square inches 0.82
Welded Wire 16 4 square inches 1.10
(6) Roof, Slope, and Covering.
(a) Roofing. All roofs shall be covered with wood, asphalt, asbestos, cement, tile, or
slate shingles; or with a built-up asphalt; or tar coating with gravel or capped
with a mineral surface cap sheet; or with sheet metal. All roofing shall be placed
and nailed in approved manner. Plain tar paper roll roofing shall not be
permitted.
(b) Slope; Rise. The sloe of all roofs of buildings and structures when tile, asphalt,
or slate shingles are used shall be not less than four (4) inches rise to 12 inches
run, except as provided below.
Where built-up roofing with gravel slag or mineral cap sheet is used, the
maximum rise shall be three (3) inches to 12 inches run.
Self-sealing or interlocking asphalt shingles may be used when the slope of the
roof is a minimum of two and one-half (2½) inches rise to 12 inch run, providing
a double layer of 15 pound asphalt saturated felt underlayment is hot-mopped on
the roof overhang and extends up to a point at least 24 inches inside of the
exterior building wall.
(c) Wood Shingle Roofing. If wood shingles are used, they shall be No. 1 grade,
edge grain, and shall be of such length, thickness, and exposure as shown in
Tables G and H. Wood singles not be used on roofs having a slope of less than
four (4) inch rise per 12 inch run.
TABLE G
Wood Shingle Roof Covering
Minimum Length Inches Minimum Thickness
16 5 butts in 2 inches
18 5 butts in 2¼ inches
24 4 butts in 2 inches
TABLE H
Wood Shingle Roof Covering
Maximum Exposure for Shingle Length - Inches
Slope of Roof to 12 inches run 16 18 24
Rise 4 inches and over 5 5½ 7½
(d) Asphalt Shingles.
1. Asphalt shingles shall be approved Class “C” label (Underwriters’
Laboratories, Inc.) square butt strip shingles weighing not less than 235
pounds per square, or hexagonal strip shingles weighing not less than
180 pounds per square, or individual shingles weighing no less than 250
pounds per square laid over asphalt felt or similar felt of not less than 15
pounds per 100 square feet.
2. Starting row of all asphalt shingles shall be doubled. Such shingles shall
be nailed with aluminum, copper, or hot dipped galvanized nails. Nail
according to manufacturer’s recommendations.
(e) Asbestos Cement Shingles. Asbestos cement shingles with approved Class “A”
or “B” label (Underwriters’ Laboratories, Inc.) and tile and slate shingles of
durable quality shall be laid in approved manner over asphalt felt or similar
approved felt of not less than 30 pounds per 100 square feet.
(f) Flat Roof Covering. Built-up roof covering for flat roofs, having a pitch of not
more than two and one-half (2½) inches rise to 12 inches run, shall be approved
Class “B” (Underwriters’ Laboratories, Inc.) minimum three (3) ply roofing
consisting of three(3) layers of asphalt or tar saturated felt, each layer of not less
than 15 pounds per 100 square feet. Where tar o asphalt coating is used, the roof
shall be surfaced with pea gravel. All layers of felt shall be mopped solid.
(g) All other types of roof covering and manner of application shall be approved by
the Building Inspector.
3.34 WALL AND CEILING FINISH. Every room used for living, sleeping, dining,
cooking, or bathing purposes shall have the walls and ceiling of approved materials, or
finished in an approved manner as regulated by this code. Approved materials shall
include plaster, tile, wood, gypsum wallboard, and masonry units. All wall and ceiling
finishing materials shall have a minimum composite thickness of one-half (1/2) inch,
except that one-quarter (1/4) inch plywood or hardboard paneling is acceptable.
(1) Lathing.
(a) General Regulations. All lath shall be nailed in accordance with the nailing
schedule, Table No. 5, tied, laced, clipped, or otherwise effectively secured.
Internal angles, coves, arches, and junctures between wood, fiber insulation,
gypsum lath, and other plaster bases shall be reinforced with cornerites of metal
lath or other similar approved material, except where metal or wire lath is carried
around such intersections. No interior lath shall be applied until all exterior
framing of buildings or structures is covered.
(b) Gypsum Lath.
1. Gypsum lath shall be nailed to wood supports or attached to metal
supports by means of clips in an approved manner. Such supports shall
be spaced not to exceed 16 inches on centers for three-eights (3/8) inch
gypsum lath and 24 inches on centers for one-half (1/2) inch gypsum
lath.
2. Joints of gypsum lath abutting walls and ceilings shall be staggered.
Gypsum lath shall be applied with the long dimension at right angles to
supporting members, with joints broken in each course and shall not be
abutted tightly together, nor be more than one-quarter (1/4) inch apart.
(c) Fiber Insulation Lath. Fiber insulation lath, when used as a plaster base, shall
have a rough, fibrous texture to insure mechanical and suction bond, and shall be
nailed in an approved manner to wood supports spaced not to exceed 16 inches
on centers. Such nails shall be placed not less than three-eighths (3/8) inch from
the ends and not less than one-half (1/2) inch from shiplapped, tongued and
grooved, or interlocking edges. End joints, except in interlocking type lath, shall
be not less than three-sixteenths (3/16) inch, nor more than one-quarter (1/4) inch
wide. Shiplapped, tongued and grooved, or interlocking edges shall be fitted to
contact.
(d) Metal and Wire Lath.
1. The dimensions, sizes, and application of expanded, ribbed, and sheet
metal lath, and all types of wire lath shall comply with accepted
engineering practice. Expanded, ribbed, and sheet metal lath shall
provide a key sufficient to retain the plaster and shall weigh not less than
two and one-half (2½) pounds per square yard. Such lath shall be
fabricated from steel sheets, copper-bearing steel, or other approved
corrosion-resistive metals, and shall be pierced to provide a mechanical
key to retain the plaster by slitting, punching, expansion, and shall be
given a protective coating of rust-inhibitive paint after fabrication, or
shall be made from galvanized sheets.
2. Wire lath shall be not lighter than number 19 W. & M. gauge wire, two
and one-half (2½) meshes per inch coated with zinc or rust-inhibitive
paint.
3. Stiffened wire lath shall not be lighter than number 20 W. & M. gauge
wire, two and one-half (2½) meshes per inch, with number 24 U.S. gauge
V-rib stiffeners spaced not to exceed eight (8) inches apart coated with
zinc or rust-inhibitive paint.
(e) Paper-backed Lath. Expanded metal or wire fabric lath backed with integral
approved paper shall be fabricated from not lighter than number 24 U.S. gauge
zinc-coated metal sheets with maximum opening one and one-eighth by two and
one-half (1-1/8 x 2½) inches or number 16 W. & M. gauge zinc-coated wire with
not more than two by two (2x2) inch mesh.
(f) Lathing Accessories. All metal lathing accessories including corner beads, base
screeds, picture molds, metal casing, and similar accessories shall be fabricated
from not less than number 26 U.S. gauge zinc-coated steel sheets, and shall be
provided with prefabricated or expanded deformations or otherwise formed to
insure complete embedment and keying of the plaster.
(2) Plastering.
(a) Number of Coats. Plastering with gypsum hard-wall, lime, or Portland cement
plaster shall be applied in not less than three (3) coats when applied over metal or
wire lath and in not less than two (2) coats when applied over other plaster bases
permitted in this Code. Lime or Portland cement plaster shall not be applied
directly to fiber insulation lath or gypsum lath.
(b) Thickness. Grounds shall be installed to provide for the following thicknesses of
interior plaster, from face of plaster base to finished plaster surfaces, as regulated
in Table I.
TABLE I
Thickness of Plaster (inches)
Type of Base Residential
Metal or Wire Lath 3/8 inch minimum
Other Approved Types of Lath 3/8 inch minimum
Unit Masonry and Concrete Walls ½ inch minimum
Monolithic Concrete Ceiling 1/8 inch minimum, 3/8 inch maximum
If monolithic concrete ceiling surfaces require more than three-eighths (3/8) inch
of plaster to produce desired lines or surfaces, metal or wire lath shall be attached
thereto.
(c) Application to Masonry or Concrete Base. When masonry walls are plastered
they shall be stripped, lathed, and plastered to protect against moisture.
(d) Weather Protection. When interior plastering work is in progress, adequate
ventilation shall be provide, and in freezing weather the enclosure shall be
heated. Plaster shall not be applied to surfaces that contain frost.
(3) Drywall. All drywall shall be a minimum of one-half (1/2) inch gypsum board applied
and jointed per manufacturer’s specifications.
3.35 NAILING TO CONNECTING WOOD MEMBERS.
(1) General Requirements. The number of nails at each bearing and connecting wood
member shall be not less than the number shown in Table No. 5. A coated sinker or
cooler nail may be used in lieu of a common nail.
(a) Staples. Power-driven, divergent chisel point galvanized wire staples may be
used for fastening plywood, fiberboard, or gypsum wall sheathing, plywood or
hardboard underlayment, plywood roof sheathing, plywood subflooring, gypsum
lath, asphalt roof shingles, and the first ply only of two-ply system gypsum
drywall finish, provided that the gauge, crown, length, and spacing of the staples
for a particular material and condition of use are in compliance with accepted
standards and as regulated herein. Except that the gauge of staples used for
fastening structural wall sheathing, roof sheathing, and subflooring shall be not
less than No. 14.
(b) Power-driven, divergent chisel point galvanized wire staples or equivalent nails
not less than two (2) inches long, may be used in lieu of nails for fastening wood
boards one (1) inch (nominal) in thickness to studs, joists, or rafters, provide that
gauge of such staples is not less than No. 14. The number of staples to be used at
each stud, joist, or rafter shall be determined on the basis of one (1) staple for
each required nail.
Chapter X. Heating, Flammable Liquid Storage, Air Conditioning, Chimneys,
Fireplaces, Gas Vents, and Incinerators
3.36 HEAT PRODUCING APPARATUS FOR HEATING, INCINERATION, AND
ALLIED APPURTENANCES.
(1) General.
(a) Permit Required. Before proceeding with the construction, installation, erection,
alteration, or remodeling of any boiler, furnace, incinerator, or other heat
producing apparatus, a permit shall first be obtained from the Building Inspector
by the heating contractor. An application shall be filed by said contractor
specifying in detail the work to be done and by accompanied by the fee as set
forth in Table No. 1.
(b) Accessibility. The installation of heat producing appliances shall in all cases be
such as to make them accessible for cleaning, operation, and maintenance.
(c) Design Temperature. Heating systems for one and two family residences shall be
capable of heating the dwelling to 70ºF when the temperature outdoors is -15ºF
with a 15 mph wind. Manual J. Calculating Heat Losses, Second Edition, 1964,
National Warm Air Heating and Air Conditioning Association, or its succeeding
publication shall be an acceptable design standard for purposes of determining
heating requirements.
(d) Air for Combustion. Suitable provision shall be made where necessary for intake
of air needed for combustion of fuel burning appliances.
(e) Unsafe Heating Appliances. The Building Inspector shall have the authority to
seal any heating appliance regulated herein which has been installed in violation
of the regulations of this code, or which is found upon inspection to be in an
unsafe condition an to be a life, health, or fire hazard. It shall be unlawful for
any unauthorized person to break such seal.
(2) Heating Furnaces and Boilers.
(a) Definitions.
1. Heating furnaces and boilers shall include central furnaces, hot water
boilers operating at not in excess of 250ºF, and steam boilers operating at
not in excess of 15 pounds gauge pressure.
2. Central furnace means a self-contained, flue connected appliance
intended primarily to supply heated air through ducts to spaces remote
from or adjacent to the appliance located as well as to the space in which
it is located.
(b) Mounting.
1. Furnaces and boilers fired by combustible fuel shall be mounted on
floors of fire-resistive construction with noncombustible flooring and
surface finish, and with no combustible material against the unit. Where
solid fuel is used, fire-resistive construction shall extend not less than 18
inches at the front or side where ashes are removed.
2. Furnaces and boilers that are approved specifically for installation on a
floor or wall constructed of combustible material may be mounted in
accordance with the conditions of such approval.
3. Furnaces and boilers fired by combustible fuel located on the same floor
as sleeping quarters shall be isolated by at least a one (1) hour fireresistive
separation.
(c) Clearances.*
1. Clearance between the heat producing apparatus supply ducts and
combustible materials shall not be less than those recommended for use
by National Fire Protection Association Booklet 90B, a copy of which is
on file in the office of the Building Inspector. Listed clearances can be
reduced through a use of protection specified by the National Fire
Protection Association Booklet 90B.
2. Heating furnaces and boilers fired by combustible fuel shall not be
installed in confined spaces such as alcoves or closets unless they have
been approved specifically for such installation and are installed in
accordance with the conditions of such approval. Installation clearances
for furnaces and boilers in confined spaces shall not be reduced by
protection methods. Combustion air shall be provided.
3. Minimum clearance from supply ducts, risers, boots, and register boxes
shall be as recommended by the National Board of Underwriters.
*Clearance for gas appliances shall be as per current AGA or ASA Standards.
(3) Gas Appliances.
(a) Scope. The regulations of this section shall apply to all gas appliances utilizing
natural, manufactured, or mixed gas, and the gas utilization equipment shall be
installed in accordance with American Standard Association Code ASA 721.30 –
1969, which is also referred to as National Fire Protection Association Pamphlet
No. 54 of the same date and entitled “Installation of Gas Appliances and Piping”
or revisions thereto or as otherwise regulated by this Code.
(b) Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to this section, to-wit:
1. Draft Hoot. A device built into a gas appliance or made part of the flue
or vent connector from a gas appliance which is designed for the
following purposes:
a. Insure the ready escape of the products of combustion in the
event of no draft, back draft, or stoppage beyond the draft hood.
b. Prevent a back draft from entering the appliance.
c. Neutralize the effect of stack action of the flue or vent upon the
operation of the gas appliance.
2. Flue or Vent Concealer. The pipe connecting a gas appliance with the
flue or vent.
3. Gas Appliance. Any device utilizing gas fire, and especially designed to
provide space heating.
4. Gas Conversion Burner. A burner designed to supply gaseous fuel to a
boiler or furnace which was originally designed to utilize another fuel.
5. Gas Regulator. A device for maintaining and controlling a uniform gas
pressure.
6. Space Heater. A direct fired heating device mounted on or near the floor
for heating the room in which the device is located without external
heating pipes or ducts.
7. Wall Heater or Furnace. A space heater which is supported from or
recessed in the wall of the room being heated.
(c) Venting. All gas appliances regulated herein which require vents shall be vented
to an approved flue or vent.
(d) Description. All gas appliances shall be labeled with the manufacturer’s
identification mark, the maximum hourly input rate in BUT per hour, the type of
gas the burner is designed to use, and the symbol of the testing agency which
approved the appliance.
(e) Operating Instructions. The installer of any gas fired furnace or boiler, or gas
conversion burner shall post in a conspicuous place near the appliance, complete
operating instructions for such appliances, including the installer’s name and
business address.
(f) Safety Measures.
1. All gas appliances shall be provided with a quarter-turn shut-off valve
with an attached lever handle, so constructed that the valve can be easily
and quickly closed.
2. The main shut-off valve shall shut off the entire supply of gas to the
appliance, except where a pilot burner is used, a separate manual shut-off
shall be used to shut off the supply of gas to the pilot burner. Such pilot
shut-off shall be installed between meter and main shut-off valve and
shall be close to main shut-off valve.
3. All automatically controlled gas appliances shall be provided with an
automatic safety pilot device so constructed and adjusted that no gas can
flow through the main burner unless the pilot light is burning. The
operation of such device shall not depend on the closing of an electric
circuit to shut off the main gas supply.
4. Automatic safety pilot devices shall be so adjusted that the main gas
supply is shut off within three (3) minutes after the pilot flame has been
extinguished, except that on gas conversion burners with inputs in excess
of 400,000 BTU per hour such time shall be reduced to five (5) seconds.
(g) Gas Burners.
1. Gas burners in gas appliances shall be properly installed and supported to
prevent twisting, sliding, or dropping out of power position.
2. All burners shall be so located that they will be readily accessible for
operation, adjustment, or repair.
3. Baffles, when necessary, shall not interfere with proper combustion and
shall be locked in position.
4. Where a gas space heating appliance is connected to a chimney or gas
vent, the flue gas temperature at the inlet of the draft hood shall be set at
not less than 350ºF for interior chimneys, and not less than 425ºF for
exterior chimneys.
(h) Automatic Control.
1. All gas fired furnaces, and hot water boilers, including those converted to
gas firing, shall have automatic thermostatic control to close the
automatic gas valve in the event that excessive high temperatures
develop in the furnace or hot water boilers.
2. Such devices shall be provided for all gas fired steam boilers, as outlined
above, in the event excessive pressures develop in the boiler or the water
level in the boiler drops dangerously low.
3. Electrically operated safety controls shall not depend on the closing of an
electrical circuit to shut off the gas supply to the appliance.
(i) Gas Conversion Burners.
1. Before any gas conversion burner is installed, the combustion chamber
flue passages, smoke pipe, and the chimney, shall be thoroughly cleaned
of all rust, soot, and dirt. All rust and scale shall be scraped from the
edges of the firing clinker or cleanout doors, and the door jambs to obtain
a tight fit. Leaky joints on cast iron furnaces shall be re-cemented. A
smoke or other test shall be used to determine the effectiveness of the
repairs. All doors on the boiler or furnace, except the firing door, shall
be tightly sealed. The slots in the firing door shall be sealed. The fire
brick in steel warm air furnaces shall be removed except where it is the
only material that forms the sides of the fire pot.
2. The firing door on the furnace or boiler shall be arranged to open easily
to relieve pressure by filling or removing the door catch and providing a
spring device to hold the door closed.
3. Where a horizontal (in-shot) type gas conversion burner is installed in
the ash pit of a dry base boiler or gravity warm air furnace, the ash pit
shall be lined on the bottom of the sides up to the grate level with two (2)
inches of insulating firebrick or other approved insulation.
4. Movable smoke pipe dampers shall be removed. Other dampers which
are on integral part of the boiler or furnaces shall be removed or
permanently locked in a position which does not interfere with the
operation of the burner.
5. In down draft or revertible flue type furnaces or boilers in which the flue
passage turn downward after leaving the combustion chamber, the top of
the combustion chamber, or flue passage shall be vented to the smoke
pipe by a one (1) inch diameter or larger pipe. The relief opening of a
vertical or horizontal draft diverter should be at least one (1) foot higher
than the highest flue passage.
6. Where a bypass to the smoke pipe is provided in the construction of the
furnace or the boiler at the point where the flue turns downward, the
damper in the bypass may be partially opened and locked in place in lieu
of the required one (1) inch pipe.
7. The cross-section area of the flue or vent connector shall be not less than
one (1) square inch per 7,500 BTU per hour input of the gas conversion
burner. An orifice plate or neutral pressure point adjuster shall be
inserted in the flue or the vent connector to make necessary adjustment
of the burner. This orifice plate shall be located between the unit and the
diverter.
8. The draft diverter shall be located in the same room as the appliance.
(j) Gas Fired Space Heater. (Room Heaters)
1. Gas fired space heaters shall not be installed in bathrooms or shower
rooms.
2. Gas fired space heaters may be installed in individual offices and in
individual apartments, if such installation is in compliance with the
following:
a. Space heater installed is normally closed rooms having a volume
of less than 400 cubic feet shall be provided with an air intake to
supply outside air for combustion purposes
b. Space heaters shall be provided with an automatic safety pilot
device.
c. The burner of the space heater shall be enclosed with a metal
housing so arranged that there will be no open flame. The
arrangement space heater shield shall be such that there will be
no possibility of personal contact or combustible material contact
with the flame or the housing enclosing the burner.
d. Space heater installed in sleeping rooms shall be provided with
automatic safety pilot devices, and combustion air shall be drawn
directly from the outside.
e. Space heater shall be installed with clearances to combustible
construction as shown in the following table:
Required Clearance from Combustible Construction (Inches)
Type of Space Heater
Jacket, Sides, &
Rear
Projected Flue Box or Draft
Hood
Circulation or Radiating Space Heater 6 2
Wall Heaters (Wall Furnaces) None -
Gas Steam or Hot Water Radiators 6 2
f. Space heaters shall be placed so as not to cause a hazard to walls,
floors, curtains, furniture, open doors, or to the free movement of
persons within the room.
g. Gas fired space heaters which have been approved for mounting
on combustible floors shall be mounted in accordance with such
approval. Other types of gas fired space heaters shall be
mounted on noncombustible floors or on combustible floors as
regulated in this code.
(4) Oil Burners.
(a) Scope. The regulations of this section shall apply to all oil-burning equipment
and shall include all equipment connected thereto including tanks, piping, pumps,
control devices, and all accessories.
(b) Fuel Oil. Fuel oil used in connection with such burners to which these
regulations apply shall have a flash point of not less than 100ºF as determined by
the Tag close cup tester and shall be a hydrocarbon oil free from acid, grit,
fibrous, or other foreign matter likely to clog or injure the burners or valves.
(c) Installation of Oil Burners.
1. All oil burners shall be installed in an approved and workmanlike
manner. Combustion chambers, etc., shall be cleaned in accordance with
the requirements of Section 3.36(3)(i).
2. Where oil burners are installed in boilers or furnaces originally designed
for other fuels, the ash door of the boiler or furnaces shall be removed, or
bottom ventilation otherwise provided to prevent an accumulation of
vapors in the ash pit, unless the burner is of a type which mechanically
purges the ash pit.
3. Manually operated dampers shall be such that they cannot close off more
than 80% of the internal cross-sectional area of the smoke pipe.
4. Rooms in which oil burners are located shall be provided with adequate
ventilation to assure continuous complete combustion of the oil. Where
the oil burner is located in a room which does not have windows or doors
to the outside air, such room shall be provided with an opening or duct to
the outside air, or to a room which ahs windows or doors to the outside
air.
5. Operating Instructions. The installer of any oil fired furnace or burner or
oil conversion burner shall post in a conspicuous place near the
appliance, complete operating instructions for such appliances, including
the installer’s name and business address.
(d) Oil Burner Construction and Control.
1. All oil burners shall be of an approved type.
2. All oil burners shall be arranged to prevent abnormal discharge of oil in
the event of ignition failure or premature flame extinguishment by
automatic means specifically approved for the burner with which used.
3. Oil burning space heaters shall be provided with such controls only if
they are connected to an oil storage tank which is not an integral part of
the space heater.
4. All oil burners shall be provided with an approved method for manually
stopping the flow of oil to the burner from a point at a safe distance from
the burner.
5. Automatically controlled oil burners used in connection with hot water,
steam, or warm air heating systems shall be equipped with approved
automatic devices to stop the burner or reduce the fuel supply in the
event of excessively high pressure or low water in the steam boiler or
overheating in the hot water boiler or warm air furnace.
6. Oil burners which are supplied by gravity feed shall be equipped with an
approved constant level valve. Such constant level valve if not a part of
the burner or the oil tank shall be installed in the oil feed line of the tank
or as close thereto as possible.
(5) Recessed Heater sand Wall Heaters.
(a) Definition. Recessed heaters and wall heaters mean self-contained heating
appliances designed for incorporation in or permanent attachment to a wall,
partition, floor, or ceiling of the room being heated.
(b) Installation.
1. Recessed heaters and wall heaters shall not be installed in or attached to
walls, partitions, floors, or ceilings constructed of combustible material
unless approved specifically for such installation and installed in
accordance with the conditions of such approval.
2. Recessed heaters and wall heaters shall be so located as not to cause a
fire hazard to walls, floors, curtains, furniture, and doors.
3. Panels, grilles, and access doors which must be removed for normal
servicing operations of recessed heaters and of wall heaters shall not be
attached to the building construction.
4. Wall heaters installed in sleeping rooms shall be provided with automatic
safety pilot devices, and all combustion air shall be drawn directly from
the outside.
(6) Connections to Chimneys or Vents.
(a) Appliances required to be flue connected or vented:
1. Every heat producing appliance burning solid, liquid, or gaseous fuel
shall be connected to a chimney or vent that is suitable and safe for such
use except those appliances approved specifically for use without a flue
or vent connection. The main central heating devices shall be connected
only to masonry chimneys, or other approved chimney.
2. Gas burning ranges, hot plates, laundry stoves, and domestic clothes
dryers that are approved specifically for use without a vent may be
installed in accordance with the conditions of such approval.
3. Gas burning water heaters with inputs not over 5.000 BTU per hour, gas
refrigerators, counter appliances, room heaters except when installed in
sleeping quarters, and other gas burning appliances not provided with
flue collars that are approved specifically for unvented use may be
installed in conditions of such approval. Gas burning devices requiring
venting, other than central heating devices, shall be vented through an
approved vent and such vent shall terminate in the outside air in
accordance with the conditions of approval.
(b) Flue Pipes and Vent Connectors.
1. Materials. Flue pipes and vent connectors shall be made of
noncombustible material capable of withstanding the flue gas
temperatures of the appliances and of 24 gauge minimum thickness to
withstand physical damage. The material of vent connectors shall also
be resistant to corrosion.
2. Support. Flue pipes and vent connectors shall be securely supported, and
joints fastened with sheet metal screws or rivets.
3. Pitch. Flue pipes and vent connectors shall maintain a pitch or rise of at
least one-quarter (1/4) inch to the foot (horizontal length) from the
appliance to the chimney or vent.
4. Length. Connections to the chimney shall be as direct as possible and in
no case shall the horizontal vent exceed 75% of the vertical height of the
chimney above the flue connection.
5. Size. The flue pipe or vent connector shall not be smaller than: 1) the
size of the flue collar of the appliance, 2) the size recommended by the
appliance manufacturer, or 3) the size of the outlet of the draft hood that
is supplied by the manufacturer of the gas burning appliance. When
house heating gas conversion burners are installed the flue size shall be
that suggested by American Standard Z-21-8-1958, Table 1, Page 13.
6. Damper. No manually operated damper shall be placed in such flue or
vent connector.
7. Passage through Floors or Ceilings. No flue pipe or vent connector shall
pass through any floor or ceiling.
8. Flue pipes of liquid or solid fuel burning appliances shall not pass
through walls or partitions constructed of combustible material unless
they are guarded at the point of passage by:
a. Metal ventilated thimbles not less than 12 inches larger in
diameter that the flue pipe or vent connector; or
b. Metal or burned fire clay thimbles built in brickwork or other
approved fireproofing materials extending not less than eight (8)
inches beyond all sides of the thimble; or
c. In lieu of such protection, all combustible material in the wall or
partition shall be cut away from the flue pipe or vent connector a
sufficient distance to provide the clearance required from such
flue pipe or vent connector. Any material used to close up such
opening shall be noncombustible.
9. Not more than one opening shall be allowed in each chimney flue, other
connections be made by means of an approved junction box. One
additional opening for an incinerator may be made provided it does not
open into the same section of flue liner.
(7) Steam and Hot Water Pipes.
(a) Clearance.
1. Steam and hot water pipes shall be installed with a clearance of at least
one (1) inch to all combustible material except as specified in paragraphs
2 and 3 of this section.
2. At points where pipes carrying steam or hot water at not over 15 pounds
per square inch gauge pressure, or hot water at not over 250ºF, emerge
from a floor, wall, or ceiling boards may be less than one (1) inch, but
shall not be less than one-half (1/2) inch. Each opening shall be covered
with a plate of noncombustible material.
3. Hot water pipes on a system with automatic firing and with limit control
such that water temperature at the boiler or furnace cannot rise above
180ºF may be installed without clearance to combustible material.
(b) Protection.
1. Coverings or insulation used on steam or hot water pipes shall be of
noncombustible material.
2. Where steam pipes and hot water pipes pass through a floor, wall, or
ceiling of fire-resistive construction, the openings around them shall be
filled with noncombustible material to prevent the passage of fire.
(8) Air Ducts.
(a) Warm Air Supply Ducts.
1. All warm air supply registers shall be connected to the furnace or other
heating unit by means of fittings and ducts which are continuous and
substantially airtight throughout. Warm air supply ducts shall be
constructed entirely of metal or other noncombustible material equivalent
in structural strength and durability. The minimum thickness of metal
used for warm air ducts shall be of the U.S. Standard Sheet Metal
Gauges shown in the following table:
Round Ducts Diameter in Inches Gauge Rectangular Ducts Width in Inches Gauge
Less than 12 30 14 or Less 28
12 or More 28 Over 14 26
2. Joints and seams of such ducts shall be securely fastened. Slip joints
shall have a lap of at least one (1) inch and the units shall be securely
fastened together. Ducts shall be securely supported by metal hangers,
straps, lugs, or brackets. No nails, conduit, wiring, or pipe shall
penetrate through the duct walls.
3. Single wall ducts when passing through or contained in combustible
walls, floors, or ceilings shall have fire-sixteenths (5/16) inch clearance
to combustible construction, and shall be covered with one thickness of
asbestos paper weighing not less than 12 pounds per 100 square feet,
except that five-sixteenth (5/16) inch clearance and the asbestos paper
may be omitted on ducts from automatically fired forced air furnaces.
4. Ducts located in closets shall be covered with one-quarter (1/4) inch
approved noncombustible insulation and shall be protected from
mechanical injury.
5. Any open space around vertical ducts where such ducts enter walls,
floors, or ceilings shall be tightly filled with asbestos cement or other
approved noncombustible insulating material.
6. Warm air ducts in gravity systems and risers in forced air installation
shall be installed so that the same ducts or riser shall not serve both the
bathroom and any other room.
7. Warm air supply ducts shall not terminated in any garage area.
(b) Cold Air Return Ducts.
1. All cold air return registers shall be connected to the furnace by means of
fittings and ducts which are continuous and substantially air tight
throughout.
2. Portions of cold air return ducts within three (3) feet of the furnace shall
conform to the regulations of subsection 8-A-1 for warm air supply
ducts. The remaining portion of cold air return ducts may be constructed
of metal or other approved material, provided, however, that no material
more flammable than one (1) inch thick (nominal) wood boards shall be
used.
3. Spaces between structural framing members may serve as return ducts
provided such spaces are substantially air tight or are made tight with
heavy asbestos paper secured to such framing member. When spaces
between joists are used for this purpose, such spaces shall be closed with
metal, dense composition board, cement asbestos board, or similar
approved rigid material.
4. The interior of combustible return ducts shall be lined with metal at
points where there is danger of incandescent particles being dropped
through the register, such as directly under floor registers and at bottom
of vertical ducts.
5. Cold air return ducts from bathroom or garages shall not be permitted.
(c) Warm Air Registers. Where warm air registers are installed in combustible
construction the register box shall be covered with one thickness of asbestos
paper weighing not less than 12 pounds per 100 square feet and shall have a
clearance of five-sixteenth (5/16) inch from combustible construction, except that
five-sixteenth (5/16) inch clearance to combustible construction may be omitted
where an automatically fired forced air furnace is used.
3.37 FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS, STORAGE, AND EQUIPMENT. The rules and
regulations of the Industrial Commission of the State of Wisconsin, as incorporated in the
Flammable Liquids Code adopted by said Commission, and all amendments thereof and
supplements thereto shall prevail except where stricter requirements are hereinafter
provided.
(1) Fuel Oil Feed Systems for Heating Purposes. In the construction and installation of
fuel oil systems for heating purposes, only pump suction feed systems having anti-syphon
devices shall be used. The storage tanks to be used in connection with such systems shall
be located underground, outside the building, with the following exceptions:
(a) Not more than two (2) tanks shall be permitted in the basement. When two (2)
tanks are installed, there shall be installed a straight thru head valve in each tank,
in connection with the outlet arrangement approved by the Building Inspector. A
tank shall be not less than 220 gallons nor more than 300 gallons in capacity, and
shall be at least 14 gauge sheet steel. The fill pipe shall be at least two (2) inches
in diameter, and shall terminate outside of building at least three (3) feet from
any opening such as a door or window. The vent pipe shall be one (1) inch in
diameter and shall terminate outside of building at least two (2) feet from any
opening such as a door or window. The tank or tanks shall be mounted on an
incombustible stand and shall be at least nine (9) inches from the floor. Where
applicable, the requirements for inside tanks shall also apply to outside tanks.
(b) Fuel oil storage tanks of 1,000 gallons capacity or less may be installed under the
basement floors of all buildings which are not places of public assemblage. The
top of each fuel oil storage tank installed under this exception shall be at least
two (2) feet below the top of the basement floor. This subsection shall not be
construed to prohibit the use of auxiliary supply tanks as described in the
following subsection.
(2) Auxiliary Supply Tanks for Fuel Oil Heating Systems.
(a) Auxiliary supply tanks of the gravity or pressure type may be used if suitable
automatic safeguards are installed to prevent abnormal discharges of oil at the
burners. No such tank shall have a capacity in excess of 60 gallons. If more than
one auxiliary tank is installed in a single building, the total capacity of such tanks
shall not exceed 60 gallons.
(b) Where an auxiliary supply tank of the pressure or gravity type is located within a
building, the tank shall be not less than five (5) feet if of the gravity type, and if
of the pressure type, not less than 10 feet distant measured horizontally, from any
fire or flame. The tank shall be substantially and rigidly supported and otherwise
protected against mechanical injury.
(c) Tanks for systems under pressure shall be designed for six (6) times the
maximum working pressure and be tested and proven tight at twice the maximum
working pressure. The maximum working pressure shall not exceed 50 pounds
per square inch. All such tanks shall be provided with a reliable pressure gauge,
an air relief valve, and a suitable device to vent the tank in case of fire, both
discharging outside of the building.
(d) The use of gauging devices or test wells, the breakage of which would permit the
escape of oil or vapor within the building is hereby prohibited.
(e) Auxiliary tanks shall be filled by pumping from the storage tank except that
where the entire storage is contained in an auxiliary tank located inside the
building, a fill pipe shall extend from such auxiliary tank to a location outside of
the building. The fill pipe shall be so installed that in case of overflow, none of
the overflow will enter the building.
(3) Overflow Oil Return. The overflow pipe of auxiliary gravity type tanks shall not be
provided with valves or other obstructions, but in pressure type tanks the overflow and
supply pipes shall be provided with interconnection valves so designed that the opening
or closing of the overflow pipe shall likewise open and close the supply pipe. Where a
reducer is not used on the supply pipe at the pump, the overflow pipe shall be one size
larger than the supply pipe.
(4) Piping Used in Fuel Oil Heating Systems. Pipes shall be of black malleable pipe or of
copper tubing bearing the approval of recognized authorities. Suitable fittings of
galvanized cast iron or brass shall be used in connecting the piping and other fuel oil
equipment. All piping within the building extending in any position other than vertical
shall be laid under or within the concrete floor of the basement, and shall have a coverage
of concrete of not less than one (1) inch.
(5) Permits for the Installation of Flammable Liquid Storage Tanks or Other
Equipment Pertaining to the Use of Flammable Liquids.
(a) Before proceeding with the construction, erection, alteration, remodeling, or
replacement of storage tanks or other equipment pertaining to the use of
flammable liquids, a permit shall first be obtained from the Building Inspector.
Before the Building Inspector shall issue such permit, an application shall be
filed with said Building Inspector by the contractor or builder, specifying the
location, size, use, and capacity of such storage tanks or equipment, together with
the estimated cost of the work. If the application shows that the installation,
remodeling, altering, repairing, or replacements are to be performed in
compliance with the provisions of this Code, the Building Inspector shall approve
the same and shall issue a permit to the applicant for which a fee shall be charged
in accordance with Table 1 of this Code.
(b) Flammable Liquids Shall Include Liquified Petroleum Gas.
1. Liquified petroleum gas shall mean and include any material which is
composed predominantly of any of the following hydrocarbons, or
mixtures of them: propane, propylene, butanes (normal butane or
isobutane), and butylenes.
2. The term storage tanks or equipment shall be construed to include all
devices, piping, storage tanks, cylinder, installations for the use of
removable cylinders, and equipment pertinent to the use of liquified
petroleum gas.
3. All installations of liquified petroleum gas storage tanks or equipment
shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Code, with the Statues
of the State of Wisconsin and with any orders, rules, or regulations
issued by the Industrial Commission of the State of Wisconsin,
conformity with the standards for the design, installations, and
construction of containers and pertinent equipment for the storage and
handling of liquefied petroleum gases as recommended by the National
Fire Protection Association shall be prima facie evidence of conformity
with generally recognized standards for safety to persons and property.
4. A storage tank or installation for the use of removable cylinders erected
above the surface of the ground shall be considered a building within the
meaning of this Code, and the Zoning Code, particularly the building
setback provisions for yards.
(6) Underground Tanks, Abandoned, Out of Service, Removal.
(a) Temporarily Out of Service. Tanks shall be rendered “temporarily out of
service” only when it is planned that they will return to active service at the
location within 90 days. The following steps shall be carried successively:
1. Removal of a flammable liquid which can be pumped out with a service
pump.
2. Cap or plug the fill line, gauge opening, and pump suction, using
appropriate sealing compound on pipe fittings. If fill line and gauge
opening are equipped with caps which can be properly locked, the secure
locking of these caps are sufficient.
3. Leave the vent line open.
(b) Abandoned Tanks. Tanks which are no longer in service may be rendered
“temporarily out of service” pending their removal in accordance with the
procedure outline in Section 3.37(6).
(c) Leaking Tanks. All tanks found to be leaking shall be removed as per Section
3.37(6)(e).
(d) Change in Use. Whenever there is a change in use of a premises which no longer
requires the use of existing underground tanks, they shall be removed as per
Section 3.37(6)(e). This shall apply to all premises where the use has already
changed and all future changes in use.
(e) Removal of Tanks. Tanks shall be removed according to the following
successive steps:
1. Remove all flammable liquid from connecting lines and tank.
2. Disconnect and remove insofar as possible the suction, inlet, gauge, and
vent lines.
3. Cap or plug open ends of remaining lines.
4. Close all openings in the tank with pipe plugs before the tank is removed
from the ground.
5. Remove the tank from the premises within 72 hours from the time the
tank is uncovered.
6. Keep the tank tightly sealed with plugs or caps until it is removed from
the premises and during transportation upon its removal.
3.38 AIR CONDITIONING AND REFRIGERATION SYSTEMS.
(1) Permit Requirements.
(a) Permit Required. Except as hereinafter provided, before proceeding with the
construction, erection, or installation of any air-cooled, water-cooled, or
mechanically-cooled air conditioning or refrigeration system or unit in or to serve
any building, a permit shall first be obtained from the Building Inspector.
(b) Permits shall not be required for the installation of any air conditioning or
refrigeration system or unit that does not use water for cooling and where the
source of operating power is obtained by plugging in an electrical cord
connection to an electrical outlet. This paragraph shall be applicable to portable
units.
(c) Application for a permit shall be made by the installing contractor upon a form
provided by the Building Inspector, shall be filled out completely, and shall
provide the following information:
1. Name and address of contractor.
2. Location of premises where installation is proposed.
3. Name and address of owner.
4. Location of unit on premises, including distance to lot lines for exterior
apparatus.
5. Manufacturer’s identification, classification, and size of unit.
6. Nature of coolant.
7. If water-cooled, source of water and method of discharging waste water.
(Refer to Plumbing Inspection Department.)
8. Where water conservation devices are required, manufacturer’s name,
identification, classification, and size of equipment.
9. Such additional information as shall be required by the Building
Inspector.
(2) Exterior Structures. Where any unit of an air conditioning or refrigeration system is
located outside of the structure, said unit shall comply with setback requirements as set
forth in the Zoning Ordinance and said location shall be subject to approval of the
Building Inspector. Said location shall not by noise or sight be detrimental to adjoining
property.
3.39 CHIMNEYS.
(1) General Requirements.
(a) Height. Chimneys shall extend at least three (3) feet above a flat roof and at least
two (2) feet above any portion of the building within 10 feet.
(b) Corbeling. No chimney shall be corbeled from a wall more than six (6) inches;
nor shall chimney be corbeled from a wall which is less than 12 inches in
thickness unless it projects equally on each side of the wall; provided that in the
second story of two story buildings corbelling of chimneys on the exterior of the
enclosing walls may be equal the wall thickness. Corbeling shall not exceed one
(1) inch projection for each course of brick projected.
(c) Change in Size or Shape at Roof not Permitted. No change in the size or shape
of chimney, where the chimney passes through the roof, shall be made within a
distance of six (6) inches above or below the roof joists or rafters.
(d) Chimney Foundation. All masonry chimneys shall rest on a foundation located
on permanently undistributed soil at least four (4) feet below established grades,
or shall be supported on fireproof construction. No masonry chimney shall rest
on or be hung or otherwise supported from combustible floor or wall
construction.
(2) Construction.
(a) Masonry chimneys shall be constructed of masonry units or of reinforced
concrete and shall have walls not less than four (4) inches nominal thick.
(b) Masonry chimneys shall be self-supporting and shall support no weight but their
own.
(c) Water leakage around chimneys shall be prevented by flashing and counter
flashing. Saddles shall be built on the high side of chimneys on sloping roofs.
(d) The roof, floors, and walls shall be framed around chimneys so that no
combustible material shall be within two (2) inches of the masonry. Such space
shall be filled with noncombustible material at all floor and ceiling levels.
(3) Liners.
(a) Masonry chimneys for domestic heating plants shall be lined with approved fire
clay flue liners not less than five-eighth (5/8) of an inch thick or with other
approved liner materials that will resist without softening or cracking a
temperature of 1,800ºF.
(b) Fire clay flue liners shall be installed ahead of the construction of the chimney as
it is carried up, carefully bedded one on the other in approved mortar with close
fitting joints left smooth on the inside.
(c) In masonry chimneys with walls less than eight (8) inches thick, liners shall be
separate from the chimney wall and the space between the liner and the masonry
shall not be filled; only enough mortar shall be used to make a good joint and
hold the liners in position.
(d) Flue liners shall start from the base of the chimney, or, in the case of fireplaces,
from the throat of the fireplace. They shall extend, as nearly vertically as
possible, for the entire height of the chimney.
(e) Where two (2) or more flues adjoin each other in the same chimney a four (4)
inch masonry wythe shall be provided between the adjacent flues. The cross
sectional area of flues shall be not less than 63 square inches. In no case shall
any fuel burning equipment hereafter installed be connected to any flue unless
the cross-sectional area of the draft intensity produced by the flue is adequate for
such fuel burning equipment which may be connected to such flue.
(4) Masonry Chimneys for Incinerators. Masonry chimneys for domestic type
incinerators shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements for masonry
chimneys. All flues shall terminate in a substantially constructed spark arrester with
openings not greater than one-half (1/2) inch, or be provided with other suitable means
for avoiding discharge of fly particles.
(5) Cleanouts. Cleanouts or other approved devices shall be provided at the base of all
chimneys or ash pits to enable the flues to be maintained clean and so constructed that
they remain tightly closed with not in use.
3.40 FIREPLACES.
(1) General Requirements.
(a) Fireplaces shall be constructed of masonry or of reinforce concrete with back and
sides of the thickness specified herein. Firebrick at least two (2) inches thick or
other approved lining shall be provided. The total thickness of back and sides
including the lining shall be not less than eight (8) inches. See fireplace detail (b)
for typical construction.
(b) Factory-built fireplaces that are approved as a result of tests and listing by a
nationally recognized testing laboratory may be approved for installation. A
factory built solid fuel burning fireplaces shall be vented into an approved class
A chimney.
(c) Fireplace hearth extensions shall be provided of approve noncombustible
material for all fireplaces. Where the fireplace opening is less than six (6) square
feet, the hearth extension shall extend at least 16 inches in front of and at least
eight (8) inches beyond each side of the fireplace. Fireplace openings over six
(6) square feet shall be provided with a hearth extension of 20 inches in front of,
and 12 inches beyond each side of the fireplace opening. All combustible
materials shall be kept a minimum of eight (8) inches from the fireplace opening.
(d) Fireplaces constructed of masonry or reinforce concrete shall have hearth
extension of brick, concrete, stone, tile, or other approved noncombustible
material properly supported and with no combustible material against the
underside thereof. Wooden forms or centers used during the construction of
hearth and hearth extensions shall be removed when the construction is complete.
(e) Spaces between fireplaces and combustible material shall be firestopped by
placing noncombustible material to a depth of one (1) inch at the bottom of such
spaces.
(f) Clearances from Combustible Construction. All wooden beams, headers, and
joists shall be trimmed away from fireplaces for distance of not less than two (2)
inches at all sides thereof. Headers supporting trimmer arches shall be not less
than 16 inches from the face of the chimney breast and trimmers shall be not less
than six (6) inches from the inside faces of nearest flue.
3.41 GAS VENTS.
(1) General Requirements.
(a) Type of Vents Which May be Used. Gas appliance vents that do not conform to
the requirements of this article for chimneys shall be of one of the following
types installed as required by this section.
1. Type B Gas Vents. Vent piping of noncombustible corrosion resistant
material approved as a result of tests and listing by a nationally
recognized testing laboratory for venting of gas appliances.
2. Type BW Gas Vents. Vent piping of noncombustible corrosion resistant
material approved as a result of test and listing by a nationally
recognized testing laboratory for venting recessed gas heaters.
3. Type C Gas Vents. Vent piping of single wall galvanized iron shall not
be less than No. 24 gauge or of other approved noncombustible corrosion
resistant material.
(b) Height. Vent shall extent at least two (2) feet above the point of departure from
the roof and two (2) feet above any portion of the building closer than 10 feet.
Gas vents need not comply with this provision when equipped with an approved
device that assures proper and effective venting as installed. Through the wall,
vents shall terminate not less than 18 inches from any openable door or window,
and 18 inches above exterior grade.
(c) Use Limits.
1. Type B gas vents shall be used only with approved gas appliances which
produce flue gas temperatures not in excess of 550ºF. They shall not be
used for venting the following:
a. Incinerators;
b. Appliances which may be converted readily to the use of solid or
liquid fuel;
c. Boilers and furnaces, other than attic furnaces, except where
specific approval is obtained from the Building Inspector for the
use of Type B gas vents.
2. Type BW gas vents shall be used only with approved recessed gas
heaters.
3. Type C gas vents shall be used only for runs directly from the spaces in
which the appliance is located through the roof to the outer air.
3.42 DOMESTIC TYPE INCINERATORS.
(1) Application.
(a) This section applies to direct-fed incinerators having a fire-box or charging
compartment of not over five (5) cubic feet in capacity when used in dwellings.
(2) Gas Burner Connections. Where a gas burner is used, a shut-off cock shall be provided
at an accessible location in the gas line to the burner. Incinerators furnished with means
for automatic ignition of the gas at the main burner shall be equipped with a device which
will automatically shut off the main gas supply in the event the means of ignition
becomes inoperative, or the means of keeping the valve of the device becomes
inoperative, or both.
(3) Mounting.
(a) Domestic type incinerators, except as hereinafter provided shall be mounted on
floors of fire-resistive construction with noncombustible flooring or surface
finish and with no combustible material against the underside thereof. Such
construction shall extend not less than 12 inches beyond the incinerator base on
all sides, except hat at the front or side where ashes are removed, it shall extend
not less than 18 inches beyond the incinerator.
(b) Domestic type incinerators that are specifically approved for installation on a
combustible floor may be mounted in accordance with the conditions of such
approval.
(4) Clearances.
(a) Domestic type incinerators, except as provided herewith, shall be installed to
provide clearances between the unit and woodwork or other combustible
material, of not less than 36 inches at the sides and top, and not less than 48
inches at the front, an in no case the clearance above the charging door be less
than 48 inches.
(b) Domestic type incinerators that are specifically approved for installation with
clearance less than specified above may be installed in accordance with the
conditions of such approval, provided that in any case, the clearances shall be
sufficient to afford ready accessibility for firing, cleanout, and any necessary
servicing, and with a minimum clearance of three (3) inches between the sides
and combustible material.
(c) Domestic type incinerators may be installed in rooms, but not in confined spaces
such as alcoves, with reduced clearances to woodwork or other combustible
material, provided that the combustible material is protected with an approved
protective material, but in no case shall this clearance be less than three (3)
inches to the protection.
(5) Chimneys for Incinerators.
(a) Domestic type incinerators shall be connected to a chimney suitable for solid fuel
burning appliances.
(b) Chimneys used for incinerators shall be provided with a heavy, galvanized screen
on top for fire protection or be provided with other suitable means of avoiding
discharge of fly particles. Such screen shall be kept in repair at all times.
(6) Flue Pipes for Incinerators.
(a) Domestic type incinerator flue pipes, except as herein provided shall be installed
to provide clearance of not less than 18 inches to woodwork or other combustible
material.
(b) Domestic type incinerator flue pipes may be installed in rooms, but not in
confined spaces such as alcoves, with reduced clearances to woodwork or other
combustible material provided the combustible material is protected with an
approved protective material.
(c) Domestic type incinerator flue pipes shall not pass through any combustible wall
or partition unless protected at the point of passage in accordance with Section
3.36(6)(b) 7 and 8.
(7) Refuse Chutes. Refuse chutes shall not feed directly into incinerators.
Chapter XI. Garages
3.43 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS (See Detail (a).)
(1) Definitions.
(a) An attached private garage shall mean a private garage attached directly to the
principal building, or attached by means of an enclosed or open breezeway,
porch, terrace, or vestibule, or a private garage so constructed as to form an
integral part of the principal building.
(b) A detached private garage shall mean a private garage entirely separated from the
principal building.
(c) One-hour fire-resistive construction shall include the following assemblies and
materials:
1. Two (2) inch brick or stone veneer.
2. Metal lath or perforated rock lath and three-fourths (3/4) inch of plaster.
3. Five-eighths (5/8) inch of vermiculite plaster board.
4. Five-eighths (5/8) inch fire code gypsum plaster board.
(2) Locations – Detached Garages. Detached garages shall be governed by the following
unless otherwise provided for in appropriate zoning codes.
(a) Garages of wood frame construction shall be located not less than 10 feet from
any residence building, except that such distance may be reduced to not less than
five (5) feet when the adjacent wall is protected with not less than one (1) hour
fire resistive construction.
(b) Garages of masonry wall construction shall not be located less than five (5) feet
from any residence building.
(3) Area. All private garages shall be limited in area as regulated in this section.
(a) Ordinary construction (masonry walls), 1,200 square feet.
(b) Unprotected noncombustible frame construction, 720 square feet.
(c) Wood frame construction, 720 square feet.
(4) Foundations and Footings. Attached private garages shall be provided with the same
type footings and foundations as required herein for the principal building. Detached
private garages may be built with a continuous floating slab of reinforced concrete not
less than four (4) inches in thickness. Reinforcement shall be a minimum of six by six (6
x 6) inches No. 10 x 10 wire mesh. The slab shall be provided with a thickened edge all
around, eight (8) inches wide and eight (8) inches below top of slab. Exterior wall curbs
shall be provided not less than four (4) inches above the finished ground grade adjacent
to the garage. Bolts three-eighths (3/8) inches in diameter with nuts and washers
attached, six (6) inches long, shall be embedded three (3) inches in the concrete curb of
detached garages eight (8) feet on centers.
(5) Floor Surfaces. The floor in all private garages shall be of concrete construction. No
openings or pits in the floor shall be permitted, except for drainage.
(6) Construction. Private garages shall be constructed as follows (See detail (c) for
detached garages):
(a) Load bearing foundation walls and piers, masonry walls, and partitions shall be
constructed as regulated herein except as stated above.
(b) Detached private garages of wood frame construction shall be constructed with
the following minimum requirements:
1. Studs may have a maximum spacing of 24 inches on centers.
2. Diagonal corner bracing may be applied on the inside surface of studs.
3. Corner posts may consist of two (2) two by four (2 x 4) inch studs or a
single four by four (4 x 4) inch stud.
4. Horizontal bracing and collar beams may be two by six (2 x 6) inch with
a maximum spacing of four (4) foot on centers.
(c) Attached private garage shall be of the same type of construction as that of the
principal building and as further regulated in this Code.
(7) Attached Private Garages. Private garages may be attached to or made a part of
residence buildings when in compliance with the following regulations:
(a) All walls in common with a principal building and attached private garage shall
be of not less than one (1) hour fire-resistive construction on garage interior.
(b) Where a private garage is part of a building having habitable rooms over such
garage, there shall be provided a horizontal and vertical separation between the
two (2) occupancies of not less than two (2) hour fire resistive construction,
except that in lieu thereof, the spaces between the joists and studs of the floor and
wall shall be filled with approved noncombustible material four (4) inches in
thickness and protected with one (1) hour fire resistive construction.
(c) An attached private garage may have a door connecting directly into the principal
building, provided that floor of such garage is at least eight (8) inches below the
floor of such principal building. Such door shall be a self-closing metal clad
door or solid wood door not less than one and three quarter (1¾) inches in
thickness. A maximum 100 square inches of one-quarter (1/4) inch stationary
wire glass window may be permitted in such door.
(d) All open flame equipment shall be effectively separated by not less thane one (1)
hour fire resistive wall, floor, or ceiling; however, suspended furnaces or direct
fired units that are fired with a liquid fuel or gas may be used without an
enclosure, provided that they are located at least seven (7) feet above the floor
and at least six (6) inches from any combustible wall or ceiling. All units shall
be supported by noncombustible brackets or hangers.
Chapter XII. Miscellaneous and Violations
3.44 NEW MATERIALS AND METHODS. All new materials, methods of construction,
devices, and equipment shall be approved by the Building Inspector for use in buildings
by the procedure herein provided when they are provided to be the equal of those
specifically required by this Code; or he may adopt the recommendations and approvals
of the Department of Industry, Labor, and Human Relations, State of Wisconsin, or such
other committee as may be established by this or other local ordinances.
3.45 TESTS. Unless based on accepted engineering design, all new building materials,
appliances, equipment, systems, or methods of construction not provided for in this Code
shall be subjected to tests that simulate the actual conditions which occur in normal use.
Such tests shall be made at the expense of the applicant at an independent testing
laboratory and copies of the test results shall be kept on file in the office of the Building
Inspector.
The Building Inspector may accept duly authenticated reports from recognized
authoritative sources in respect to the use of any new materials, methods, or systems of
construction complying with applicable specifications and standards of accepted
engineering practices or any such new materials, methods, or systems of construction
approved by the Department of Industry, Labor, and Human Relations, State of
Wisconsin.
3.46 PREFABRICATED DWELLINGS OR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS. Prefabricated
assemblies not capable of design by accepted engineering analysis shall be subjected to
tests. When prefabricated assemblies are not readily accessible for inspection at the site,
a registered engineer or architect of the State in which the assembly is manufactured shall
furnish a certified report of inspection. All tests and inspection records shall be
accessible to the Building Inspector at all times during fabrication and erection of the
building or assembly unit or such records as he may designate shall be filed with him.
3.47 IDENTIFICATION OF PRODUCTS. All materials shall be identified by the approved
label, the grade mark, the trademark, or by other approved manufacturer’s identification.
3.48 INVALIDITY OF PART. In any section, subsection, paragraph, clause, or provision of
this Code shall be adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the provisions
so adjudged, and the rest of this Code shall remain valid and effective.
3.49 VIOLATIONS. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, use, occupy, or maintain
any building or structure in violation of any provisions of this Code, or to cause, permit,
or suffer any such violation to be committed. Any person violating any of the provisions
of this Chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $1.00 or
more than $200.00, together with the costs of prosecution and, in default of payment
thereof, shall be imprisoned for a period of not less than one (1) day or more than six (6)
months or until such forfeiture and costs are paid. It shall be the responsibility of the
offender to abate the violation as expeditiously as possible, and each day that such
violation is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
If, in any action, a permit was issued, it shall not constitute a defense, nor shall any error,
oversight, or dereliction of duty on the part of the Building Inspector constitute a defense.
3.50 FAILURE TO OBTAIN PERMIT. It shall be unlawful to commence work prior to
obtaining a permit therefore. Double fees shall be charged if work is commenced prior to
the issuance of a permit.
TABLE NO. 2
Room Areas
(Reference 3.15(5))
Category Requirement Minimum Dimension
Living Room 160 square feet 11 feet
Living Room with Dining Space 180 square feet
Dining Room 80 square feet
Kitchen-Usable Floor Area 60 square feet 6 feet
Bedroom 100 square feet
Other Habitable Room 70 square feet
Bathroom See Section 3.15(9)(d)






TABLE NO. 4
Building Element Nail Type Number and Distribution
Stud to plate Common-toe nail 4-8d
Stud to plate Common-direct 2-16d
Double studs Common-direct 16d 30” o.c.
Corner studs Common-direct 16d 30” o.c.
Sole plate to joist or blocking
Common 16d 16” o.c.
Double cap plate Common-direct 16d 24” o.c.
Cap plate laps Common-direct 2-16d
Ribbon strip – 6” or less Common-direct 2-10d each bearing
Ribbon strip – over 6” Common-direct 3-10d each bearing
Roof rafter to plate Common-toe nail 3-16d
Roof rafter to ridge Common-direct 2-16d each rafter
Jack rafter to hip/valley Common-toe nail 3-10d
Floor joists to studs Common-direct 5-10d or 3-16d
Ceiling joists or studs Common-direct 4-10d or 2-16d
Floor joist to sill or girder Common-toe nail 2-16d
Ledger strip Common-direct 2-16d at each joist
Ceiling joists to plate Common-toe nail 2-16d
Ceiling joists to rafters Common-direct 3-16d
Ceiling joists (laps over
partition) Common-direct 3-16d
Collar beam – 1” thick Common-direct 4-10d
Collar beam – 2” thick Common-direct 2-16d
Bridging to joists Common-direct 2-8d each end
Diagonal brace (to stud and
plate) Common-direct 2-8d each bearing
Tail beams to headers Common-end nail 3-16d
Header beams to trimmers Common-end nail 3-16d each header
1” sub-flooring 6” or less Common-direct 2-8d each joist
1” sub-flooring 8” or more Common-direct 3-8d each joist
2” sub-flooring Common-direct 2-16d each joist
1” sheathing – 6” or less Common-direct 2-8d each stud or rafter
1” sheathing – over 6” Common-direct 3-8d each stud or rafter
Plywood sheathing Common-direct 8d 5” o.c. exterior edges
Plank roof decking and subfloor
Common-direct
4” or 6” wide 2-10d
8” wide 3-10d
Roof sheathing – 6” or less Common-direct 2-8d each rafter
Roof sheathing – over 6” Common-direct 3-8d each rafter
Fiber Board sheathing Large head 7-No. 11gx1¾” per bearing
Polystyrene Large head Under shingles 6” o.c.
Gypsum sheathing Large head
Shingles – wood 8” or less Corrosion-resistive
2-length to penetrate sheathing
Shingles – over 8” Corrosion-resistive
3-length to penetrate sheathing
Weather boarding Corrosion resistive 2-8d each bearing
Corrosion resistive roofing 6 per shingle length to
Shingles – asphalt nail penetrate sheathing
Plywood subfloor Common-direct
8d panel edges 6” o.c.
Intermediate 10” o.c.
Gypsum lath
Common-direct
For 3/8” – 13 Ga. 1 1/8”,
19/64” Dia. Head-Flat
For ½” – 13 Ga. 1¼”, 19/64”
Dia. Head-Flat
3d blue lathing nail
16” width require 4 nails per
lath each support
24” width require 5 nails per
lath each support
Shingle nails shall penetrate not less than 3/4” into nailing strips, sheathing, or supporting
construction except as otherwise provided in paragraph 3.41(4)
TABLE NO. 5
Minimum Girder Size
A36 Steel – F = 22,000 PSI
A. Girders Supporting First Floor Joists, One Story Building – No Roof Loading.
Assumed Load
Span C to C of
Bearing
Width of Floor
Tributary to Beam Size of Steel Beam
LL = 44 PSF
Partitions = 10 PSF
DL Floor = 20 PSF
DL Ceiling = 10 PSF
LL Attic = 20 PSF
100 PSF
7’ 10’-12’ 4 WF 13
7’ 12’-18’ 6 B 12
8’ 10’-12’ 6 B 12
8’ 12’-18’ 8 B 13
9’ 10’-12’ 6 B 12
9’ 12’-18’ 8 B 15
10’ 10’ 6 B 12
10’ 10’-14’ 8 B 13
10’ 14’-18’ 8 WF 17
11’ 10’ 8 B 13
11’ 10’-14’ 8 WF 17
11’ 14’-18’ 8 WF 20
12’ 10’ 8 B 15
12’ 10’-14’ 8 WF 17
12’ 14’-18’ 8 WF 24
B. Girders Supporting First Floor Joists, Two Story Building – No Roof Loading
Assumed Load
Span C to C of
Bearing
Width of Floor
Tributary to Beam Size of Steel Beam
LL 1st = 40 PSF
Partitions 1st = 10 PSF
DL 1st = 20 PSF
LL 2nd = 40 PSF
Partitions 2nd = 10 PSF
DL 2nd = 20 PSF
Ceiling = 10 PSF
LL Attic = 20 PSF
170 PSF
7’ 10’-12’ 6 B 12
7’ 12’-18’ 8 B 15
8’ 10’-12’ 8 B 15
8’ 12’-18’ 8 WF 17
9’ 10’ 8 B 15
9’ 10’-14’ 8 WF 17
9’ 14’-18’ 8 WF 20
10’ 10’ 8 B 15
10’ 10’-14’ 8 WF 20
10’ 14’-18’ 10 WF 21
11’ 10’-12’ 8 WF 20
11’ 12’-16’ 10 WF 25
11’ 16’-18’ 10 WF 25
12’ 10’-12’ 10 WF 21
12’ 12’-16’ 12 WF 27
12’ 16’-18’ 12 WF 27
NOTE: Where Girders support greater or lesser uniform or concentrated loads, or are subject to other
unusual loading condition, calculations shall be submitted to prove acceptable performance.
Chapter XX. Provisions Applicable to Hales Corners
3.100 SCOPE. Where the provisions of Chapter XX conflict with provisions of preceding
chapters of Chapter 3, the provisions of Chapter XX shall prevail.
3.101 BUILDING SITE AREA.
(1) The required building site area for a new building shall be as follows:
SQUARE FOOTAGE REQUIREMENTS
Families Basement Bedrooms
Required Square Feet
1 Yes 1 900
1 No 1 1,000
1 Yes 2 1,000
1 No 2 1,100
1 Yes 3 1,100
1 No 3 1,200
1 Yes 4 1,200
1 No 4 1,300
TRI-LEVEL HOMES
Families Bedrooms Required Square Feet
1 1 900
1 2 1,000
1 3 1,100
1 4 1,200
MULTIPLE FAMILY UNITS
Basement Bedrooms Required Square Feet per Family Unit
Yes 1 700
No 1 800
Yes 2 900
No 2 1,000
Yes 3 1,000
No 3 1,100
ONE AND ONE-HALF AND TWO STORY SINGLE FAMILY HOMES
Basement Bedrooms First Floor Required Square Feet
Total Required Square
Feet
Yes 2 900 1,100
No 2 1,000 1,200
Yes 3 900 1,300
No 3 1,000 1,400
(2) Before the second floor area can be considered as square footage for building size
requirements for one and one-half and two-story single family homes, the following
conditions must be met:
(a) A finished stairway to the second floor must be provided.
(b) Rough flooring must be installed on the second floor.
(c) The plan must be approved for finished ceiling height of seven (7) feet six (6)
inches in the livable portion of the second floor area, and only such second floor
area as provides such seven (7) foot six (6) inches ceiling height shall be
considered as area for the minimum square feet building requirements.
(d) Initial construction shall provide for finished roof lines and window openings.
(e) The first floor ceiling joist shall be two (2) feet by eight (8) feet minimum.
(3) Measuring. In measuring square footage for a split-level residence, all areas without a
living area beneath shall be used in computing the first floor area. Garages and
breezeways shall not be included in any computation. When the structure shall be
composed of living quarters as well as a business area attached thereto the gross floor
space of said living quarters shall contain an area of at least 1,100 square feet and the
business portion of said structure shall contain an additional 300 square feet, and the
arrangement of said space shall be subject to the approval of the Building Inspector and
the Building Board.
3.102 FIRE LIMITS: CLASSES OF CONSTRUCTION.
(1) State Code. The Definitions and Standards of the Department of Industry, Labor, and
Human Relations, Chapter IND 51, Wis. Admin. Code, so far as applicable, are adopted
by reference and made part of this Section. A violation of the standards imposed by IND
51 shall be a violation of this Section.
(2) Fire Limits in Areas Zoned B-1, B-2, and M-1. Those parcels within the Village of
Hales Corners zoned B-1, B-2, and M-1 are hereby declared to be included within the
Fire limits. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as permitting or authorizing the
erection, construction, alteration, or moving of any building or structure as defined in
Chapter IND 51, Wis. Admin. Code, within said Fire Limits of the Village of Hales
Corners except as hereinafter provided. All new buildings within the Fire Limits shall be
of Fire Resistive Type A (No. 1); Fire Resistive Type B (No. 2); Metal Frame Protected
(No. 3); Heavy Timbers (No. 4); Exterior Masonry (No. 5); Metal Frame Unprotected
(No. 6) except as permitted on those parcels Zoned B-2 meeting the setback requirements
of 3.102(3) listed below.
(3) New Buildings: B-2: Requirements. All new buildings within the Village of Hales
Corners zoned B-2, having minimum side yards of 15 feet for interior lots, and having a
minimum side yard of 10 feet toward the street and 15 feet toward the interior side for
corner lots, shall be of Wood Frame Unprotected (No. 8) or better.
(4) Buildings: B-1 Requirements. Any new building constructed in B-1 which meets the
setback requirements of 3.102(3) above, or any remodeling of existing buildings in B-1,
which contain or install a sprinkler system throughout, in accordance with Section 6.31,
Village Fire Code, shall be permitted to build or alter in accordance with construction
requirements of Wood Frame Unprotected (No. 8) or better. It is the intent of this
subsection that any new building of frame construction in B-1 must have a setback in
accordance with 3.102(3) and must have an automatic sprinkler system throughout as
defined in 6.31(1); and any remodeling of an existing building irrespective of class of
construction may be remodeled using said Wood Frame construction if the entire building
is automatically sprinkled throughout as defined in 6.31(1). These requisites shall apply
to all buildings of 2,500 square feet or more.
(5) Classes of Construction.
(a) Fire Resistive Type A (No. 1). A building is of fire resistive construction if all
the walls, partitions, piers, columns, floors, ceilings, roof, and stairs are built of
noncombustible material with a fire resistive rating as specified in table 51.03-A,
Wis. Admin. Code.
(b) Fire Resistive Type B (No. 2). A building is of fire resistive construction if all
the walls, partitions, piers, columns, floors, ceilings, roof, and stairs are built of
noncombustible material, with a fire resistive rating as specified in table 51.03-A,
Wis. Admin. Code.
(c) Metal Frame – Protected (No. 3). A building is of metal frame protected
construction if the structural parts and enclosing walls are of metal, or metal in
combination with other noncombustible materials, with the resistance ratings as
set forth in table 51.03-A, Wis. Admin. Code.
(d) Heavy Timber (No. 4). A building is of heavy timber construction if the
structural frame consists of heavy timber or heavy timber in combination with
metal, reinforced concrete, or masonry. The structural and enclosing wall shall
be as set forth in table 51.03-A, Wis. Admin. Code.
(e) Exterior Masonry (No. 5). A building is of exterior masonry construction if all
enclosing walls are constructed of masonry or reinforced concrete with fire
resistive ratings as set forth in table 51.03-A, Wis. Admin. Code.
(f) Metal Frame Unprotected (No. 6). A building is of a metal frame unprotected
construction if the enclosing walls are of unprotected metal or unprotected metal
in combination with other noncombustible materials and all building elements are
as set forth in table 51.03-A, Wis. Admin. Code, unless otherwise exempted.
(g) Wood Frame Protected (No. 7). A building is of wood frame protected
construction if the structural parts and enclosing walls are of protected wood, or
protected wood in combination with other materials, with fire resistive ratings as
set forth in table 51.03-A, Wis. Admin. Code. If such enclosing walls are
veneered, or encased or faced with stone, brick, tile, concrete, plaster, or metal,
the building is also termed a wood frame protected building.
(h) Wood Frame Unprotected (No. 8). A building is of wood frame unprotected
construction if the structural parts and enclosing walls are of unprotected wood,
or unprotected wood in combination with other materials. If such enclosing
walls are veneered, encased, or faced with stone, brick, tile, concrete, plaster, or
metal, the building is also termed a wood frame unprotected building. Whenever
“frame construction” is used in subsections (7) or (9) of Section 3.102, it shall
refer to Wood Frame Unprotected (No. 8).
(i) Doubtful Classifications. If there is doubt as to the classification within which a
given dwelling of other structure falls, the Building Inspector shall determine
such classification.
(6) Wooden Shingle or Shake Roofing. Wooden shingle or shake roof may be used in the
Fire Limits if rated as “Class B Fire Retardant” as defined by Underwriters Laboratory
and Installation is made in accordance with the specifications of the manufacturer.
(7) Alterations within Fire Limits.
(a) No building or structure of frame construction shall be increased in height after
October 14, 1963.
(b) After October 14, 1963, no building or structure of frame construction within the
Fire Limits shall be extended on any side unless the construction of such
extension conforms to the requirements of this Code for new construction. No
building or structure of nonconforming construction shall be extended, repaired, r
remodeled at a cost in excess of 50% of the fair market value of the existing
structure (not deducting from such value any loss caused by fire or any other
casualty) unless said existing structure shall be made conforming in its entirety.
(c) Subject to the limitations herein contained, nothing in this Section shall prohibit
other alterations within the Fire Limits. Minor alterations, repairs, and changes
not covered herein may be made with the same materials of which the building is
constructed.
(8) Moving Frame Construction in the Fire Limits. No building of frame construction
shall be moved into the Fire Limits nor from place to place within the Fire Limits, nor
relocated on the same lot within the Fire Limits.
(9) Exceptions. Nothing herein shall prohibit within the Fire Limits, and subject to the
specified limitation, the erection of new buildings or structures, nor the extension or
enlargement of existing buildings or structures, of frame construction as follows:
(a) Piazzas or balconies on dwelling not exceeding 10 feet in width or extending
more than three (3) feet above the second story floor beams; provided that no
such structure shall extend to a lot line or be joined to a similar structure of
another building.
(b) Fences.
(c) Display signs, which shall be governed by the Sign Control Code.
(10) Specific Requirements – New Buildings.
(a) Enclosing Walls. All enclosing walls of new buildings or structures within the
Fire Limits shall be of incombustible material.
(b) Roofs. All roofs of new buildings shall be covered with fire resistive materials.
A roof covering shall be considered fire resistive if made of three (3) or more
thicknesses, or ply, of approved asphalt saturated asbestos felt, or three (3)
thicknesses, or ply, of approved asphalt or tar saturated rag-felt with gravel, or
equal surfacing, of if made of approved asphalt composite shingles, approve
asbestos shingles, tin sheet iron, clay tile, concrete, or other approved
incombustible material.
(c) Partitions. In new buildings of more than one story, all floors and roof joists
shall be supported by incombustible bearing walls or partitions or by semifireproof
partitions as defined in section IND 51.05, Wis. Admin. Code, or by
columns and girders. If a bearing partition is supported by a steel girder, the
portion of such girder which projects below the ceiling shall be covered with
metal lath and plastering or other approved fireproofing.
(d) Exceptions. This subsection shall not apply to frame residences within the Fire
Limits when such buildings do not exceed two (2) stories in height and are
occupied by not more than two (2) families nor to private garages when such
garages are erected as accessory buildings to the frame residences excepted
hereunder.
(11) Existing Buildings Partially Destroyed by Fire or Decay. It shall be unlawful to repair
any existing structure or building within the Fire Limits when such structure or building
shall have been damaged by fire or decay to the extent of 50% of the fair market value of
such structure or building, and any structure or building so damaged shall be subject to
condemnation under section 30.111(1) f this Code. When such a structure or building
shall have been damaged by fire or decay to any extent of less than such value, no repairs
shall be made upon the same without the permission of the Building Inspector.
3.103 ADJACENT BUILDINGS. No permit shall be issued for the construction of adjacent
dwellings unless by proper design of the front elevation, selection of materials in walls
and roof, a substantial degree of variation in the appearance of such adjacent dwelling is
obtained.
3.104 STREET REQUIRED. No permit shall be issued unless the building shall be
constructed on a site abutting a publicly dedicated and accepted street without the
approval of the Village Board. Persons who wish to build on a private road shall petition
for such approval to the Village Board, who shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
the matter, and give a public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest,
and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon receipt of the petition, the matter
shall be referred to the Plan Commission for its recommendation. Provided, however, the
Building Inspector may issue a permit where, prior to April 2, 1958:
(1) There is a recorded easement to a public street form the building side,
(2) There is an improved and completed private thoroughfare connected to a public street
from the building site, or
(3) There is a group housing plan as defined in Section 8.14(3)(1) of the Zoning Code
already approved by the Plan Commission and the Village Board.
3.105 PERMIT NOT NECESSARY FOR MINOR REPAIRS. This code shall not be
construed to require a permit for any repairs or minor alterations which do not change the
occupancy, area, structural strength, fire protection, exists, light, or ventilation of the
building.
3.106 VILLAGE-OWNED BUILDING. No inspection fee is to be charged for any building
or buildings owned by the Village. Permits shall be procured for such work.
3.107 CURB, DRIVEWAY, AND SIDEWALKS – PERMITS.
(1) Permit. Prior to cutting any curb, a permit for such work shall be obtained from the
Building Inspector who will furnish detailed information as to just how this work is to be
accomplished.
(2) Manner of Making Cut. Where it is necessary to cut through an existing concrete curb
of a Village street to install a driveway, the old concrete pavement and curb for its full
depth and for the full width of flared driveway shall be removed to a point flush with the
street side of the curb. Flare shall be neatly made and to a radius of approximately two
(2) feet. Entire portion of curbing removed for purpose of flaring driveway shall be
within the confines of the lot which the driveway serves unless agreeable to the adjacent
property owners to extent the flare over the lot line. The exact manner of cutting and
replacing the curb is shown on a sketch furnished by the contractor at the time the curb
permit is issued.
(3) Driveways. Driveways from the curb to a point flush with the inside edge of the main
walk shall be seven and one-half (7½ ) inches thick and shall be composed of one (1) part
cement, two (2) parts fine aggregate, and three and one-half (3½) parts coarse aggregate,
aggregates to be as hereinabove specified.
(4) Expansion Joints. Where cement walks or driveways are built to the curbs, either at
crosswalks or in front of private property, an expansion joint made up of two (2) onehalf-
inch strips of asphalted felt shall be inserted.
(5) Cement Walks. Public walks shall be of Portland cement concrete and built to
specifications on file in the office of the Village Engineer. All contractors building
public walks in this Village shall conform to these specifications and to the grades for
same as given by the Village Engineer. A permit shall be obtained from the Building
Inspector before beginning such work. Public walks, except those built by the Village,
shall be inspected by said Village, and the builder thereof shall pay the inspection charges
of $3.00.
3.108 YARD FOR ATTACHED PRIVATE GARAGE. Notwithstanding the provisions of
Section 3.43(2)(a), no attached private garage shall be erected nearer than 10 feet from
any adjoining property.
3.109 AIR CONDITIONING UNITS. Unless a preponderance of proof is submitted to the
satisfaction of the Inspector that the water capacity within the immediate vicinity will not
be materially depleted, no water-cooled air conditioning units shall be allowed within the
Village.
3.110 FURTHER REGULATIONS FOR MOVING BUILDINGS.
(1) Applicant to be Owner. Every applicant to move a building to a new location shall be
the owner of the structure to be moved, and shall have an interest in the site of the
proposed new location.
(2) Upon receipt of an application to move a building to a new location within the Village,
the Building Inspector shall cause to be sent written notice to the neighboring property
owners in the vicinity of the new location informing them of the time and place for the
hearing thereon by the Plan Commission.
3.111 CONDEMNATION OF UNSAFE STRUCTURES.
(1) Building Inspector to Act. The Building Inspector shall act for this Village under the
provisions of §66.05(5), Wis. Stats., relating to the razing of buildings. The Building
Inspector shall act for this Village under said statutory provision except as to the
assessment and collection of the special tax therein provided for.
(2) Official Newspaper. The Tri Town Hub shall be the official newspaper for publication
of notices required in §66.05(1)(a), Wis. Stats.
(3) Circuit Court Action. Anyone affected by any such order may apply to the Circuit
Court for an order restraining the Building Inspector from razing and removing such
building or part thereof.
(4) Appeal to Arbitration. If any order made by the Building Inspector in pursuance to this
Section is not acceptable to the owner or tenant affected thereby, such owner or tenant
shall have the right to appeal, to-wit; the objections to and the necessity for the
reasonableness of such order may be submitted to three (3) reputable builders, one (1) to
be chosen by the owner or the tenant to which said order of the Building Inspector
applies, one (1) chosen by the Village Board, and the third by the other two (2) who shall
act as arbitrators. If the builders so chosen are unable to agree, the vote of a majority
shall be the decision of the arbitrators. The arbitrators herein provided for shall affirm or
modify the order of the Building Inspector and shall submit their decision within five (5)
days from the date of their appointment unless such time be extended by mutual
agreement of such owner or tenant and the Village Board and such decision as reported in
writing to the Village Board shall be endorsed by said Board in the manner provided for
in this Section. Until the rendering of such report by the arbitrators changing or
modifying the order of the Building Inspector, the order of the Building Inspector as first
issued shall be in full force and effect. An election to proceed by arbitration under this
subsection shall be construed as a waiver of the right to proceed by an appeal under the
following subsection. When the owner or tenant request the appointment of such
arbitrators, he shall deposit with the Village Treasurer the sum of $12.00. If the decision
of the arbitrators shall be favorable to the owner or tenant, such $12.00 shall be returned
to him and in said event, the Village shall pay each member of the Board of Arbitrators
the sum of $4.00. If the decision is against the owner, the $12.00 paid by him shall be
paid to the Board of Arbitrators in equal shares.
(5) Owner May Appeal to Court. Any owner or tenant dissatisfied with any order or
regulation of the Building Inspector under the provisions of this Section may commence
an action within 30 days after the service of such order or regulation in the Circuit Court
of Milwaukee County against the Village to vacate and set aside any such order or
regulation on the ground that such order is not necessary for the protection of the public
as herein provided, which said action shall proceed as all other actions commenced in the
Circuit Court.
3.112 REMOVAL OF BUILDING RUBBISH. No person owning, controlling, managing, or
occupying any building, structure, or premises in this Village, whether holding a permit
issued under Section 3.05 or not, shall permit building rubbish or waste materials from
the construction, remodeling, or the making of major or minor repairs upon any building,
structure, or premises to accumulate, but shall promptly remove the same from such
building, structure, or premises or from any street, alley, or public grounds upon which
such building rubbish or waste material is located.
3.113 SANITARY SEWER.
(1) If the public sewer system is available to the applicant for any permit required by this
Code, no permit shall be issued unless the Building Inspector is satisfied that the
applicant will connect to the public sewer system.
(2) No person shall make any provision for carrying into the public sewer system water from
the street, gutters, lawns, areaways, down spouts, roofs of any building, overflow from
cisterns, or water from any house or building foundation drain. The Building Inspector
and the Plumbing Inspector shall enforce the provisions of this Section.
3.114 UNIFORM NUMBERING SYSTEM.
(1) System Established. There is hereby established a uniform system of number all houses
and buildings fronting on all streets in the Village of Hales Corners. All even number
shall be placed upon houses and buildings on the north side and on the east side of said
streets; all odd numbers shall be placed upon houses and buildings on the south side and
on the west side of said streets.
(2) Assigning and Placing Numbers. The Building Inspector, with the advice and
assistance of the Village Engineer, has made the necessary survey and has assigned to
each house and building located on the streets its respective number under this uniform
system. The owner, occupant, or agent shall place or cause to be placed upon each house
or building controlled by him the number assigned by the Building Inspector.
(3) Size and Location of Numbers. All numbers placed on house and buildings in
accordance with this Section shall be of ceramic material contained with an aluminum
frame or durable equivalent and shall be not less than three and one-quarter (3¼) inches,
including background, in height and not less than two (2) inches in width. Such number
shall be distinctly legible and shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the front of each
house or building, so as to be easily seen and read from the public way.
(4) Village Clerk to Have Numbers Available: New Construction. The Village Clerk
shall have numbers available in conformance with the specifications of this Section at a
cost to the applicant of $4.00 for a four (4) digit number, $5.00 for a five (5) digit
number, and $1.00 for a one (1) digit number. Applicants for permits for new buildings
shall purchase such numbers from the Village Clerk prior to the issuance of a building
permit by the Building Inspector.
(5) Maintaining Numbers. It shall be unlawful to maintain any number other than the new
number as designated by the Building Inspector.
(6) Duty of Policeman. All policemen of the Village shall report violations of any
provisions of this Section.
(7) Compliance. Any owner, occupant, or agent of any house or building, who has receive
at least 10 days notice from a municipal official demanding compliance with this Section,
who fails or refuses to comply shall be guilty of a violation of this Chapter.
3.115 EXCAVATIONS, FILLING, AND GRADING.
(1) No person shall make any excavation or do any filling or grading or change water flow
which shall adversely affect neighboring properties. Reference Section 15.03(8).
Compliance inspection shall be conducted upon reference.
(2) Permit Required. A permit shall be required when filling or excavating consists of one
(1) cubic yard per 1,000 square feet of property, or results in an elevation change of 12
inches or more over an area of 500 square feet or more. The permit fee shall be $20.00.
Said permit is not required for grading related to new building construction.
(3) Information to be Filed. No permit for any excavation or grading shall be granted
unless the applicant shall first file with the Building Inspector:
(a) In the case of an excavation, a statement of the purpose and a plan showing the
dimensions of the excavation.
(b) In the case of grading, a topographic survey showing grade and elevation of
property before and after completion of proposed grading of the applicant’s
property and immediately abutting properties.
(4) Alternating Grades.
(a) The proposed alteration or modification of grade shall not damage or depreciate
the value of adjacent lots or parcels of land.
(b) The natural flow of surface water toward or away from adjacent property shall
not be affected by the alteration or modification of the grade.
(5) Permit to State. The permit granted shall state in the case of an excavation, the location
and size of the excavation, and, in the case of grading, the proposed grade when the
grading authorized by the permit is completed.
(6) Underpinning. Whenever an excavation shall be carried to such a depth that adjoining
walls will have to be underpinned, it shall be the duty of the general contractor to give
adjoining property owners written notification of the fact. All excavations for building
shall be property guarded and protected by the excavator and shall be close sheathed
wherever it may be necessary to prevent the adjoining soil from caving it.
(7) Dropping Frost Breakers Prohibited. The dropping of heavy weights or frost breakers
within 20 feet of another building to facilitate the excavation for substructures or for
general demolition purposes is prohibited.
3.116 SWIMMING POOLS.
(1) Definitions. “Swimming Pool” as used in this Section is defined as any artificial body of
water used or intended to be used for wading or swimming, having a depth at any point
greater than 24 inches or with a surface area exceeding 200 square feet, constructed,
installed, or maintained in the ground or on top of the ground outside or as an accessory
to a residential building on private property within the Village.
(2) Construction and Maintenance.
(a) Every swimming pool shall be so designed and constructed as to facilitate
cleaning and shall be maintained and operated in such a manner as to be clean
and sanitary at all times.
(b) Every swimming pool shall be so designed, constructed, and maintained so that it
will not create a hazard to health, safety, or the general welfare, and will not be
detrimental to the neighborhood or to the residents thereof.
(c) All buildings or structures to be erected under the provisions of this Section shall
conform to the requirements of the Building Code for setbacks and area
requirements for accessory structures.
(d) Any lights illuminating such swimming pool be so erected as to eliminate direct
rays and minimize reflected rays of light on adjoining premises.
(e) A substantial tight fence with minimum height of 48 inches shall completely
surround all swimming pools and have a self-latching and self-enclosing gate.
Such fences shall be erected in such manner that there shall be an apron of level
surface at least three (3) feet in width surrounding all sides of the pool. For all
above ground pools, if the side walls are 48 inches in height above the nearest
ground level, and if such pool has no permanent ladder or access to the pool, the
side walls can be used as a fence.
(f) All swimming pools must be equipped with an adequate self-contained filtration
and re-circulating system detached from any portable water supply or waste
disposal system.
(g) Pools shall not drain into sanitary sewers or neighbors’ property. Pool waste
water may be used for irrigation by surface or subsurface spreading providing no
hazard, nuisance, or unsanitary condition will occur in the opinion of the Health
Officer or the Superintendent of Public Works.
(3) Permit. All private swimming pools shall require a building permit with a fee of $5.00
and a zoning permit with an additional fee of $5.00 from the Building Inspector.
Application for permits shall be accompanied by plans before construction commences,
showing plot plan, dimensions, depths, volume in gallons, type and size of filtration
system, and waste disposal system.
(4) Appeal from Inspector’s Ruling. Any person feeling himself aggrieved by any order or
ruling of the Building Inspector may appeal in writing to the Board of Appeals of the
Village within 30 days of the alleged act or omission of said inspector pursuant to §62.23,
Wis. Stats., and the rules and regulations of the Board.
(5) Duty to Comply. Compliance with this Section shall be the duty of the person owning,
controlling, or managing any building or premises wherein or whereon there shall be
placed or there exists a swimming pool subject to this Section.
3.117 LIABILITY NOT ON VILLAGE. This Code shall not be construed as placing any
liability on the Village for damages to anyone injured or to any property damaged or
destroyed as a result of the improper location of any building, or any defect in any
building or any defect in any equipment in any building. The Village assumes no liability
for anyone injured or claiming to be injured or for any property loss suffered or claimed
to be suffered by anyone under the provisions of this Chapter.
3.118 APPEAL FROM INSPECTOR’S RULING. Any person feeling himself aggrieved by
any order or ruling of the Building Inspector may appeal in writing to the Board of
Appeals of the Village within 30 days of the alleged act or omission of said Inspector
pursuant to §62.23, Wis. Stats., and to the rules and regulations of the Board. The
appellant shall, annex to the notice of appeal such plats, surveys, plans, or specifications
which are of probative value in the determination of the appeal together with the name
and address of the appellant. Upon the filing of such notice with the Clerk, the appellant
shall receive a copy of the Rules of the Board of Appeals. Upon the filing of notice of
appeal, an appeal shall stay all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appeal from,
unless the Inspector certifies to the Board of Appeals that, by reason of the facts stated in
a certificate a stay, would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. Upon
the filing of such notice of appeal, the Board of Appeals shall fix a time and place for the
hearing of the appeal not less than 10 nor more than 30 days from the date of such filing.
3.119 BUILDING BOARD.
(1) Architectural Appeal. No building permit for any structure for which a building permit
is required shall be issued unless it has been found as a fact by the Building Board by at
least a majority vote, after a view of the site of the proposed structure whenever
practicable, and after an examination of the application for a building permit, which shall
include:
(a) Exterior elevations of the proposed structure,
(b) Existing finished grade lines of abutting improved properties,
(c) Location of the proposed structure drawn to scale on a plot plan of the land
owned by the applicant, that the exterior will, when erected, not be so at variance
with nor so similar to either exterior architectural appeal and functional plan of
the structures already constructed or in the course of construction in the
immediate neighborhood or the character of the applicable district established by
the Zoning Code, as to cause a substantial depreciation in the property values of
said neighborhood within said applicable district. Building permits shall only be
issued in conformance with the exterior elevations and the location of the
proposed structure as filed with the Building Board. The Building Inspector shall
issue a stop order in the manner provided in Section 3.12 of this Code for failure
to conform with the filed exterior elevations and location of the proposed
structure, and such nonconformance shall subject the applicant to the penalties
provided in Section 3.200.
(2) Hearing. The Building Board may, if it desires, hear the applicant for the building
permit in question and the owner of the lot on which it is proposed to erect the structure
in question, together with any other persons, whether residents or property owners,
desiring to be heard, Rule II of the Rules of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall apply to
such hearing. At no time shall the Building Board concern itself with deed restrictions.
(3) Presumption of Finding. On an appeal to the Board of Appeals, in the absence of proof
to the contrary adduced before the Board of Appeals, a refusal to grant the building
permit because refusal of the Building Board to make the finding required by Subsection
(1) shall be deemed to be based upon facts supporting the conclusion that the exterior
architectural appeal and functional plan of the proposed structure for which a building
permit was refused would, when erected, be so at variance with or so similar to all of the
exterior architectural appeal and functional plan of structures already constructed or in
the course of construction in the immediate neighborhood, or the character of the
applicable district, as to cause a substantial depreciation in the property values of said
neighborhood within said applicable district.
3.120 WHEN A USE OR OCCUPANCE SHALL BE DISCONTINUED AND A
BUILDING OR PORTION THEREOF VACATED. Whenever any building or
portion thereof is being used or occupied contrary to the provisions of this Code, the
Building Inspector shall order such use of occupancy discontinued and the building or
portion thereof vacated, by notice served on any person using or causing such use or
occupancy to be continued and such person shall vacate such building or portion thereof
within 10 days after receipt of the notice or make the building or portion thereof comply
with the requirements of this Code on use and occupancy.
3.121 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY BY FIRE CHIEF. The Fire Chief shall have dual
authority with the Building Inspector in the issuance of certificates of occupancy under
Section 3.13 of the Building Code for multi-family and commercial structures, places of
public assembly, and schools. All authority and power granted therein to the Building
Inspector equally is herein granted to the Fire Chief for such buildings.
3.122 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
(1) Accessory Buildings (100 Square Feet or Less).
(a) A building permit and Building Board approval are required.
(b) Building to be anchored in such manner as to make it safe.
(c) The construction approval to be made by the Building Inspector.
(2) Accessory Buildings (Over 100 Square Feet).
(a) Requires Building Board approval.
(b) Requires same construction as a garage.
3.123 STATE UNIFORM DWELLING CODE ADOPTED.
(1) Certified Inspector. For purposes of issuance of permits, inspection, and enforcement
of said uniform building code for one and two family dwellings, the Inspector shall be
that person or independent agency certified by the Wisconsin Department of Industry,
Labor, and Human Relations under Chapter IND 26, Wis. Admin. Code.
(2) Definitions for One and Two Family Dwelling Code.
(a) Addition. “Addition” means a new construction performed on a dwelling which
increases the outside dimensions of the dwelling.
(b) Alteration. “Alteration” means a substantial change or modification other than
an addition or minor repair to a dwelling or to systems involved within a
dwelling.
(c) Cubic Content. “Cubic Content” means that volume of dwelling enclosed by the
outer surface of exterior walls from the top of the footing to the roof.
(d) Department. “Department” means the Department of Industry, Labor, and
Human Relations.
(e) Dwelling. “Dwelling means:
1. Any building, the initial construction of which is commenced on or after
the effective date of this ordinance, which contains one or two dwelling
units; or
2. An existing structure, or that part of an existing structure, which is used,
or intended to be used, as a one or two family dwelling.
(f) Minor Repair. “Minor Repair” means repair performed for maintenance or
replacement purposes on any existing one or two family dwelling which does not
affect room arrangement, light and ventilation, access to or efficiency of any
exist stairways or exits, fire protection, or exterior aesthetic appearance and
which does not increase a given occupancy and use. No building permit is
required for work to be performed which is deemed minor repair.
(g) One or Two Family Dwelling. “One or Two Family Dwelling” means a building
structure which contains one or separate households intended to be used as a
home, residence, or sleeping place by an individual or by two or more individuals
maintaining a common household to the exclusion of others.
(h) Person. “Person” means an individual, partnership, firm, or corporation.
(i) Uniform Dwelling Code. “Uniform Dwelling Code” means those Administrative
Code provisions, and any future amendments, revisions, or modifications thereto,
contained in the following chapters of the Wisconsin Administrative Code:
Chapter IND 20 – Administration and Enforcement
Chapter IND 21 – Construction Standards
Chapter IND 22 – Energy Conservation Standards
Chapter IND 23 – Heating, Ventilating, and Air Conditioning Standards
Chapter IND 24 – Electrical Standards
Chapter IND 25 – Plumbing and Potable Water Standards
3.124 INSTALLATION AND OPERATION OF HEATING UNITS ADJUNCT TO
WARM AIR FURNACES.
(1) Application. This Section shall apply to all supplemental heating units installed. No
person may install or cause to be installed a supplemental heating unit which fails to meet
the requirements of this Section.
(2) Definitions.
(a) “Supplemental Heating Units” includes all devices described as energy
converters, stoves, or supplemental heating devices using wood, coal, or other
solids as fuel and attached to the existing warm air furnace and using the furnace
ducts for distribution of heat.
(b) “Horizontal Slide Damper” is a horizontal piece of sheet metal used to divide the
warm air plenum of the existing furnace into two (2) approximately equal airtight
parts.
(3) Permit. No person may install or cause to be installed a supplemental heating unit
without first obtaining a permit from the Building Inspection Division. The Building
Inspection Division shall give each permit application the following information: It is
recommended that: (1) The wood burned in the units should be dry wood, preferably dry
hardwoods; (2) The chimney flue should be checked periodically to be sure the flue is
open; and (3) The chimney flue should be cleaned at least once a year.
(4) Permit Fee. A permit fee of $10 shall be paid by the applicant for each unit installed.
(5) Plan and Data Approval. Plans and data for each supplemental heating unit shall be
submitted to the Building Inspection Division for approval before a permit may be issued.
The following data is required to be submitted with each application: (1) The
manufacturer’s installation and maintenance/operations instructions; (2) Proposed
chimney flue and/or new chimney flue sizes; and (3) The number and size of existing
vent connectors to the chimney flue.
(6) Inspections. No person may operate or permit the operation of supplemental hearing
devices without first calling for an inspection and receiving final approval from the
Building Inspection Division.
(7) Installation Clearance. The clearances from combustibles for the installation of all
supplemental heating units shall conform to the following requirements:
(a) Table A
TABLE A
Required Clearance in Inches from Combustibles for Supplemental Heating Units
From Front of Unit From Top, Sides, & Rear of Unit Chimney or Vent Connector
48” 36” 18”
(b) Table B
TABLE B
Required Minimum Clearances, in Inches, from Combustibles with Specified Forms of Protection
Types of Protection: Where the Required Clearance with No Protection is:
Applied to the combustible
material unless otherwise
specified and covering all
surfaces with the distance
specified as the required
clearance with no
protection. Thicknesses are
minimum.
36 Inches Above
36 Inch
Sides and Rear
18 Inch Chimney or Vent
Connector
1. ¼ inch asbestos millboard
spaced out 1 inch (Note 2)
30 18 12
2. 0.013 inch (28 gauge) sheet
metal on ¼ inch asbestos
millboard 24 18 12
3. 0.013 inch (28 gauge) sheet
metal spaced out 1 inch (Note
2) 18 12 9
4. 0.013 inch (28 gauge) sheet
metal on 1/8 inch asbestos
millboard spaced out 1 inch
(Note 2)
18 12 9
5. 1½ inch asbestos cement
covering on heating appliance
18 12 18
6. ¼ inch asbestos millboard
on 1 inch mineral fiber bats
reinforced with wire mesh or
equivalent
18 12 6
7. 0.027 inch (22 gauge) sheet
metal on 1 inch mineral fiber
bats reinforced with wire or
equivalent
18 12 3
8. ¼ inch asbestos millboard
36 36 18
9. ¼ inch cellular asbestos
36 36 18
Note 1: Except for the protection described in 5, all clearances should be measured from the outer
surface of the supplemental heating unit to the combustible material disregarding any
intervening protection applied to the combustible material.
Note 2: Spaces shall be of incombustible material.
Note 3: Asbestos millboard referred to above is a different material from cement board. It is not
intended that asbestos cement board be used in complying with these requirements when
asbestos millboard is specified.
(8) Mounting of Unit.
(a) On incombustible floors, all units shall be mounted on a firm, level base of brick,
cement, concrete, or other incombustible material.
(b) On combustible floors, all units shall be mounted on a four (4) inch thick
concrete block base with circular or rectangular holes or equivalent
incombustible material so arranged that the holes will parallel the small
dimension and be covered with sheet metal of not less than No. 2 U.S. gauge.
The above specified floor protection shall extend not less than 18 inches around
the perimeter of the unit.
(c) Units with Legs on Combustible Floors. All units which have 18 inches or more
of open space under the base of the unit may be mounted on combustible floors
provided that the floor under the unit is protected with not less than one-fourth
(1/4) inch of asbestos millboard and covered with sheet metal of not les than No.
24 U.S. gauge. The above specified floor protection shall extend not less than 18
inches above the perimeter of the unit. If there is less than 18 inches of open
space under the base of the unit, the unit shall be mounted on two (2) inches of
concrete block, brick, or other incombustible material and equally covered with
sheet metal of not less than No. 24 U.S. gauge. The above specified floor
protection shall extend not less than 18 inches around the perimeter of the unit.
(9) Type and Size of Chimney. An approved all-fuel chimney shall be used for solid fuel
burning equipment. The chimney shall be sized so that the cross-sectional area of this
chimney is not smaller than the cross-sectional area of the flue collar of the equipment to
be connected to it. No other equipment shall be connected to the flue serving the solid
fuel burning equipment. All masonry chimneys constructed according to the
requirements of Section 6.10 of the Fire Code and factory-built chimneys bearing a
listing by a nationally recognized testing laboratory such as Underwriters Laboratories
will be considered as approved.
(10) Chimney Connector or Stovepipe. The chimney connector or stovepipe shall comply
with the following table:
Minimum Chimney Connector Gages for Oil, Wood, & Coal
Diameter of Connector
Galvanized Steel Gage Minimum
Thickness (inches) Number Gage
Less than 6 inches .019 26
6 inches to less than 10 inches .024 24
10 inches to 13 inches .030 22
14 inches to 16 inches .036 20
Greater than 16 inches .058 16
(11) Damper. The chimney connector shall have a cast iron damper to control the draft.
(12) Warm Air Supply Duct.
(a) Size and Material. The area of the warm air supply duct shall not be less than the
area of the collar or plenum opening of the unit to which it is connected. The
warm air supply duct and horizontal slide damper shall be constructed entirely of
incombustible material equivalent in structural strength and durability to the
following table:
TABLE C
Ducts
Width or Diameter Inches
Minimum Thickness
Galvanized Iron U.S. Gauge Minimum Thickness
Aluminum B & S Gauge
0 through 12 26 24
Over 12 24 22
(b) Connection to Furnace Without Horizontal Slide Damper. The connection of the
warm air supply duct from the unit to the furnace should be centered on the front,
rear, or sides of the plenum of the furnace. A back draft damper shall be installed
in the warm air duct as close to the furnace plenum as possible. Full air flow
shall be maintained. (See Figure 1 or Figure 2.)
FIGURE 1 – TYPICAL APPROVED DESIGN
(c) Connections to Furnace with Horizontal Slide Damper. The connection of the
warm air supply duct from the unit to the furnace plenum should be centered both
horizontally and vertically above the horizontal slide damper. Full air flow shall
be maintained. (See Figure 3.)
FIGURE 3 – TYPICAL APPROVED DESIGN
(13) The Return Air Duct.
(a) Supplemental Heating Unit Without Horizontal Slide Damper.
1. Connection to Furnace. When the return air for the unit is taken from the
furnace return air, the connection shall be made on the filtered air side of
the filter and connected to the blower intake of the unit. (See Figure 1 in
Subsection (12)(b)1.) When the return air for the unit is taken from the
outside, it shall be taken from a weatherproof louver with a one-fourth
(1/4) inch wire mesh hardware cloth and connected to the blower air
intake of the unit. (See Figure 2 in Subsection (12)(b)2.) Dampers shall
not be installed in the return air duct regardless of which method is used.
2. Size and Material. The area of the return air duct shall not be less than
the area of the warm air supply duct. The return air duct shall be of the
same material as specified in Table C in Subsection (12)(a) above.
(b) Supplemental Heating Unit with Horizontal Slide Damper.
1. Connection to Furnace. The connection of the return air ducts to the
furnace should be centered both horizontally and vertically below the
horizontal slide damper. Full air flow shall be maintained. (See Figure 3
in Subsection (12)(c).)
2. Size and Material. The area of the return air duct shall not be less than
the area of the collar of the plenum opening of the unit to which it is
connected. The material shall conform to Table C in Subsection (12)(a)
above.
(14) Blower on Furnace When Used With Horizontal Slide Damper in Plenum. The
blower on the furnace shall be adequate to maintain the manufacturer’s specifications for
CFM and static pressure when measured above the horizontal slide damper when the
damper is closed.
(15) Fresh Air Intake Connected to Furnace Return Air System. The size of the fresh air
intake where used shall not be less than the cross-sectional area of the area of a four (4)
inch (12.6 square inch) round duct. The material shall conform to Table C in Subsection
(12)(a) above. The fresh air intake shall be connected to the return plenum of the
furnace. A volume damper of the locking type shall be placed in the duct for the fresh air
intake.
(16) Combustion Air. If the Heating Inspector, after examination of the supplemental
heating unit and the furnace, deems it necessary to add combustion air, the size of the
opening shall not be less than the cross-sectional area of the flue collar size of the
supplemental heating unit.
(17) Electrical Connections and Controls.
(a) For Units Without Horizontal Slide Dampers. All electrical connections,
controls, and wiring shall conform to the Wisconsin State Electrical Code.
(b) For Units With Horizontal Slide Dampers. The electrical connections shall
conform with the Wisconsin State Electrical Code. A fan control shall be
installed in the plenum of the solid fuel burning unit and wired in parallel to the
existing fan control on the furnace. The fan control in the plenum of the slid fuel
burning unit shall activate the furnace blower motor at a temperature of 100
degrees Fahrenheit to 120 degrees Fahrenheit.
(18) Thermostat Control. The thermostat control where used on the supplemental heating
unit shall activate the blower motor at a temperature of 100 degrees Fahrenheit to 120
degrees Fahrenheit.
(19) Outdoor Wood Furnaces Prohibited. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set
forth in this Section or this Code, no person shall construct, install, operate, or use or
suffer to construct, install, operate, or use an or any outdoor wood furnace to provide heat
to any building or structure or equipment upon any property in the Village.
3.125 INSTALLATION AND OPERATION OF ROOM HEATERS, STOVES, AND
FREE STANDING FIREPLACES.
(1) Application.
(a) This section shall apply to all radiant heating units installed. No person may
install a radiant heating unit which fails to comply with the requirements of this
Section.
(2) Definitions. “Radiant Heating Unit” is a room heater, stove, or free standing fireplace
not intended for duct connections used to heat a room(s) using the combustion of a solid
fuel such as wood or coal as a source of heat.
(3) Permit. No person may install or cause to be installed a radiant heating unit without first
obtaining a permit from the Building Inspection Division. The Building Inspection
Division shall give to each permit applicant the following information. It is
recommended that: (1) The wood burned in the units should be dry wood, preferably dry
hardwoods; (2) The chimney flue should be checked periodically to be sure the flue is
open; and (3) The chimney flue should be cleaned at least once a year.
(4) Permit Fee. A permit fee of $10 shall be paid by the applicant for each unit installed.
(5) Plan and Data Approval. Plans and data for each radiant heating unit installation shall
be submitted to the Building Inspection Division for approval before a permit may be
issued. The following data is required to be submitted with each application: (1) The
manufacturer’s installation and maintenance/operation instructions; (2) Proposed
chimney flue and/or new chimney flue sizes; and (3) The number and size of existing
vent connectors to the chimney flue.
(6) Inspection. No person may operate or permit the operation of a radiant heating unit
without first calling for an inspection and receiving final approval from the Building
Inspection Division.
(7) Installation Clearance. The clearances from combustibles for the radiant heating units
shall conform to Table A in Section 3.124(7)(a) and Table B in Section 3.124(7)(b)
(8) Mounting of the Unit.
(a) On incombustible floors, the units shall be mounted on a firm, level base of
brick, cement, concrete, or other incombustible materials.
(b) On combustible floors, the units shall be mounted on a four (4) inch concrete
block base with circular or rectangular holes or equivalent incombustible material
so arranged that the holes will parallel the smaller dimension and be covered with
sheet metal of not less than N. 24 U.S. gauge. The above specified floor
protection shall extend not less than 18 inches beyond the perimeter of the unit.
(c) Units with Legs on Combustible Floors. Units which have 18 inches or more of
open space under the base of the unit may be mounted on combustible floors
provided that the floor under the unit is protected with not less than one-fourth
(1/4) inch of asbestos millboard and covered with sheet metal of not less than No.
24 U.S. gauge. THE above specified floor protection shall extend not less than
18 inches beyond the perimeter of the unit. If there is less than 18 inches of open
space under the base of the unit, the unit shall be mounted on two (2) inches of
concrete block, brick, or other incombustible material and equally covered with
sheet metal of not less than No. 24 U.S. gauge. The above specified floor
protection shall extend not less than 18 inches beyond the perimeter of the unit.
(9) Size and Type of Chimney. An approved all fuel chimney shall be used for solid fuel
burning equipment. The chimney shall be sized so that the cross-sectional area of the
chimney is not smaller than the cross-sectional area of the flue collar of the equipment to
be connected to it. Other equipment shall not be connected to the flue serving the solid
fuel burning equipment. Masonry chimneys constructed according to the requirements of
Section 6.10 of the Hales Corners Fire Code and factory-built chimneys bearing a listing
by a nationally recognized testing laboratory such as Underwriters Laboratories will be
considered as approved.
(10) Chimney connector or Stovepipe. The chimney connector shall conform to Section
3.124(10) of the Hales Corners Code.
(11) Damper. The chimney connector shall have a cast iron damper to control the draft.
(12) Combustion Air. If the Heating Inspector, after examination of the radiant heating unit
and the furnace, deems it necessary to add combustion air, the size of the opening shall
not be less than the cross-sectional area of the flue collar size of the unit.
(13) Blower. A blower where used shall have adequate protection such as a screen or other
material to prevent material to be inserted in the blower assembly.
(14) Electrical Connections. The electrical connections, controls, and wiring where used
shall conform to the Wisconsin State Electrical Code.
(15) Thermostat Control. The thermostat control where used shall activate the blower motor
at a temperature of 100 degrees Fahrenheit to 120 degrees Fahrenheit.
Chapter XXL. Penalties.
3.200 VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.
(1) Any person holding a permit issued under this Chapter covering any premises wherein or
whereon there shall be placed or there exists anything in violation of any provision of this
Chapter; or any person owning, controlling, or managing any building or premises
wherein or whereon there shall be placed or there exists anything in violation of any
provision of this Chapter; or any person who shall assist in the committing of any
violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter or who shall build contrary to the plans
or specifications submitted to and approved by the Building Inspector; or any person who
shall omit, neglect, or refuse to do any act required by this Chapter shall be subjected to a
penalty as provided in Section 19.04 of this Village Code, provided that the accumulated
penalties recoverable in any one action shall not exceed $2,000.00.
(2) Enforcement by Injunction. Compliance with the provisions of this Chapter may also
be enforced by injunctional order at the suit of the Village, or one or more owners of real
estate situated within an area affected by the regulations of this Chapter.
(3) Declared Nuisances. Any building or structure erected or structurally altered in
violation of the provisions of this Chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se, and
the Village may apply to any court or competent jurisdiction to restrain or abate such
nuisance.
CHAPTER 4
Sewer and Well Code
4.01 Purpose
4.02 Definitions
4.03 Discharge of Deleterious Matter Prohibited
4.04 Connection to Public Sewer Required
4.05 Plumber’s License
4.06 Private Sewage Disposal
4.07 Building Sewers and Connections
4.08 Bond
4.09 Use of Public Sewers
4.10 Protection from Damage
4.11 State Code Adopted
4.12 Metropolitan Sewerage Commission Rules Adopted
4.13 Powers and Authority of Inspectors
4.14 Installation and Construction of Wells and Pumps
4.15 Fees
4.16 Sewage Holding Tanks
4.17 Illicit Discharges and Connections to the Storm Drain System
4.18 Penalty
4.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate the use of public and private
sewers and drains, private sewage disposal, the installation and connection of building
sewers, the discharge of waters and wastes into the public sewer system, and the
installation and construction of wells and pumps within the Village of Hales Corners.
4.02 DEFINITIONS. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the
terms used in this Chapter shall be as follows:
(1) District means the Village of Hales Corners, Wisconsin.
(2) Commission means the Commission of Public Works.
(3) Sewage Works means all facilities for collection, pumping, treating, and disposing of
sewage.
(4) Superintendent means the Superintendent of Public Works, or his authorized deputy,
agent, or representative.
(5) Plumbing Inspector means the Plumbing Inspector of the Village.
(6) Sewage means a combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments.
(7) Sewer means a pip or conduit for carrying sewage.
(8) Public Sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights,
and which is controlled by the Village.
(9) Sanitary Sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and from which storm water,
surface, and ground waters are specifically excluded and are never intentionally admitted.
(10) Storm Sewer or Storm Drain means a sewer that caries storm and surface waters from
drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted and industrial wastes.
(11) Sewage Treatment Plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
(12) Industrial Waste means the liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct from
sanitary sewage.
(13) Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food and
from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
(14) Property Shredded Garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be
carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no
particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension.
(15) Foundation Drain means a pipe or conduit receiving the discharge from the soil under
and around the outside wall of a building.
(16) Building Sewer means the extension from the building to the public sewer or other place
of disposal.
(17) B.O.D. (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five (5) days at 20 degrees C., expressed in parts per million by weight.
(18) pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per
liter of solution.
(19) Suspended Solids means the solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, which are removable by laboratory
filtering.
(20) Natural Outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of
surface or ground water.
(21) Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently.
(22) Person means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or group.
(23) Shall is mandatory; May is permissive.
4.03 DISCHARGE OF DELETERIOUS MATTER PROHIBITED.
(1) No person shall place, deposit, or permit to be deposited upon public or private property
within the District or in any area under the jurisdiction of the District, any human or
animal excrement (other than the normal type of fertilizer), garbage, or other
objectionable waste.
(2) No person shall discharge into any natural water outlet within the District, or in any area
under the jurisdiction of the District any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with an
order of the District and the Plumbing Code.
4.04 CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER REQUIRED. The owner of any house,
building, or property used for human habitation, occupancy, employment, recreation,
business, or any other purpose, situated within the District and abutting on any street,
alley, or right-of-way in which a public sewer is located, or in which the extension of the
public sewer may be deemed feasible by the Commission is required at his expense to
install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the
proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, within 90 days
after date of official notice to do so.
4.05 PLUMBER’S LICENSE REQUIRED. No person shall carry on the business of
plumbing or installation of plumbing or sewer connections or drain laying or do or
perform any such work within the limits of the Village until he shall have first obtained a
plumbing permit. No permit shall be granted unless such person shall have first obtained
the Plumber’s License required by law and shall exhibit said license to the Plumbing
Inspector and the Superintendent of Public Works.
4.06 PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEM.
(1) “Private Sewage System” means a sewage treatment and disposal system service a
sewage treatment and disposal system serving a single structure with a septic tank and
soil absorption filed located on the same parcel as the structure. The term also means an
alternative sewage system approved by the Wisconsin Department of Industry, Labor,
and Human Relations, including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption field, a
holding tank, a system of serving more than one (1) structure, or a system located on a
different parcel than the structure. A private sewage system may be owned by the
property owner or by a special purpose district.
(2) Except as herein provided, no person shall construct or maintain any private sewage
system or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage or human excrement.
(3) In the granting of any permit and in the regulation of any private sewage system, the
Village shall obtain the services of a certified soil tester either as an employee or under
contract to review and verify certified soil tester reports pursuant to §145.20(2)(d), Wis.
Stats., which is incorporated herein by reference and made a part of this section.
(4) Where a public sanitary sewer is certified by the Commission as not available to serve
any house, building, or property, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the State Plumbing Code, the rules and
regulations of the Wisconsin Department of Industry, Labor, and Human Relations.
(5) When a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal
system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer pursuant to Section 4.04
and any septic tank. Cesspools are prohibited and similar private sewage disposal
facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
(6) The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary
manner at all times, at no expense to the Village.
(7) Additional requirements may be imposed by the certified soil tester, the Health Officer,
or Plumbing Inspector in accordance with the standards imposed by §145.02(2) and
145.13, Wis. Stats.
4.07 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
(1) The Commission may appoint the Superintendent as Plumbing Inspector to act under the
direction of the Commission and to have control of the supervision and inspection of
drainage, drain laying, and sewer connections and to enforce all laws, ordinances, and
rules in relation thereto.
(2) No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use,
alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written
permit from the Plumbing Inspector.
(3) No private sewage disposal system shall be installed unless a permit has been issued
therefore by the Plumbing Inspector. Before issuing a permit the Plumbing Inspector
shall require evidence of said absorption tests.
(4) There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits – (a) for residential and
commercial service, and (b) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In
either case, the owner r his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by
the District. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specification, or
other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Plumbing Inspector.
(5) No permit shall be issued to connect with the public sanitary sewer any lot, excavation, or
open basement. No permit shall be issued to connect any building with the sanitary
sewer until such building is completed enclosed by roof, the outside wall backfilled to
establish grade, and all sanitary sewer lines within buildings that will be covered by
basement floors have been inspected and approved by the Plumbing Inspector and after
the permanent floor is constructed in the basement. In buildings without basements, the
permit shall be issued after the footing and the sub-floor have been constructed.
(6) All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer
shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the District for any loss or
damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building
sewer.
(7) A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building.
(8) Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are
found on examination and test by the Plumbing Inspector to meet all requirements of this
Chapter.
(9) In all buildings where a foundation drainage system is provided and there is no natural
drain for this subsurface water to drain into, the owner shall provide or build a suitable
pit, minimum size 15 inches diameter by 30 inches deep, to collect all water that may
enter the foundation drainage system; also he shall install, operate, and maintain a sump
pump, cellar drainer, or some suitable pump and he shall pump this foundation water to a
storm sewer or outside building to a natural drain, or discharge point at least three (3) feet
from the foundation wall of the building. No person shall connect any foundation
drainage system to the sanitary sewer system, or willfully allow any sump pit to overflow
into the basement floor drain that is connected to the sanitary sewer.
(10) All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work
unless otherwise approved by the Plumbing Inspector. Pipe laying and backfill shall be
performed in accordance with the State Plumbing Code except that no backfill shall be
replaced until the work has been inspected.
(11) In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public
sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means
and discharged into the building sewer at the expense of the building owner.
(12) The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the “Y”
branch. If no suitable “Y” branch is available, a neat hole may be cut into the public
sewer to receive the building sewer with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of
45 degrees. A 45 degree ell may be used to make such connection, with the spigot end
cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the
building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation at
the point of connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the invert
connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special connections
may be used for connection only when approved by the Plumbing Inspector. If the public
sewer is broken or damaged in any manner by making a connection the owner shall
replace all damaged pipe in the public sewer at his expense.
(13) The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the Plumbing
Inspector, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four (4) inches. The slope of
such four-inch pipe shall be not less than 1/8 inch per foot.
(14) Building sewer shall be so laid as to attain a seven (7) foot depth to the lot line, except
where the public sewer main is less than seven (7) feet deep and a lesser depth for the
building sewer is determined by the Plumbing Inspector.
(15) Location of Sanitary Connections. No person, except a licensed plumber shall be
permitted to tap or make any connection with the general sewerage system or any part
thereof. Such information as the Plumbing Inspector, Superintendent, the Commission,
or its Engineer may have with regard to the location of sewer junctions or slant will be
furnished to plumbers, the District assuming no risk as to accuracy of the same.
4.08 BOND
(1) Before engaging the plumbing or drain laying or receiving a permit to do such work, the
applicant shall file with the Village Clerk a bond executed by a surety company licensed
to do business in the State of Wisconsin, in the penal sum of $1,000. All bonds shall be
approved as to form and execution by the Village Attorney, and shall be approved by the
Village Board as to sufficiency of sureties. The condition of such bonds shall be that the
applicant shall indemnify and save harmless the District, and its officers, employees, and
agents against any and all injuries, damages, costs, expenses, outlays, and claims
resulting from or arising out of the performance of any work for which the permit is
issued, or from the performance by the applicant or his employee or agent of any work
incidental to or connected with such work; and further that the applicant shall pay all
judgments, costs, and charges which may be recovered against the Sanitary District, or
any of its employees, officers, or agents, by reason of the performance of said work or in
consequence of any work done by said applicant or his employees or agents pursuant to
said permit, and further that the applicant shall replace and restore the pavement,
macadamizing, or any other surfacing over and upon any opening he may make in any
highway, street, road, or any public way or public place, or any private lands over or
through which there has been granted to the District an easement for public sewers and
the applicant shall restore all such openings to as good a state and condition as he found
it, and keep and maintain the same in good order to the satisfaction of the Village Board
for a period of three (3) months following the date of the final inspection by the
Superintendent. Such bond shall remain in force until the expiration of any permit or
permits issued during the term of said bond, except that n expiration the bond shall
remain in force as to all penalties, claims, and demands that may have accrued thereunder
prior to such expiration. Bonds in compliance with the foregoing provisions shall be
executed and filed annually on or before January 1 of each year, and no permit shall be in
force until such bond is so filed and has been approved as provided herein.
(2) A certificate of insurance from a plumbing association recognized by the Commission of
Public Works may be accepted in lieu of such bond.
4.09 USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS.
(1) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water,
ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling heater, air conditioning water, or
unpolluted industrial process waters into any sanitary sewer.
(2) Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged into such sewers as are
specifically designated as storm sewers or into a natural outlet approved by the Plumbing
Inspector.
(3) Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer.
(a) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit.
(b) Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per million of weight
of fat, oil, or grease.
(c) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid,
solid, or gas.
(d) Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, paunch manure, or any other solid or viscous substance capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewage works.
(e) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
(f) Any waters having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment,
and personnel of the sewage works.
(g) Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient
quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the
Sewage Treatment Plans.
(h) Any waters or wastes containing suspended oils of such character and quantity
that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the
Sewage Treatment Plant.
(i) Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public
nuisance.
(4) Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Plumbing
Inspector, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing such
substance in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes and other harmful ingredients;
except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters of dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the State Board of
Health, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.
(5) Where installed, all grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at
his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times.
(6) The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having (a) a five (5) day
Biochemical Oxygen Demand greater than 300 parts per million by weight, or (b)
containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids, or (c)
containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in subsection
(3) of this section, or (d) having an average daily flow greater than 2% of the average
daily sewage flow of the District, shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Superintendent. Where necessary in the opinion of the Superintendent, the owner shall
provide at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to (a) reduce the
Biochemical Oxygen Demand to 300 parts per million by weight, or (b) reduce
objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum provided for in
subsection (3) of this section, or (c) control the quantities and rates of discharge of such
waters or wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to
the proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for approval to the State
Board of Health and the Commission. No construction of such facilities shall be
commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.
(7) Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waster or wastes, they shall
be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his
expense.
(8) When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property served by a building
sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building
sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole,
when required, shall be accessibly and safely locate, and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed
by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and
accessible at all times.
(9) All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which
reference is made in subsection (8) of this section, or upon suitable samples taken at said
manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole
shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point
at which the building sewer is connected.
(10) No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special
agreement or arrangement between the District and any concern whereby an industrial
waste of unusually strength of character may be accepted by the District for treatment,
subject to payment therefore by the industrial concern.
4.10 PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE. No unauthorized person shall maliciously,
willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, or tamper with any sewer,
structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage works.
4.11 STATE CODE ADOPTED. The Wisconsin State Plumbing Code, Chapters H61, H62,
and H63, Wisconsin Administrative Code, so far as applicable, is adopted by reference
and made a part of this Chapter. A violation of such chapters shall be a violation of this
Chapter. However, pursuant to the authority of §144.06, Wis. Stats., the Village Board
hereby determines that it has not elected to require connections to a water main by
abutting properties used for human habitation in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 residentially
zoned districts.
4.12 METROPOLITAN SEWERAGE COMMISSION RULES ADOPTED. The rules of
the Milwaukee County Metropolitan Sewerage Commission are adopted by reference and
made a part of this Chapter. A violation of such rules shall be a violation of this Chapter.
4.13 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
(1) The Superintendent of Public Works, and his agents bearing proper credentials and
identification, and the Plumbing Inspector shall be permitted to enter upon all properties
for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
4.14 INSTALLATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF WELLS AND PUMPS.
(1) Purpose. Safeguarding of the water used for drinking and domestic purposes is
fundamental to protection of public health, necessitating taking every reasonable
precaution to prevent water pollution. This section seeks to prevent water pollution of
the water used for drinking and domestic purposes within the Village.
(2) Adoption of State Codes. The provisions and regulations contained in the Wisconsin
State Well Construction and Pump Installation Code, NR 112, Wisconsin Administrative
Code, adopted by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and such rules and
regulations as may be adopted by said Department shall extend over and govern all well
constructions and pump installations in the Village.
(3) Permit. Any person who shall construct a well or install a pump intended or used for
supplying water for human consumption shall obtain a permit to perform said work from
the Plumbing Inspector of the Village.
(4) Community Wells.
(a) Any water system designed to serve more than two (2) residences or business
establishments shall be approved by the following administrative officials:
1. The Village Attorney for his inspection of the form of agreement to
assure the protection of the Village and the users of the system; the
Village Engineer to assure adequacy of the water mains, safeguarding of
the public roads, protection against fire, and convertibility to public uses;
the Plumbing Inspector to assure compliance with this ordinance; and the
Commission of Public Works to consider the matter and formulate a
recommendation for the Village Board.
2. Final approval shall be required from the Village Board.
(5) Inspector may Revoke Permit. If the Plumbing Inspector shall find at any time that this
section is not being complied with, he shall revoke the permit by written notice posted at
the site of the work. When any such permit is revoked it shall be unlawful to do any
further work upon such well or pump until the permit is reissued, excepting such work as
the Plumbing Inspector shall order to be done as a condition precedent to the reissuing of
the permit.
4.15 FEES. The fees for street repairs, wells, pumps, plumbing, and laying are as follows:
Description Fee
1. Street Repair Fee to 50% of Width $500.00
2. Street Repair Fee over 50% $750.00
3. Connection to Private or Public Sewer System $ 40.00
4. Water Connection 2” or Under $ 30.00
5. Water Connection Over 2” $ 35.00
6. Relaying of Existing Sewer or Drain Field $ 20.00
7. Each Fixture $ 7.00
8. Well Pump $ 15.00
9. Building Drain $ 20.00
10. Storm Sewer Catch Basin $ 25.00
11. Sprinkler Main Connections $ 20.00
12. Sprinkler Heads $ .25 each
13. Re-inspection $ 25.00
14. Minimum Fee per Permit $ 50.00
4.16 SEWAGE HOLDING TANKS.
(1) No sewage holding tanks shall be permitted for any new residential construction.
(2) Sewage holding tanks will be permitted for existing residential uses after a determination
has been made by the Commission of Public Works:
(a) That no connection to a public sewer is available; and
(b) That the existing septic sewage disposal system upon the premises is inoperative
based on percolation tests and boring tests and does not meet the requirements of
the Wisconsin State Administrative Code; and
(c) That the construction of a new septic sewage disposal system upon the premises
would not meet the requirements of the Wisconsin State Administrative Code;
and
(d) That the building site is located within a plotted subdivision; and
(e) That such sewage holding tank shall remain in use only for such period of time as
it can be abandoned in favor of a connection to a public sewer or to another
permanent method of sewage disposal meeting the requirements of the Wisconsin
State Administrative Code.
(3) A permit from the Plumbing Inspector shall be required for the installation of any
allowable sewage holding tank.
(4) The owner of any premises whereon is located a sewage holding tank shall be responsible
for its operation and maintenance so that it does not cause any detriment to the health or
welfare to the occupants of the premises or to any neighbors.
4.17 ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS TO THE STORM DRAIN
SYSTEM.
(1) Definitions. The following definitions shall be applicable in this Section:
(a) Illicit Connection: Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system
including, but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-storm water
discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the
storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor
drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been
allowed, permitted, or approved by a government agency, prior to the adoption of
this ordinance.
(b) Person: Means any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as
the owner’s agent.
(c) Storm Drain System: Publicly-owner facilities by which storm water is collected
and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems,
municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities,
retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage
channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
(2) Discharges Prohibited. No person shall discharge, spill or dump substances or materials
which are not entirely composed storm water into receiving bodies of water or onto
driveways, sidewalks, parking lots or other areas that drain into the storm drainage
system.
(3) Connections Prohibited. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of
illicit connections to the storm drainage system is prohibited. This prohibition expressly
includes, without limitation, illicit connections made prior to the adoption of this
ordinance, regardless of whether the connections was permissible under law or practice
applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
(4) Exemptions. The following activities are exempt from the provisions of this Section
unless found to have an adverse impact on the storm water:
(a) Discharges authorized by a permit issued by the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources.
(b) Discharges resulting from fire fighting activities.
(c) Discharges from uncontaminated ground water, potable water source, roof drains,
foundation drain and sump pump, air conditioning condensation, springs, lawn
watering, individual residential car washing, water main and hydrant flushing and
swimming pools if the water has been dechlorinated.
(5) Enforcement. Whenever the Director of Public Works, or his agent or designee, finds a
person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this Section, the
Director of Public Works, or his agent or designee, may order compliance by written
notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
(a) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(b) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
(c) The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contaminated hazards
and the restoration of any affected property;
(d) In the event the person fails to eliminate the illicit connects or discharge, fails to
cease and desist in discharge, practices or operations in violation of this Section
or fails to abate or remediate the storm water pollution or contamination hazards,
that person may be subject to a forfeiture for each offense together with the costs
of prosecution, in accordance with the provisions of Section 19.04 of this Code.
Each day that the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
4.18 PENALTY. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Chapter or any order,
rule, or regulation issued hereunder, shall be shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
§19.04 of this Village Code.
CHAPTER 5
Electrical Code
5.01 Object and Purpose
5.02 Administration
5.03 License for Electricians
5.04 Permits
5.05 Permit Fees
5.06 Inspection
5.07 Right of Entry
5.08 Installation Standards
5.09 Sale of Illegal Equipment
5.10 Duties of Electrical Inspector
5.11 Force and Effect
5.12 Penalty
5.01 OBJECT AND PURPOSE. The object and purpose of this electrical code is to
safeguard persons and property from hazards arising from the use of electrical energy by
establishing minimum standards fro the installation and maintenance of electrical
systems. Compliance with these standards is intended to result in installations reasonably
free from electrical hazards. The standards merely prescribe and establish a reasonable
minimum and do not constitute a specification for electrical installations and electrical
equipment.
5.02 ADMINISTRATION.
(1) Department of Electrical Inspection. There is created the Department of Electrical
Inspection, which shall be under the supervision of the Village Administrator. An
Electrical Inspector, appointed by the Village Board, shall act as head of this department,
performing such inspection and other duties as are required. The Electrical Inspector
shall have the general management and control of all matters pertaining to electrical
inspection and shall enforce this code. Where requirements of various laws and
regulations and the provisions of this code conflict, the stricter requirements shall govern.
(2) Electrical Inspector. The Electrical Inspector shall have the following qualifications:
(a) He shall be of good moral character.
(b) He shall be a competent electrician.
(c) He shall be well-versed in approved methods of electrical construction for safety
of life and property, the statutes of Wisconsin relating to electrical work, the
rules and regulations issued by the Wisconsin Department of Labor, Industry,
and Human Relations, and the National Electric Code of the National Fire
Protective Association.
(d)
1. He shall have had at least two (2) years experience as a journeyman in
the practice of his trade and two (2) years of training in a recognized
college of electrical engineering; or
2. He shall have had at least five (5) years experience as a master
electrician or electrical contractor in the business of supervising the
installation of electrical wires, apparatus, and equipment; or
3. He shall have had at least that experience and training which is
equivalent to the stated in subparagraphs 1 and 2.
(3) Examining Committee. There shall be appointed an Examining Committee, which shall
consist of the Electrical Inspector and two (2) members who shall be named by the
Electrical Inspector subject to the approval of the Village Board. Whenever practicable,
the two (2) said members shall have a practical knowledge of electricity. Two members,
the Electrical Inspector, and a committee member shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.
5.03 LICENSE FOR ELECTRICIANS.
(1) Required. No person shall install, alter, repair, remove, connect, disconnect any
electrical wiring fixtures or apparatus for any purpose in the Village without first having
procured a license therefore as herein provided; except any person who is performing
such work as a bona fide employee of and for the holder of a license. The electrical
inspector shall periodically research the roster of licensees to determine that all electrical
work performed within the Village is under the supervision of a qualified electrician.
(2) Fees. The initial fee for such license shall be $60.00 for one year. For each yearly
renewal of such license, a fee of $40.00 shall be paid. All such licenses shall be issued
for one year commencing July 1 and expiring on June 30 of each year following their
issuance, unless sooner revoked. If any license shall not be renewed on or before July 1
of each year, such license shall be considered as having lapsed and the renewal fee
therefore shall be $60.00. The Electrical Inspector shall not be under any obligation to
notify any licensee regarding the termination of date of the license held.
Fees for all licenses shall be paid to the Village Treasurer and no license shall be issued
or held valid unless signed by the Electrical Inspector and stamped as paid by the Village
Treasurer in the amount required by such license.
(3) Application. Application for a license shall be made to the Electrical Inspector on forms
furnished by him. All applications for license shall be referred by the Electrical Inspector
to the Examining Committee, who shall promptly investigate and report to the Electrical
Inspector as to the fitness of the respective applicants for the license. All applicants shall
have had at least six (6) years practical experience in electrical work; except that if any
applicant has attended an accredited electrical school, he shall have full credit given to
him toward the six (6) year practical experience requirement for each full year he has
attended such accredited electrical school to a maximum of three (3) years practical
experience.
(4) Examinations. The Committee shall meet as often as necessary for the consideration of
such applications, an regular examinations shall be held during August, but special
examinations may be held at any time selected by the Committee.
Any person successfully passing the examination of the Examining Committee shall be
issued a master electrician’s certificate to that effect and he may thereafter be granted a
license upon the payment of proper fee. Such master electrician’s certificate shall be
good for a period of five (5) years, and may within 30 days after expiration, thereafter be
renewed for a like period without having to take another examination, within the
discretion of the Examining Committee.
(5) Plant Electrician. A license fee of $15.00 each calendar year shall be charged for any
person who regularly employs a competent electrician to do the maintenance work in his
plant, but in no case shall such electrician be permitted to engage in the installation of
any electrical wiring, fixtures, or apparatus outside of that solely in connection with such
plant. Such license may be granted to individuals only, so that when the licensed
electrician leaves that employ of such person, a new license will be required for the new
employee performing such services.
Any new employee hired to do maintenance work in any plant shall make application to
the Electrical Inspector for a temporary license. If the Electrical Inspector shall consider
such applicant qualified, he may grant him permission to do such maintenance work only
until the next examinations are held, at which time such new employee shall take the
examination prescribed by the Examining Committee. If such employee passes said
examination, he shall be issued a permanent license; and if he shall not pass such
examination, his temporary license shall be revoked and no license shall be granted to
him, in which case the person so hiring said electrician may hire some other employee
who is capable.
(6) Revocation. The Examining Committee may investigate any charge which may be
brought against the holder of a license and may revoke any such license for violation or
for noncompliance with this Chapter by the licensee, or any person performing work
under the direction of the licensee.
When a license is revoked, no license shall again be granted to the same licensee for at
least 30 days. After 30 days have expired the licensee may make application for
reinstatement by filing a request therefore with the Electrical Inspector. The Electrical
Inspector shall submit the application for reinstatement to the Examining Committee.
Should the Examining Committee refuse reinstatement of the license, the licensee shall
not be permitted to make application for reinstatement for a period of six (6) months from
the date of last petition. Any licensee petitioning for reinstatement may demand a
hearing and the Committee shall meet and hear the licensee within 60 days from the date
of the petition. The reinstatement fee for such license shall be $20.00.
(7) Inspector and Committee Members not Liable. If any action is taken by the Electrical
Inspector or by any member of the Examining Committee to enforce this Chapter such
action or act shall be considered as done in the name of and on behalf of the Village, and
the Electrical Inspector or any member of the Examining Committee in so acting for the
Village shall not be liable for any damage that may accrue to any person or persons or
property as a result of any such action or act committed in the discharge of their duties,
and any lawsuit or action brought against said Electrical Inspector or members of said
Committee by reason thereof, shall be defended by the Village Attorney until termination
of the proceedings contained therein.
5.04 PERMITS.
(1) Required.
(a) No electrical equipment shall be installed, altered, renewed, replaced, or
connected without first procuring a permit therefore. A permit shall be required
for the repair, removal, or disconnection of any existing branch lighting circuit
switches, sockets, or receptacles, and any such electrical work shall only be done
by a qualified person under this Code.
(b) Before overhauling existing installations, or replacing work condemned by the
Electrical Inspector, a permit shall be procured. Fees provided for “new work”
under this Code shall apply to all repairs or replacements made as a result of
condemnation by the Electrical Inspector.
(2) Temporary Permits.
(a) For buildings where conduit wiring is required, special permits for temporary
work may be granted by the Inspector for the installation of open work and
exposed wiring, lights, power for building operations, display, decorative
lighting, etc., for use for a period not to exceed six (6) months subject to
discontinuance and complete removal at expiration and to condemnation and
revocation within such period.
(b) On applying for permit for temporary work, a specified period of time which
such wiring is to remain in service must be started. Service shall be cut off at the
end of this period and shall not again be connected without a written permission
from the Electrical Inspector.
(3) Exceptions.
(a) Any person manufacturing electrical appliances, employing a competent
electrical, shall not be required to have a permit for his testing equipment.
(b) In emergency work, the person doing such work shall report same to the
Electrical Inspector within two (2) days after beginning work and such work shall
be done in accordance with this Chapter.
(4) Application; Issuance. The Electrical Inspector shall issue permits for the execution of
electrical installation for light, heat, or power upon the filing of proper applications,
which shall be made on blanks furnished by the Electrical Inspector prescribing the
nature of the work, and no work shall be done until a permit has been obtained.
No permit shall be issued until all fees have been paid and all orders of the Electrical
Inspector complied with. No permit shall be issued unless the permit shall list all
electrical work to be installed. In event electrical work is commenced prior to the
issuance of a permit, a double fee shall be required for such work.
5.05 PERMIT FEES.
(1) Permit fees for Electrical Installation shall be:
Description Fee
1. Light Switch, Light Fixtures, & Convenience Outlets $ .70 each
2. Light Fixture and Florescent Tube $ .60 each
3. Mercury, HPS, LPS, Metal Halide Fixtures $ 3.00 each
4. Range & Clothes Dryer $ 8.00 each
5. Garbage Disposal & Dishwasher $ 7.00 each
6. Water Heaters, Gas & Oil Burners $ 11.00 each
7. Refrigerating & Air Conditions - .25 per HP $ 11.00 min
8. Feeders – No. 4 A.W.G. or larger $ 14 .00 each
9. Temporary Service (How Long?) $ 25.00 each
10. Service Conductors & Switch
a) 0 through 400 amps $ 25.00 each
b) 401 through 1,000 amps $ 35.00 each
c) each 1,000 amps added $ 35.00 each
11. Ventilation Fans/Exhaust $ 5.00 each
12. Motors over ¼ HP $ 1.00 per HP
13. Fuel Dispensing Pumps $ 10.00 each
14. Transformers, Rectifiers, & Generators $ .50 per KW
15. Space Heating Systems – per circuit $ 5.00 each
16. Misc. Heating Devices $ 6.00 each
17. Dimmers – 1,000 Watts or more $ 4.00 each
18. Power Receptacles – 230 volts or over $ 8.00 each
19. Wireways, Busways, Raceways, or Gutters $ .40 per ft.
20. Strip Lights, Plug-in Strip, or Trol-E-Duct $ .50 per ft.
21. X-ray Machines & Motion Picture Machines $ 80.00 each
22. Signs $ 20.00 each
23. Swimming Pools
a) In-ground $ 40.00 each
b) Above-ground $ 25.00 each
24. Hot Tubs/Spas $ 60.00 each
25. Re-inspection /Special Inspection $ 35.00 each
26. Minimum Fee for Permit $ 60.00
5.06 INSPECTION
(1) Upon Completion. Upon Completion of the wiring in or on any premises and before any
wiring is to be hidden from view, the person doing the work shall notify the Electrical
Inspector and the Inspector shall inspect the installation within 24 hours of the time such
notice is received. If, upon inspection, it is found that the installation is in compliance
with this Code and does not constitute a hazard to life or property, he shall approve the
same and authorize concealment of the wiring, or authorize connection for electrical
service. If the installation is incomplete or not strictly in accordance with this Code, he
shall issue orders to the person installing the same to remove all hazards and make the
necessary changes or additions within seven (7) days. No person shall conceal any
electrical work before inspection. If this subsection is violated, the Electrical Inspector
has authority to order removal of any materials which conceal the electrical work from
inspection and may, at his option, require all trades to cease further construction until
thee has been compliance with such order.
(2) Turning On Current. Current shall not be turned on any electrical wiring until a
certificate of inspection has been issued by the Electrical Inspector; provided, however,
that in occupied buildings, where a permit for lighting fixtures has been issued, the
Electrical Inspector may authorized the installation of meters for electric service after the
wiring has been inspected and approved.
(3) Turning Off Current. The Electrical Inspector shall cut off the electrical current from
any equipment which is found in his judgment to be in an unsafe condition, and no
person shall reconnect any equipment thus cut off until written permission is given by the
Electrical Inspector.
(4) Additional Inspections. Where additional inspections are made necessary by reason of
neglect to make connections work, found faulty or defective at the expiration of the time
limit set for re-inspection as specified in notice duly served, inspection fee shall be
$50.00 for each re-inspection.
(5) Inspection where Plant Electrician Employed. Any person using electricity for light,
heat, or power and regularly employing an electrician to give his attention to the electric
equipment, shall have his electrical installation inspected semi-annually, and shall pay
fees as provided in Section 5.05.
A record shall be kept of all new installation and permanent alterations made during the
period from one (1) periodical inspection to the next and shall be submitted to the
Electrical Inspector whenever periodical.
5.07 RIGHT OF ENTRY. If the Electrical Inspector or his assistants have the knowledge or
belief that a violation of this Code exists, he shall have the right to enter any building,
premises, or subway in the discharge of his official duties, and for that purpose shall be
given prompt access on reasonable notification to the proper authority.
5.08 INSTALLATION STANDARDS.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, all electrical methods, materials, and
applications shall conform to and comply with the Fire Code of the Village and the
National Electrical Code of the National Fire Protective Association edition in force by
the State of Wisconsin at the date of issuance of the permit. Installation, alteration,
replacements, and repairs of electrical equipment used for light, heat, or power shall be
installed in a workable and workman-like manner in conformity with the regulations of
this Chapter.
(a) Wiring Installations – Commercial. Electrical wires for light, heat, or power
shall be installed in rigid steel conduit, electrical metallic steel tubing, or
approved plastic conduit in all commercial buildings hereafter built or
remodeled, except residences containing not more than two (2) living units.
Concealed wiring may be installed in armored cable.
(b) Exception. Wood Frame Multi Family construction may be installed in nonmetallic
shielded cable in conformance with the Wisconsin State Electrical Code,
Volume 2 ch ILHR 16, of the Department.
(2) The Electrical Inspector may grant special permission, for a limited period of time, for
the installation or use of temporary electric wiring and equipment which does not
conform with the regulations of this Chapter. The person installing such wiring or
equipment shall be directly and legally responsible and accountable for the safe condition
of the installation at all times, and its complete removal at the end of the fixed temporary
period, as set by the Electrical Inspector, or any time sooner when ordered by the
Electrical Inspector. Carnivals, circuses, theatrical acts, and exhibitions and all places of
temporary outdoor assembly are included in the provision of this subsection and all
electric wiring and equipment associated therewith shall be installed, maintained, and
operated in a safe and workmanlike manner. All such electric wiring and equipment shall
be isolated from the public by proper elevation and guarding and all electric fuses and
switches shall be installed in approved enclosures. Cable laid on the ground in area
traversed by the public shall be buried in trenches or protected by approved covers.
(3) Prefabricated Buildings. Pre-wired buildings or parts of buildings where the finish of
the wiring therein has been installed in a manner or at such point in construction as to
preclude the inspection by observation of any portion of the electrical system, without
inspection as herein provided, are in violation of this electrical code.
The rules and regulations issued by the Wisconsin Department of Labor, Industry, and
Human Relations and the National Electrical Code of the National Fire Protective
Association shall apply to prefabricated construction.
Where the said buildings or parts of buildings conform with the requirements of all other
ordinances, compliance with the electrical code can be acquired in the following manner:
(a) The Village Electrical Inspector can make the inspection at the factory. All costs
of time and transportation by a mutually acceptable means shall be paid by the
owner or manufacturer; or
(b) The finish of all walls may be installed after inspection at this site of erection; or
(c) All wiring may be “fished in” at the site of erection.
5.09 SALE OF ILLEGAL EQUIPMENT. No person shall keep or offer for sale or sell, for
use within the Village, any apparatus, equipment, or fixtures, designed or intended to be
used for the production, transmission, or utilization of electrical current or power, if said
apparatus, equipment, or fixtures, when installed for use, would be in violation of this
Chapter or would be unsafe or dangerous.
5.10 DUTIES OF ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR. The Electrical Inspector shall enforce this
Chapter. A record shall be kept of all official work; said record shall be so arranged as to
afford prompt information concerning electrical equipment.
5.11 FORCE AND EFFECT. Existing electrical equipment which does not conform tot the
regulations of this Code may be continued in use if maintained in a safe condition.
When any addition, alterations, or renewals of existing electrical equipment lawfully
installed prior to the adoption of this Code are made, such portion of the installation
which is added, altered, or renewed shall conform to the regulations of this Code.
Any change in the occupancy or use of an existing building, structure, or premises for
which an occupancy permit is required shall require that an electrical inspection be made
prior to the issuance of occupancy permit.
All violators will at that time be corrected to the satisfaction of the Electrical Inspector
except that he may accept such existing items of electrical work which were installed
according to code and under permit at the time of installation and which he shall not
consider as a hazard to public safety.
5.12 PENALTY. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Chapter or order, rule, or
regulation issued hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as provided in §19.04 of this
Village Code.
CHAPTER 6
Fire Prevention Code
6.01 Intent
6.02 Definitions
6.03 State Codes Adopted
6.04 Fire Inspections
6.05 Right of Entry
6.06 Investigation of Fires
6.07 Waste Material
6.08 Keeping Oily Rags, Etc.
6.09 Carrying Fires and Open Candle Flames
6.10 Emission of Sparks from Chimneys or Smokestacks
6.11 Defective Chimneys
6.12 Use of Oxy-Acetylene Torches
6.13 Oil Drip Pans
6.14 Gasoline Engines
6.15 Glue Pots and Soldering Furnaces
6.16 Smoking
6.17 Gas Shut-off, Gas Appliances
6.18 Pathways Required
6.19 Flammable Decorative Materials
6.20 Closing and Vacating of Buildings
6.21 Stoves in Public and Mercantile Buildings
6.22 Notice Showing Location of Fire Escapes
6.23 Obstruction: Change in Position or Construction
6.24 Construction and Operation of Filling Stations
6.25 Delivery and Storage of Flammable Liquids
6.26 Underground Storage of Flammable Liquids
6.27 No Smoking in Mercantile Establishments
6.28 Fire Extinguishers: Survey and Specifications
6.29 Commercial and Institutional Kitchens
6.30 Maintenance of Equipment
6.31 Automatic Sprinkler Systems
6.32 Standpipe Systems
6.33 Modification of Code Requirements
6.34 Tank Inspection Fees
6.35 Appeals
6.36 Penalty
6.37 Fees
6.38 Public Street and Highway Fire Call Service Costs
6.01 INTENT. It is the intent of this Chapter to prescribe regulations consistent with
recognized good practice for the safeguarding to a reasonable degree of life and property
from the hazards of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling, and use of
hazardous substances, materials, and devices and from conditions hazardous to life or
property in the use of occupancy of buildings or premises.
6.02 DEFINITIONS.
(1) Approved as applied to fire sprinkler installations means approved by the authority
charged with enforcement of this section.
(2) Approved as applied to automatic fire sprinkler devices means by provisions of the
applicable orders and/or codes of the Wisconsin State Industrial Commission.
(3) Area means the maximum horizontal projected area on one floor of a building or
structure within the exterior walls or, when a building is divided by approved fire walls,
each section so divided shall be considered an area.
(4) Automatic Fire Sprinkler Equipment means an integrated system of underground and
overhead piping designed in accordance with fire engineering standards. The system
includes a suitable water supply, such as a gravity tank, fire pump, reservoir, or pressure
tank and/or connection by underground piping to a municipal water main. The portion of
the sprinkler system above ground is a network of specially sized or hydraulically
designed piping installed in a building, structure, or area, generally overhead, and to
which sprinklers are connected in a systematic pattern. The system includes a controlling
valve and a device for actuating an alarm when the system is in operation. The system is
usually activated by heat from a fire and discharges water over the fire area.
(5) Basement means any store where less than half the height between the floor and ceiling
is above the average level of street, sidewalk, or finished grade.
(6) Fire Chief. The Fire Chief of the Village of Hales Corners as defined in Article VII of
the Bylaws.
(7) Fire Department. The Fire Department of the Village of Hales Corners as defined in
Article VII of the Bylaws.
(8) Fire Resistive means the type of construction in which the structural members including
walls, partitions, columns, floor, and roof construction are of noncombustible materials
with fire resistive ratings not less than those specified in the following table.
The two classifications are identified by the required fire resistance of floors as a matter
of convenience.
Fire Resistance Rating of Classification
Structural Members in Hours 3 Hour 2 Hour
Bearing walls or bearing portion of walls, exterior or
interior 4 3
Nonbearing walls or portions of walls, exterior or
interior (NC – noncombustible) NC NC
Principal supporting members including columns,
trusses, girders, and beams for one floor or roof only 3 2
Principal supporting members including columns,
trusses, girders, and beams for more than one floor or
roof 4 3
Secondary floor construction members, such as the
beams, slabs, and joints not affecting the stability of the
building 3 2
Secondary roof construction members such as beams,
purlins, and slabs, not affecting the stability of the
building 2 1½
Interior partitions enclosing stairways and other openings
through floors 2 2
(9) Fire Walls means a wall which has a fire resistance rating of not less than four (4) hours
and which subdivides a building or separate buildings to restrict the spread of fire
including a three (3) foot parapet wall.
(10) Multi-family House means a building or portion thereof containing three (3) or more
dwelling units, including tenement house, apartment house, or flat.
(11) Story means that part of a building comprised between a floor and the floor or roof next
above.
(12) Other Terms Used in This Section shall be as defined in Chapter Ind. 51 of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code.
6.03 STATE CODES ADOPTED. The following orders and codes of the State Industrial
Commission pertaining to fire prevention shall be a part of this Chapter as if the same had
been fully set forth herein, and it shall be the duty of the Fire Chief and his authorized
assistants to enforce these orders and all other provisions set forth in this Chapter.
(1) Cleaning and Dyeing Code, Chapter IND 7, Wis. Admin. Code.
(2) Flammable Liquids Code, Chapter IND 8, Wis. Admin. Code.
(3) General Orders on Liquified Petroleum Gases, Chapter IND 9, Wis. Admin. Code.
(4) General Orders on Dusts, Fumes, Vapors, and Gases, Chapter IND 20, Wis. Admin.
Code.
(5) General Orders on Spray Coating, Chapter IND 21, Wis. Admin. Code.
(6) Boiler and Unfired Pressure Vessel Code, Chapters IND 41 and 42, Wis. Admin. Code.
(7) Refrigerating Plan Code, Chapter IND 45, Wis. Admin. Code.
(8) Scope of Building Code, Chapter IND 50, Wis. Admin. Code.
(9) Definitions and Standards, Chapter IND 51, Wis. Admin. Code.
(10) General Requirements, Chapter IND 52, Wis. Admin. Code.
(11) Structural Requirements, Chapter IND 53, Wis. Admin. Code.
(12) Factories, Office, and Mercantile Buildings, Chapter IND 54, Wis. Admin. Code.
(13) Theaters and Assembly Halls, Chapter IND 55, Wis. Admin. Code.
(14) Schools and Other Places of Instruction, Chapter IND. 56, Wis. Admin. Code.
(15) Apartment Buildings, Hotels, and Places of Detention, Chapter IND 57, Wis. Admin.
Code.
(16) General Orders on Existing Buildings, Chapter IND 60 through 64, Wis. Admin. Code.
(17) General Orders on Fire Prevention, Chapter IND 65, Wis. Admin. Code.
6.04 FIRE INSPECTIONS.
(1) Periodic Inspections Required. The Fire Chief shall inspect or cause to be inspected as
often as may be necessary but not less than once in six (6) months, all buildings and
premises in the Village except the interior of private dwellings for the purpose of
ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire, or any
violations of the provisions of intent of any ordinance of the Village affecting the fire
hazard and exists. Such inspection frequency shall be established in Fire Inspection
criteria submitted by the Fire Chief, through the Police and Fire Commission, to the
Village Board. Such criteria and any alterations thereto shall become effective only upon
adoption by Village Board Resolution.
(2) Correction of Hazardous Conditions.
(a) Combustible Material; Obstructions. Whenever the Fire Chief shall find in any
building or upon any premises combustible or explosive matter of dangerous
accumulations of rubbish or accumulations of waste paper, boxes, shavings, or
any highly flammable materials which are so situated as to endanger life or
property, or shall find obstructions to or on any fire escapes, stairs, passageways,
corridors, halls, loading platforms, doors, or windows, liable to interfere with the
operations of fire departments or emergency equipment or egress of occupants in
case of fire, he shall order the same to be removed immediately. If he shall find
entrance or exit sidewalks or vehicular driveways or interior driveways or
sidewalks obstructed by snow, debris, construction material, vehicles, or other
matter liable to interfere with the ingress or the operation of fire apparatus or
other emergency vehicles, he shall order the obstruction removed. No person
shall operate a motor vehicle onto, on, or across the access drive upon the Hales
Corners Fire Department premises, except as may be necessary for Fire
Department or Village government purposes; any motor vehicle operated upon
the access drive for other than specified purposes shall be an “unauthorized
vehicle” for which entry upon the access drive is prohibited; the operation of any
such unauthorized vehicle shall be a violation of this Chapter and a violation of
Chapter 2 of the Municipal Code and shall subject the operator thereof to the
penalty and enforcement provisions in both Chapters, a violation of this access
drive prohibition for Chapter 2 penalty and enforcement provision purposes
being considered akin to a violation of §346.12, Wis. Stats., prohibiting driving
through safety zones.
To effectuate the foregoing as to vehicles, the Village Administrator, upon such
finding by the Fire Chief, may order “No Parking” signs erected, may designated
the placement thereof, and may order that curbs be painted a distinctive color.
The parking of any vehicle on private property or otherwise, in violation of the
foregoing, shall constitute a violation of this Chapter. In addition, the vehicle
parked in violation may be impounded by the Police Department and held until
the towing and storage charges incurred are paid.
(b) Defective Buildings. When any inspector shall find any building or other
structure which for want of repairs, lack of sufficient fire escapes, automatic or
other fire alarm apparatus, or fire extinguishing equipment, or by reason of age or
dilapidated conditions, or from any other cause, is especially liable to fire and
which is so situated as to endanger other property or the occupants thereof, and
whenever such inspector shall find in any building combustible waste material,
explosive matter, or flammable conditions dangerous to the safety of such
buildings or the occupants thereof, he shall order such dangerous conditions or
materials to be removed or remedied.
If in any existing building exits are necessary or where repairs to any structural
part of such building or structure are required, the inspector shall notify the
Building Inspector who shall re-inspect such building or structure, thereafter
instituting the proper remedies as may be required.
(c) Orders.
1. Service. Any orders under this section shall be served in writing upon
the occupant and owner of the premises. If the owner or occupant of the
premises cannot be found, such written order shall be affixed in a
conspicuous place on the entrance door to such building or structure or
on the premises. Thereafter, a copy of such order shall be mailed to the
owner and occupant addressed to their last known post office address.
No person shall remove such affixed notice without the written consent
of the Fire Chief.
2. Compliance. Any such order shall forthwith be complied with by the
owner and occupant of such building, structure, or premises. The owner
or occupant may within 24 hours appeal to the Fire chief for a review of
such order, who shall thereafter as soon as possible file his decision.
Unless such order is revoked or modified by the Fire Chief, it shall
remain in full force and be complied with within the time fixed in said
order.
(3) Exceptions. This Section shall apply to all buildings except:
(a) Private residences and accessory buildings in connection therewith.
(b) Temporary buildings or sheds used for construction purposes only.
Provided, if any building or structure, whether above exempted or not, is especially liable
to fire, and is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property, or contains any
combustible or explosive material dangerous to the safety of any building or premises or
the occupants thereof, or endangering or hindering firemen in case of fire, such building
or structure shall be subject to these orders so far as may be necessary to protect
adjoining or other buildings and their occupants and firemen.
6.05 RIGHT OF ENTRY. The Fire Chief or any inspector may at all reasonable hours enter
any buildings, premises, or public thoroughfares, excepting only the interior of private
dwellings, for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be correct any condition liable
to cause fire, or any violation of the law or order relating to fire hazards or prevention of
fires. The owner, agent, or occupant of any such premises who refuses to permit, or
prevents or interferes with, any entry into or upon the premises by any such inspector, or
interferes with any such inspection, shall be guilty of violating this Chapter.
6.06 INVESTIGATION OF FIRES. The Fire Department shall investigate the cause, origin,
and circumstances of fires occurring in the Village by which property has been destroyed
or damaged and, so far as possible, shall determine whether the fire is the result of
carelessness or design. Such investigations shall begin immediately upon the occurrence
of such fire, and if it appears to the officer making such an investigation that such fire is
of suspicious origin, the Fire Chief shall be immediately notified of the facts. He shall
thereupon take charge immediately of the physical evidence, shall notify the proper
authorities designated by law to pursue the investigation of such mattes and shall further
cooperate with the authorities in the collection of evidence and in the prosecution of the
case. A written report shall be filed within 24 hours with the Fire Department of every
fire by the senior officer in charge of such fire. Such report shall be in such form as
prescribed by the Fire Chief. It shall contain a statement of all facts relating to the cause,
origin, and circumstances of such fire and other information as may be required.
The Village Attorney and any other department of the Village, upon the request of the
Fire Department, shall assist in the investigation of any fire, which in the Department’s
opinion, is of suspicious origin.
6.07 WASTE MATERIAL.
(1) No owner, agent, or occupant of any building situated within the Village shall allow to
accumulate any waste paper, hay, straw, rages, or other waste material of combustible
nature in any building or on a premise more than 24 hours unless stored as provided in
subsection (2).
The Fire Chief shall order the immediate removal of such accumulated combustible waste
material from any building or premises when in his opinion such storage would create a
fire hazard. Ashes, when kept in basements in buildings under this section shall be
placed in fireproof bins, areas, or containers.
(2) Combustible cuttings disposal of waste, cloth, paper, or other waste combustible cutting
shall be cleared up and removed from the building at the close of each day’s work, and
shall be stored in a separate fireproof storage building, or in a metal container with cover,
or in a metal-lined box with cover, or in a fireproof vault or room.
6.08 KEEPING OILY RAGS, ETC.
(1) Oily waste and oily rags, when not in actual use, during the day, shall be kept in
approved, standard, self-closing metal waste cans, set firmly on three (3) inch legs. One
such waste can shall be installed for every 2,500 square feet of floor area, on each floor,
where oil waste or oily rags are used. The contents of all such waste cans shall be
destroyed, burned, or removed from the building at the close of each day’s work.
(2) Sweeping compounds within buildings shall be kept and stored in covered metal drums
or containers.
(3) Oily or greasy clothing shall not be allowed to remain on wooden floors or work benches,
nor placed in wooden lockers or hung against wooden walls or partitions. Wellventilated
metal lockers or metal-lined wooden lockers shall be provided.
(4) No owner or occupant of any building or premises shall store or permit the storage in any
building or on any premises of any loose or baled hay, straw, hemp, flax, tow, shavings,
sawdust, or any other combustible materials of like nature.
6.09 CARRYING FIRES AND OPEN CANDLE FLAMES.
(1) No person shall carry any fire in or through any street, lot, land, or alley except if such
fire be carried within a closed secure pan, vessel, or vehicle.
(2) No open flames or open flame candles or open flame fixtures, guarded or not, including
fireplaces, shall be used for lighting or decorative purposes in public assembly rooms or
in buildings or structures with public amusement, recreation, or dining purposes, unless
the Chief of the Fire Department or his designated representative permits such use under
such restrictions as, in his judgment, are necessary to avoid danger of ignition of
combustible material or injury to persons.
(3) Duly constituted churches or lodges may use open flame candles or other open flame
fixtures customarily associated with official functions and ceremonies without the prior
approval of the Chief of the Fire Department or his designated representative provided
precautions are taken to avoid danger of ignition of combustible material or injury to
persons.
6.10 EMISSION OF SPARKS FROM CHIMNEYS OR SMOKESTACKS. The owner of
any building wherein any chimney or smokestack used in connection with heating or
power by boilers or furnaces or for burning of refuse, emits sparks or burning embers,
shall provide such chimney or smokestack with an approved arrestor or any other
approved device that shall prevent such emissions.
6.11 DEFECTIVE CHIMNEYS. No person shall allow any dangerous chimney, flue, roof,
or any part of a building which might constitute a fire hazard to remain upon his premises
after due notice to repair or remove the same has been given by the Fire Department to
remedy the conditions.
6.12 USE OF OXY-ACETYLENE TORCHES. Any person desiring to use oxy-acetylene
torches for cutting any metal on any premises and in or on any building, shall first make
application for permission to do so to the Fire Chief. The application for such permission
shall set forth the location of the premises where the work is to be done and a description
of the work that is to be done. Before such oxy-acetylene torches are used, proper
protection of surroundings shall be made by the use of asbestos blankets or other fire
resisting materials. Ashes or sand shall be used for the absorption of oil. A fire
extinguisher, pails of water, or small hose attached to water supply shall be conveniently
located close to the cutting operations. Such other precautions shall be taken as may be
ordered by the Fire Chief.
This section shall not apply to business establishments when such oxy-acetylene torch is
used in connection with regular business operations. Such establishments shall use the
same precautions to prevent fires as required of persons who must obtain a permit.
6.13 OIL DRIP PANS. Metal drip pans shall be placed under all oil barrels resting on
wooden floors, platforms, or supports, and under all machines using oil, to catch the oil
drippings and oily metal borings. The contents of such drip pans shall be properly stored
in metal bins until removed from the building.
When a printing press or other oil bearing machine is placed on a combustible floor, such
floor shall be covered with substantial sheet metal.
Metal oil drip cups shall be placed under all shaft bearings, including elevator machinery,
suspended from the ceiling.
6.14 GASOLINE ENGINES. All stationary gasoline engines hereafter installed shall be
placed upon incombustible floors, platforms, or supports.
The gasoline engine room shall be kept free from dust, waste, and combustible materials,
needless grease or oil, and shall be lighted by incandescent electric lights. No open flame
or heat shall be permitted in such rooms.
The exhaust pipe of such engine shall extend to the outside, above the roof, and in no
case shall it exhaust within six (6) feet from any building.
Where such exhaust pipe passes through any combustible wall, partition, ceiling, or floor,
a clearance of not less than two (2) inches shall be provided around the pipe, and the
exposed woodwork shall be protected by metal, or such pipe may run through a
ventilated double metal thimble, having an air space of not less than one (1) inch between
the inner and outer rings of the thimble. Such exhaust pipes shall not be closer than six
(6) inches to any unprotected combustible wall, partition, or woodwork.
6.15 GLUE POTS AND SOLDERING FURNACES. Glue pots and soldering furnaces,
when in use, shall rest on an incombustible base, and there shall be no unprotected
woodwork within 12 inches from the same.
Wooden work benches may be used as a base for the same, only when covered with
metal over 1/8 inch sheet asbestos, to a distance of not less than 18 inches beyond the pot
or furnace on all sides.
6.16 SMOKING. Any person who by smoking or attempting to light or to smoke cigarettes,
cigars, pipes, or tobacco in which lighters or matches are employed who shall in a
careless, reckless, or negligent manner, whether willfully or wantonly or not, set fire to
any bedding, furniture, curtains, drapes, house, or any household fitting or any part of any
building shall be guilty of violating this Chapter. Smoking materials, including matches
and lighters, shall not be used within 50 feet of areas used for fueling, servicing fuel
systems for internal combustion engines, or receiving or dispensing of Class 1 liquids (as
defined within NFPA Fire Prevention Code 1), upon any business property or property
otherwise open to the public. Conspicuous and legible signs prohibiting smoking shall be
posted by the owner of such property which shall be visible at a distance of not less than
50 feet from such areas. The motors of all equipment being fueled shall be shut off by
the owner or the operator thereof, during the fueling operation, except for emergency
generators, pumps, and the like, where continued operation is essential.
6.17 GAS SHUT-OFF, GAS APPLIANCES. Every gas supply main shall have a service
cock outside of the building so placed and maintained that it can be shut of at any time
without entering the building.
All defective pipes, tubes, valves, joints, or other installation connected with gas lighting
or heating systems shall be repaired or replaced forthwith.
The use of flexible armored gas tubing shall be limited to portable devices and no more
than four (4) feet of length of such tubing shall be used as a connection to any portable
device. There shall be but one (1) shut-off valve and that shall be on the gas pipe to
which such tubing is attached.
6.18 PATHWAYS REQUIRED. The owner or occupant of any business buildings and any
buildings used for any purpose of storage shall have and keep clear from all obstruction
and encumbrance, the floor to ceiling, one pathway on all floors, including the basement
floor, of such building at least three (3) feet wide, and running from the front to the rear
of such buildings. There shall also be pathways two (2) feet wide along the front and rear
of such buildings as the Fire Chief or the Building Inspector may deem necessary, with
not less than one two (2) foot wide pathway connecting such wide pathways with the fire
escape exits or other exits and stairways.
6.19 FLAMMABLE DECORATIVE MATERIAL. No person shall have flammable
window draperies, curtains, or other decorative materials hanging within any building
sued for public assembly. Use of paper decorations, confetti, or flammable materials in
such places is prohibited. In such buildings, fabric decorations where used shall be
flameproofed and so maintained by the owner or occupant of the building.
Flameproofing shall be approved by the Fire Department.
6.20 CLOSING AND VACATING OF BUILDINGS.
(1) The Fire Chief may order the compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and all other
lawful orders or laws relating to fire prevention and fire protection in all existing
buildings and structures.
(2) The Fire Chief shall close any building and order it vacated wherein violations of any of
the provisions of this Chapter are found and not corrected within the time stipulated by
the Fire Chief.
Where the public is exposed to immediate danger, the Fire Chief shall order the closing
and vacating of the building at once.
6.21 STOVES IN PUBLIC AND MERCANTILE BUILDINGS. No owner or occupant of
any building or any person engaged, either as a contractor, workman, or in any other
capacity in any work upon any building, shall maintain a fire in any building in a stove,
salamander, or other similar contrivance unless some responsible person is at all times
present to attend such fire unless a fireproof substance is at all times maintained
immediately under such stove, salamander, or other similar contrivance and unless the
same is connected with the outside of said building by means of a noncombustible pipe or
chimney in such manner that all of the smoke and gases arising from such fire are
conducted directly to the outside of said building.
6.22 NOTICE SHOWING LOCATION OF FIRE ESCAPES. Every building required to
be equipped with fire escape stairways and balconies or spiral chutes shall have displayed
in conspicuous places, on each floor of such building, notices sufficient in number and in
plainly legible type at least six (6) inches in height, indicating and showing the location
of such fire escape stairways, balcony, or spiral chutes and the direct way to reach them.
If such notice be not displayed within 30 days after such equipment is installed and kept
continuously displayed the Building Inspector or Fire Chief shall cause the buildings to
be closed and kept closed until the provisions of this section shall have been complied
with.
6.23 OBSTRUCTION: CHANGE IN POSITION OR CONSTRUCTION. No person
shall close up or obstruct any passageway leading to any fire escape stairways, balconies,
or platforms, or any spiral chute of any building. No change in the position or
construction of any such fire escape stairway, balcony, or platform, or spiral chute shall
be made unless the permission of the Building Inspector and Fire Chief shall first have
been obtained.
6.24 CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATION OF FILLING STATIONS.
(1) Construction and Care. Gasoline stations or any other places or structures where
gasoline or other flammable liquid is disposed of shall be so constructed or graded as to
effectively prevent spills from flowing into the interior of buildings or from collecting in
any place. No such flammable liquid or the drainage from crank cases, except in suitably
closed metal containers, shall be permitted within a hazardous distance from a motor or
spark emitting device.
(2) Vending Devices. Devices vending or gauging flammable liquids shall be firmly secured
to concrete or masonry foundations, shall not leak or drip, and when an attendant is not
present shall be securely locked.
(3) Signs. “No Smoking” and “Stop Motor While Filling” sings shall be prominently posted
so as to be readily visible at points where gasoline is handled.
(4) Smoking Prohibited. In all rooms or parts of buildings which contain flammable liquids
in open containers or in which the vapors from flammable liquids are present, or in which
flammable liquids are used n any manufacturing process, smoking and the carrying of
matches is prohibited. Suitable signs lettered “Smoking Prohibited” shall be displayed.
(5) Fire Extinguishers. Wherever flammable liquids are dispensed or distributed an
adequate number of chemical fire extinguishers shall be provided in prominent and easily
accessible places. Extinguishers shall be reconditioned and refilled once a year and shall
always be in working order. No fire bucket, pail, or any device by which water alone is
applied to flames shall be constructed to be an extinguisher within the meaning of this
section.
(6) Open Flames. No flammable liquids shall be drawn, handled, or stored near or in the
presence of open flames or fires.
6.25 DELIVERY AND STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS. Any person dealing at
retail or wholesale in gasoline, benzene, or naphtha, and order like products of petroleum
in this Village, shall deliver the same to the purchaser only in tank wagons or in barrels,
jugs, or cans, painted vermillion red and having the word “Gasoline”, “Benzene”, and the
name of such other like product of petroleum plainly stenciled in English thereon, except
gasoline, benzene, naphtha or other like product may be delivered from underground
containers or tanks by means of a hose, through a measuring device or pump complying
with the rules and regulations of the State, direct to the tank of motor vehicle. No dealer
shall deliver kerosene in a barrel, jug, or can painted or stenciled as herein provided. Any
person purchasing gasoline, benzene, naphtha, or other like product of petroleum for use
or sale shall procure and keep the same only in barrels, jugs, or cans painted and stenciled
as herein provided, or if such products are used as fuel for a motor vehicle or motor boat,
in the tanks of such vehicle or boat. No person keeping for use or using kerosene shall
put or keep the same in any barrel, jug, or can painted or stenciled except as herein
provided. However, gasoline, benzene, and naphtha or other like product of petroleum or
of which gasoline, benzene naphtha, or petroleum in a constituent part may be sold in
bottles or cans of not more than one (1) quart for cleaning and similar purposes, if the
contents of such bottles or cans are so designated by a label securely pasted or attached
thereto with the words “gasoline”, “benzene”, or “naphtha” as “unsafe when exposed to
heat or fire”, printed thereon in bright red ink in letters not less than one-fourth inch in
size.
6.26 UNDERGROUND STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS. No underground tank
for the storage of flammable liquids shall be closer than 10 feet lateral distance from the
building sewer to the nearest point of excavation for each tank.
6.27 NO SMOKING IN MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENTS. In shall be unlawful to
light a match or other flame-producing device, or to smoke, carry a lighted cigar,
cigarette, or pipe in any retail mercantile establishment, except in areas approved for such
purpose by the Fire Chief. It shall be the duty of the person in charge (operator, licensee,
owner, or manager) of such establishment to post and maintain approved sins bearing the
works “No Smoking” in locations as designated by the Fire Chief or his representative.
Such person shall be held responsible for the enforcement of the regulations of this
section.
6.28 FIRE EXTINGUISHERS; SURVEY AND SPECIFICATIONS.
(1) At least one (1) fire extinguisher shall be required for every assembly, educational,
industrial, institutional, mercantile, storage, and multi-family occupancy, and additional
fire extinguishers shall be required for every 2,400 square feet or fraction thereof of floor
space in such establishments.
(2) The Fire Chief or his representative shall survey each occupancy requiring fire
extinguishers and shall specify fire extinguishing appliance sand fire detecting devices of
a type approved by a recognized testing laboratory in such number as may be necessary
to provide reasonable safety to persons and property.
6.29 COMMERCIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL KITCHENS. All commercial and
institutional kitchens shall have a U.L. Approved Hood and Duct Extinguishment System
as approved by the Wisconsin Fire Insurance Rating Bureau. The system shall also have
an automatic fuel cutoff.
6.30 MAINTENANCE OF EQUIPMENT. Sprinkler systems, standpipe systems, fire alarm
systems, and other fire protective or extinguishing systems or appliances which have
been installed in compliance with any permit or order, or because of any law or
ordinance, shall be maintained in operative condition at all times, and I shall be unlawful
for any owner or occupant to reduce the effectiveness of the protection so required;
except this shall not prohibit the owner or occupant from temporarily reducing or
discontinuing the protection where necessary to make tests, repairs, alterations, or
additions. The Fire Chief shall be notified before such tests, repairs, alterations, or
additions are started unless the work is to be continuous until completion.
6.31 AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS.
(1) Intent. The intent of this section is to provide a means for the automatic extinguishment
of fires in buildings or parts of buildings which because of their size, construction, or
occupancy or lack of suitable protective equipment constitute a special fire hazard to life
or property and an excessive burden upon the fire extinguishing facilities of the Fire
Department.
(2) Where Required. Every building hereinafter constructed or structurally altered shall
have an approved automatic sprinkler system installed and maintained when occupied in
whole or in part for the following purposes.
(a) The manufacture, storage, or sale of combustible goods or merchandise in:
1. Fire resistive buildings if: over 10,000 square feet in area; or over one (1)
story in height and exceeding 6,000 square feet in area; or over four (4)
stories in height regardless of area; or throughout every building,
regardless of number of stories where the floor area is undivided by fire
walls and exceeds 6,000 square feet and where any point within the
building is more than 50 feet, measured in a straight line, from an
exterior and accessible opening of the building.
2. Non-fire-resistive buildings if: over 7,000 square feet in area; or over one
(1) story in height and exceeding 4,000 square feet in area; or over three
(3) stories in height, regardless of area; or throughout every building,
regardless of the number of stories where the floor area undivided by fire
walls exceeds 5,000 square feet and where any point in the building is
more than 50 feet, measured in a straight line, from any exterior and
accessible opening of the building.
(b) Garages. Throughout public garages as follows: fire-resistive building over
10,000 square feet area; non-fire-resistive buildings over 6,000 square feet in
area.
(c) Basements. Throughout all basements and cellars of buildings having an area of
2,500 square feet or more used for the manufacture, storage, or sale of
combustible material or merchandise, or the housing of automobiles.
(d) Hotels. Throughout hotel buildings of non-fire-resistive construction more than
three (3) stories in height, and more than two (2) stories in height, if over 5,000
square feet area.
(e) Multi-family Dwellings and Dormitories. In the basements, cellars, storerooms,
work rooms, hallways, and stairways of multi-family buildings and dormitories
of non-fire-resistive construction, more than two (2) stories in height, or over
4,000 square feet of area.
(f) Theaters and Halls. Throughout buildings occupied or used as places of public
assembly having a stage arranged for theatrical, operatic, or similar
performances, excepting only auditorium foyers, lobbies, and throughout all such
buildings of non-fire-resistive construction, if such places of assembly are
located above the first floor, whether or not there is a stage.
(g) Hospitals and Other Institutional Buildings. Throughout hospitals and other
institutional buildings of non-fire-resistive construction over two (2) stories in
height and over one (1) story in height, if over 5,000 square feet in area.
(h) Schools and Public Buildings. In basements, kitchens, shops, and other spaces
where combustible materials are stored or handled, in buildings of non-fireresistive
construction over two (2) stories in height, or of two (2) stories in
height, if over 10,000 square feet or more in area.
(3) Application to Existing Buildings.
(a) Where the Fire Chief finds that existing buildings which are used in whole or in
part for the purposes set forth in subsection (2) of this section and which
constitute as severe fire hazard to its occupants or to adjoining property he may
order compliance with the provisions of this section. Installation of the
automatic sprinkler system shall be started within one (1) year from the service
of such order and completed within 90 days after construction is started.
(b) “Severe Fire Hazard” shall be determined by one or more of the following:
1. Any building which by reason of its construction or highly combustible
occupancy involves a severe life hazard to it occupants or in the
judgment of the Fire Chief constitutes a fire menace, e.g. paint shops and
other occupancies involving processing, mixing, storage, and dispensing
of volatile liquids.
2. Non-fire-resistive characteristics of the structure.
3. Accumulation of flammable and/or combustible material.
4. Accessibility to the premises for fire fighting equipment.
5. Number of invitees on the premises.
6. Traffic patterns for pedestrian ingress and egress.
7. Ventilation system.
8. Internal communication system.
9. Number, characteristics, and movement of employees.
10. Use and area of the premises as it would apply under subsection 2 of this
section.
(4) Type of System and Approval of Plans. Approved automatic sprinkler equipment shall
be installed, connected to an adequate water supply with sprinkler heads, valves, and
auxiliary equipment of standard types suitable for the individual building to be protected
as determined by Standard 13 of the National Fire Protection Association in effect at date
of installation. No automatic sprinkler equipment shall be installed or altered in a
building until plans have been submitted to and approved by the Fire Chief. Two (2)
copies of the plans and specifications shall be submitted for review; approved plans shall
be stamped “Approved by the Fire Chief” the date of such approval and one (1) copy
returned to the owner, the other kept on file by the Building Inspector.
(5) Interim Installations.
(a) Unless, or until such time as, a municipal water supply is available to serve a
building in which installation of an automatic sprinkler system is required,
connection of the system to a water supply shall not be required; however, all
design characteristics of systems installed under this Chapter shall include
provisions for eventual connection to a municipal water supply. In addition, such
interim installation shall also include;
1. One or more Fire Department connections with two female couplings
with National Standard Threads attached to a header of adequate sizes in
accordance with fire protection engineering standards, but not less than
four (4) inches, to supply the system; and
2. An automatic fire detection and alarm system of a type approved by the
Wisconsin Department Commerce, which fire detection and alarm
system shall be connected to a private alarm system company. The fire
detection and alarm system shall be in conformance with the
requirements of N.F.P.A. Standards 72C and 72E, Heat or Smoke
Detection Systems.
(b) The intent of Section 6.31(5)(a) is to eliminate the requirement for installation of
overhead tanks, pressure tanks, and other water supply systems while
simultaneously making the safety benefits of a sprinkler system available to
occupants and firefighters. All fire sprinkler systems installed under the
requirements of this section shall be connected to a municipal water system
within 90 days after water mains to serve the building are accepted by the Village
Engineer.
(c) Those sprinkler systems installed prior to the adoption of this code, and which do
not have an alarm and detection system as provided under subsection (a)2 herein,
and those automatic sprinkler systems installed in new or existing buildings
which have access to municipal water shall contain a remote alarm connected to
the Fire Department Dispatch office. The alarm shall be installed in accordance
with the “Standards for the Installation and Maintenance and Use of Remote
Station protective Signaling Systems for Fire Alarm and Supervisory Service”,
N.F.P.A. 72C.
(6) Exemption and Substitution of Other Fire Protection Equipment. Nothing contained
herein shall be construed as requiring the installation of sprinklers in safe deposit or other
vaults or in rooms or buildings devoted to the manufacture or storage of aluminum
powder, calcium carbide, calcium phosphide, metallic sodium and potassium, quick lime,
magnesium powder, sodium peroxide, or like materials where the application of water
may cause or increase combustion, nor in any other location where the installation of
sprinklers may increase the hazard; nor shall it be construed in any way as prohibiting the
substitution of other automatic protective equipment when approved by the Fire Chief.
6.32 STANDPIPE SYSTEMS.
(1) General Requirements. All required standpipe systems shall meet the requirements of
this section.
(2) Classes of Service.
(a) Class I – Fire Department Standpipes. For use by fire departments and those
trained in handling heavy fire streams from 2½ -inch hose.
1. Where Required. Fire Department standpipes shall be provided in all
structures over two (2) stories in height unless said building is equipped
with an automatic sprinkler system throughout.
Required standpipes shall be installed as construction progresses, to
make them available for Fire Department use in the topmost floor
constructed. Temporary standpipes may be provided in place of
permanent standpipes during the period of construction when approved
by the Fire Chief.
2. Number of Standpipes. Standpipes shall be sufficient in number so that
any part of any floor area can be reached within 30 feet by a nozzle
attached to 100 feet of hose connected to the standpipe in an
unsprinklered building and 250 feet of hose in a partially sprinklered
building.
3. Cross Connections. When two or more standpipes are required, they
shall be cross connected and equipped with individual control valves.
All control valves shall be of an approved indicating type valve. The
valves shall be located so that the water supply to any standpipe riser can
be shut off without interrupting the water supply to the remaining
standpipes and be readily accessible to the Fire Department.
4. Location of Outlets. Hose outlets shall be located in stairway enclosures.
Where stairways are not enclosed, outlets shall be at the inside of outside
walls, within one foot of a smokeproof tower, interior areas, standpipes
may be located at accessible interior locations.
5. Protection of Standpipes. Standpipes shall be protected against
mechanical and fire damage. Dry standpipes shall be visible for
inspection and not concealed. It is not the intent of this section to require
standpipes to be protected with an hourly rated fire protection.
6. Size. No required standpipe shall be less than four (4) inches in
diameter, and not less than six (6) inches in diameter for standpipes in
excess of 100 feet in height, or the system is hydraulically designed in
accordance with the requirements of subsection (3).
7. Hose Valves and Connections. An approved 2½ -inch hose connection
valve shall be located at each storey, not less than three (3) feet nor more
than six (6) feet above the floor level. Hose connection valves shall be
equipped with a tight fitting cap on a chain and having heavy lugs for a
spanner wrench.
8. Hose Threads. All threads on hose connections shall be of National
Standard dimensions. Note: §213.13, Wis. Stats., requires that all hose
connections be fitted with the National Standard hose threads adopted by
the National Fire Protection Association.
9. Fire Department Connection. An approved fire department connection
shall be installed on a four (4) inch or larger pipe connection, and at a
location on the building that is approved by the Fire Chief with each
standpipe system. The connection shall be marked “Standpipe”. If
automatic sprinklers are also supplied by the hose connection, the sign
shall read “Standpipe and Automatic Sprinkler”. The elevation of the
connection may not be less than 18 inches nor more than 42 inches above
the sidewalk or ground. If municipal water is available at the building
site, the fire department connection shall be located as close as possible
to and within 150 feet of a fire hydrant unless the Fire Chief shall permit
other distance.
10. Automatic Water Supply. An automatic water supply for a wet standpipe
system shall be designated to provide not less than the following capacity
from top outlets at not les than 65 PSI flowing pressure for a period of 30
minutes; 500 GPM for a single standpipe; 750 GPM for two (2)
interconnected standpipes; 1,000 GPM for larger systems. Any of the
following supplies will be acceptable:
a. Public water works systems where pressure and discharge
capacity are adequate;
b. Approved automatic fire pump (or pumps);
c. Pressure tank;
d. Gravity tank;
e. Approved manually controlled fire pump operated by remote
control devices at each hose outlet; or
f. Reservoirs.
11. Dry Standpipes. If only one standpipe is required, a dry standpipe may
be used. A dry standpipe shall be limited to a single riser and shall not
exceed 150 feet in height.
(3) Combined Automatic Sprinkler and Standpipe System.
(a) Definition. A combined system is a system where the vertical water piping
serves both the automatic sprinkler system and the 2½ -inch hose outlets of the
standpipes used by the Fire Department. The combined system shall comply
with all applicable sections of this Fire Prevention Code as it pertains to
automatic sprinkler systems and standpipe systems.
(b) Water Supply and Riser Size. The minimum water supply and riser size for a
combined systems hall comply with the requirements of subsection (2), (6), and
(7), except the minimum water supply for a partially sprinklered light hazard
occupancy building shall be 750 gallons per minute.
(c) Connections. Each connection from a vertical riser of a combined system shall
be provided with an individual control valve of 2½ -inches, capped as provided
in Subsections (2) and (7).
(4) Maintenance. Standpipe systems and equipment shall be maintained in an operable
condition.
6.33 MODIFICATION OF CODE REQUIREMENTS. The Fire Chief shall have power to
modify any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code upon application in writing by
the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in
the way of carrying out the strict letter of the Code, provided that the spirit of the Code
shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of
such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the Chief of the Fire
Department thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed
copy shall be furnished the applicant. In addition, a copy of such application and
decision shall be filed with the Village Administrator.
6.34 TANK INSPECTION FEES. The Fire Department of the Village of Hales Corners is
authorized to perform inspections of above-ground and underground storage tanks. The
following fees shall be applied to the inspection of above-ground and underground
storage tanks to assist in defraying the costs of performing such inspections:
Commercial Tanks:
Removal per tank $100.00
Installation of tank $30.00 / 1000 gallons ($100.00 minimum)
Plan review $40.00
Site inspection $60.00
Upgrade in system $60.00
Re-inspection $55.00 / inspection
Residential Tank: Removal per tank $100.00
Installation of tank $100.00
Plan review $40.00
Site inspection $60.00
Upgrade in system $60.00
Re-inspection $55.00 / inspection
The fees shall be charged to the owner of the property upon which such tank is located
and shall be due and payable within 30 days of the mailing of a statement to the property
owner for same. Any delinquent amount of such fees remaining unpaid may be entered
on the tax roll and bill for the property as a special charge, in addition to all other
methods of collection available at law and in equity to the Village.
6.35 APPEALS. If the Fire chief disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit
applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the Code doe not apply or that the
true intent and meaning of the Code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the
applicant may appeal from the decision of the Fire Chief to the Board of Appeals within
30 days from the date of the decision appealed. Where applicable, the Rules of the Board
of Appeals shall apply.
6.36 FEES.
(1) An annual fire prevention inspection fee shall be charged to the property owner for
required inspections of each building, structure, premises and sprinkler systems.
(2) The annual fee for required fire inspections shall be as follows:
a) Residential*
Structures with 3 or more units $ 6.30 per unit
b) Commercial
Square Footage** Charge per Unit
Under 1,000 $ 7.35
1,000 – 4,999 $ 18.90
5,000 – 24,999 $ 37.80
25,000 – 99,999 $ 75.60
100,000 – 149,999 $100.80
150,000 – 199,999 $126.00
200,000 – 249,999 $151.20
250,000 – 374,999 $189.00
375,000 – 499,999 $226.80
500,000 or more $378.00 plus $31.50 per each
additional 25,000 sq. ft. over
500,000 sq. ft.
c) Industrial
Square Footage** Charge per Unit
Under 5,000 $ 37.80
5,000 – 24,999 $ 75.60
25,000 – 99,999 $113.40
100,000 – 174,999 $189.00
175,000 – 224,999 $283.50
225,000 – 349,999 $378.00
350,000 – 499,999 $504.00
500,000 or more $504.00 plus $31.50 per each
additional 25,000 sq. ft. over
500,000 sq. ft.
d) Institutional (Churches/Schools)
Square Footage** Charge per Unit
Under 1,000 $ 12.60
1,000 – 4,999 $ 31.50
5,000 – 24,999 $ 63.00
25,000 – 99,999 $126.00
100,000 – 249,999 $189.00
250,000 – 499,999 $252.00
500,000 – 999,999 $378.00
1,000,000 or more $630.00
* The fee for hotels and motels shall be the same as for residential property,
except that the fee shall be calculated on a per room basis.
**Square footage refers to total gross floor area of any building or structure.
(3) The annual calendar year fee shall be charged for inspection and/or testing services
provided during such calendar year and shall constitute a special charge against the
property so served, pursuant to §66.60(13), Wis. Stats. Property owners shall be billed
for such fees no later than June 30 of each year. If such fees are not paid on or before
July 31 of each year, the fees shall become a lien against the property inspected and/or
tested and shall automatically be extended upon the current tax roll as a delinquent tax
against the property. All proceedings in relation to this collection, return, and sale of
property for delinquent real estate taxes shall apply to such special charge. Sprinkler
flow test fees shall be charged and collected with the alarm system billing.
(4) All buildings owned by the United States Government, the State of Wisconsin,
Milwaukee County, public schools, and the Village of Hales Corners shall be exempt
from this fire inspection fee.
(5) This section shall be effective for calendar years commencing January 1, 1995.
6.37 PUBLIC STREET AND HIGHWAY FIRE CALL SERVICE COSTS. Every person
to whom a fire call is provided on a public street or highway in the Village of Hales
Corners shall pay to the Village the actual costs of such fire call service, up to a
maximum of $500 per call. A “fire call” service under this Section shall mean a response
or appearance by the Village Fire Department as a result of an occurrence or incident
upon a public street or highway within the Village: to extinguish a fire on a vehicle,
structure or vegetation; a response or appearance to handle gasoline, other hazardous
materials, or other debris; or a response to a request or appearance for extrication
equipment to remove or attempt to remove individuals trapped in vehicle(s) as the result
of a crash on a public street or highway; all of the foregoing without regard to whether
the fire equipment was actually used. Such payment shall be due upon invoice by the
Village. A “person to whom a fire call is provided” shall include any person operating a
motor vehicle for which a fire call is made, any person owning a motor vehicle for which
a fire call is made and any person lawfully upon a public street or highway in the Village
for which a fire call is made, jointly and severally. §6.34 of this Chapter, pertaining to
appeals, and §6.35 of this Chapter, pertaining to penalty, shall not apply to this Section.
6.38 PENALTY. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Chapter or any order,
rule, or regulation issued hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section
19.04 of this Code.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
CHAPTER 8
Zoning Code
Chapter 1 Introduction
8-1-1 Authority
8-1-2 Title
8-1-3 General Purpose
8-1-4 Intent and Purpose in View
8-1-5 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
8-1-6 Interpretation
8-1-7 Severability and Non-liability
8-1-8 Repeal and Effective Date
Chapter 2 General Provisions
8-2-1 Jurisdiction and General Provisions
8-2-2 Use Regulations
8-2-3 Site Regulations
8-2-4 Heights and Area Exceptions
8-2-5 Reduction or Joint Use
8-2-6 Screens and Buffers
8-2-7 Automobile Service Station Requirements
8-2-8 Historical Preservation
8-2-9 Home Occupations
8-2-10 Landscaping
8-2-11 Stormwater Management Requirements
8-2-12 Construction Site Erosion Control and Storm Water Management
Chapter 3 Zoning Districts
8-3-1 Establishment of Districts
8-3-2 Vacation of Streets; Annexations
8-3-3 Zoning Map
8-3-4 Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries
8-3-5 R-1 Residence District
8-3-6 R-2 Residence District
8-3-7 R-3 Residence District
8-3-8 R-4 Residence District
8-3-9 B-1 Shopping Center District
8-3-10 B-2 General Business District
8-3-11 B-3 Automobile Oriented Business
8-3-12 B-4 Office and Professional Services
8-3-13 M-1 Light Manufacturing
8-3-14 P-1 Parks and Institutional
8-3-15 RCO Redevelopment/Conservation Overlay District
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Chapter 4 PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay District
8-4-1 Purpose of the PUD Overlay District
8-4-2 Types of Planned Unit Developments
8-4-3 Physical Requirements for Planned Unit Developments
8-4-4 Signs
8-4-5 Off-Street Parking
8-4-6 Subsequent Land Division
8-4-7 Criteria for Approval
8-4-8 Procedural Requirements for a Planned Unit Development Overlay District
8-4-9 Basis for Approval of the Petition for Planned Unit Development
8-4-10 Recording and Implementation Plan
Chapter 5 Floodplain-Wetland Code
8-5-1 Statuatory Authorization, Concurrent Jurisdiction, Finding of Fact, Statement of Purpose
8-5-2 General Provisions
8-5-3 General Floodplain-Wetland District
8-5-4 Nonconforming Uses
8-5-5 Administration
8-5-6 Amendments
8-5-7 Definitions
Chapter 6 Conditional Uses
8-6-1 Statement of Purpose - Conditional Uses
8-6-2 Authority of the Plan Commission; Requirements
8-6-3 Initiation of Conditional Use
8-6-4 Application for Conditional Use
8-6-5 Hearing on Application
8-6-6 Notice of Hearing on Application
8-6-7 Standards - Conditional Uses
8-6-8 Denial of Application for Conditional Use Permit
8-6-9 Appeals
8-6-10 Conditions and Guarantees
8-6-11 Validity of Conditional Use Permit
8-6-12 Complaints Regarding Conditional Uses
8-6-13 Bed and Breakfast Establishments
8-6-14 Requirements for Buildings or Uses which are Fifty Thousand (50,000) Square Feet or
Greater in Area and which Are Used for the Permitted or Conditional Use in the B-1
Shopping Center District
Chapter 7 Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Lots
8-7-1 Existing Use Permitted
8-7-2 Classification and Regulation
8-7-3 Removal of Hazards
8-7-4 Front Setback Deviations
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Chapter 8 Traffic Visibility, Loading, Parking and Access
8-8-1 Traffic Visibility
8-8-2 Loading Requirements
8-8-3 Parking Requirements
8-8-4 Highway Access
8-8-5 Storage and Parking of Recreational Vehicles
8-8-6 Storage of Trucks, Tractors and Road Machinery
Chapter 9 Signs and Billboards
8-9-1 Purpose of Sign and Billboard Regulations
8-9-2 Signs and Billboards - Definitions
8-9-3 Sign Permit Required
8-9-4 Signs Excepted
8-9-5 Sign Setbacks Required
8-9-6 General Prohibitions
8-9-7 Permit Procedures and Fees
8-9-8 Construction Standards
8-9-9 Specific Sign Restrictions
8-9-10 Temporary Signs
8-9-11 Campaign Signs
8-9-12 Dangerous and Abandoned Signs
8-9-13 Variances or Exceptions
8-9-14 Construction and Maintenance Regulation for Signs
8-9-15 Nonconforming Signs
8-9-16 Abandoned Billboards and Signs
8-9-17 Enforcement
Chapter 10 Performance Standards - Industrial and Business Developments
8-10-1 Chapter Intent
8-10-2 Vibration
8-10-3 Cellular Telephone, Microwave, and Related Communication Towers and Accessory
Ground Structures
8-10-4 External Lighting
8-10-5 Odor
8-10-6 Particulate Emissions
8-10-7 Visible Emissions
8-10-8 Hazardous Pollutants
Chapter 11 Satellite Earth Stations; Television or Radio Antenna Towers; Wind Energy
Systems
8-11-1 Satellite Earth Stations
8-11-2 Radio or Television Antenna Towers
8-11-3 Conditional Use Permits Required - Wind Energy Systems
8-11-4 Permit Procedure - Wind Energy Systems
8-11-5 Specific Requirements Regarding Wind Energy Systems
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Chapter 12 Accessory Uses and Structures; Fences and Hedges
8-12-1 Accessory Uses or Structures
8-12-2 Outside Storage of Firewood
8-12-3 Outside Storage
8-12-4 Fences and Hedges
8-12-5 Swimming Pools
Chapter 13 Administration
8-13-1 General Administration System
8-13-2 Zoning Administrator
8-13-3 Role of Specific Village Officials in Zoning Administration
8-13-4 Occupancy Permit
8-13-5 Site Plan Approval
8-13-6 Official Map
8-13-7 Violations and Penalties
Chapter 14 Changes and Amendments to the Zoning Code
8-14-1 Authority
8-14-2 Initiation of Changes or Amendments
8-14-3 Procedure for Changes or Amendments
8-14-4 Protest
Chapter 15 Appeals
8-15-1 Appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals
8-15-2 Application for Hearings
8-15-3 Hearings
8-15-4 Decision and Disposition of Cases
8-15-5 Variations
8-15-6 Review by Court of Record
Chapter 16 Definitions
8-16-1 Definitions
Code Amendments
Village of Hales Corners
Zoning District Summaries
Minimum Lot Size Minimum Yard Requrement
Total Area
(Square
Feet)
Width at
Frontage
(Feet)
Front Yard
(Feet) Side Yard (Feet)
Rear Yard
(Feet)
R-1 Resident District
two-family dwellings; single family dwellings; public
parks
Churches; Schools; Libraries, museums, community
buildings; CLAS for 9-15 persons 10,000 75 35
with attached
garage-10; with
detatched garage-
10 (north or west
sides) or 20 (south
or east sides) 40
R-2 Resident District single family dwellings; public parks.
Churches; Schools; Libraries, museums, community
buildings; Private recreational uses; Two-family
dwellings; CLAS for 9-15 persons 15,000 90 45
with attached
garage-10 (north or
west sides) or 15
(south or east
sides); with
detatched garage-
10 (north or west
sides) or 25 (south
or east sides) 40
R-3-Resident District single family dwellings
Churches; Schools; Libraries, museums, community
buildings; Private recreational uses; CLAS for 9-15
persons 20,000 100 60
with attached
garage-15; with
detached garage-
15 (north or west
sides) or 30 (south
or east sides) 40
R-4 Resident District Public Parks
Multi-family dwellings for more than 2 families or
housekeeping units; Private clubs; Convalescent
homes; Planned residential development projects;
Funeral homes; Senior Housing; Private recreational
uses 10,000 n/a 35 20 40
B-1 Shopping Center
District
Large general merchandise stores, food stores,
general retail, personal services, banks/savings and
loan institutions, restaurants, offices
Private clubs; Drive-in uses; Parking and storage lots;
Mechanical garages; Undertaking establishments
with attached living quarters; Veterinarian offices
and/or animal hospitals; Building supply stores 2 acres 200 50
corner lot-50; noncorner-
10;
bordering
residentially zoned
parcel-25 25
B-2 General Business
District
Large general merchandise stores, food stores,
general retail, personal services, banks/savings and
loan institutions, restaurants, offices
Financial Institutions with drive-in facilities, veterinary
services, child day care centers, building supply
stores, boat sales and recycling drop off centers 7,200 60 20
corner lot-20; other-
10 25
B-3 Automobile-oriented
District none
Automobile-oriented retail sales and services,
including automotive sales and service, car washes,
gasoline stations, drive-in banking and drive-in
restaurants 15,000 100 40
corner lot-40; noncorner-
10 25
B-4 Office & Professional
Services
Offices, personal service shops, beauty shops, real
estate agencies, travel services, consulting services,
funeral homes, and other professional and similar
offices, financial institutions
Veterinary services, contractors offices, laboratories,
and child day care centers. 7,200 60 20
corner lot-20; other-
10 25
Type of Zoning District Principal Permitted Uses Conditional Uses
Revised 03-05 Page 1 of 2
Village of Hales Corners
Zoning District Summaries
Minimum Lot Size Minimum Yard Requrement
Total Area
(Square
Feet)
Width at
Frontage
(Feet)
Front Yard
(Feet) Side Yard (Feet)
Rear Yard
Type of Zoning District Principal Permitted Uses Conditional Uses (Feet)
M-1 Light Manufacturing
Light manufacturing, building supply yards, bakeries,
laundries, warehouses and similar uses
Outside storage and laboratories; All B-1, B-2, B-3, B-
4 permitted and conditional uses 10,000 75 50
corner lot-50; noncorner-
10 25
P-1 Parks & Institutional
Schools, day care centers, churches, hospitals,
nursing homes, clinics, museums, art galleries,
cemeteries, lodges, public buildings, private and
public recreation and forest preserves
Gift shops, florists, and food service when directly
associated with permitted uses; Funeral homes;
Communication towers, solid waste management,
and recycling facilities; Amphitheaters, amusement
parks & aquariums 10,000 n/a 35
corner lot-50; noncorner-
10 40
RCO
Redevelopment/Conserva
tion Overlay
superimposed upon basic districts to provide certain
additional permissive uses and regulatory standards
applicable thereto without disturbing the underlying
basic district regulations and zoning none n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a
PUD Planned Unit
Development Overlay
Residential, Business, Institutional, Industrial,
Planned Unit Developments and Mixed Compatible
Use Developments
Any use allowed only as a conditional use in any of
the other Districts 1-3 acres n/a n/a n/a n/a
FW Floodplain/Wetland Agriculture, Recreation, Parking Lots none n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a
Revised 03-05 Page 2 of 2
Section 8-1-1
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
SEC. 8-1-1 AUTHORITY.
This Chapter is adopted under the authority granted by Sections 61.35, 62.23(7) and 87.30 of the
Wis. Stats. and amendments thereto.
State Law Reference: Sections 61.35 and 62.23(7), Wis. Stats.
SEC. 8-1-2 TITLE.
This Chapter shall be known as, referred to and cited as the "Zoning Code, Village of Hales Corners,
Wisconsin" and is hereinafter referred to as the "Code" or "Chapter."
SEC. 8-1-3 GENERAL PURPOSE.
The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the comfort, health, safety, morals, prosperity, aesthetics
and general welfare of the people of the Village of Hales Corners, Wisconsin.
SEC. 8-1-4 INTENT AND PURPOSES IN VIEW.
The general intent and purposes in view of this Chapter are to regulate and restrict the use of all
structures, lands and waters and to:
(a) Promote and protect the comfort, public health, safety, morals, prosperity, aesthetics and
general welfare of the people;
(b) Divide the Village into zones or districts restricting and regulating therein the location,
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of buildings, structures and land for
residence, business and manufacturing and other specified uses;
(c) Protect the character and the stability of the residential, business, manufacturing and other
districts within the Village and to promote the orderly and beneficial development thereof;
(d) Regulate lot coverage, the intensity of use of lot areas and the size and location of all
structures so as to prevent overcrowding and to provide adequate sunlight, air, sanitation and
drainage;
(e) Regulate population density and distribution so as to avoid sprawl or undue concentration
and to facilitate the provision of adequate public services, utilities and other public
requirements;
(f) Regulate parking, loading and access so as to lessen congestion in and promote the safety
and efficiency of streets and highways;
(g) Secure safety from fire, panic, flooding, pollution, contamination and other dangers;
(h) Stabilize and protect existing and potential property values and encourage the most
appropriate use of land throughout the Village;
(i) Preserve and protect the beauty of the Village of Hales Corners;
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-1-4
(j) To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the character of development or
intended uses within specified zoning districts;
(k) To provide for the elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings and structures
which are adversely affecting the character and value of desirable development in each
district;
(l) Prevent and control erosion, sedimentation and other pollution of the surface and subsurface
waters;
(m) Further the maintenance of safe and healthful water conditions;
(n) Prevent flood damage to persons and property and minimize expenditures for flood relief and
flood control projects;
(o) Provide for and protect a variety of suitable business and industrial sites;
(p) Protect the traffic-carrying capacity of existing and proposed arterial streets and highways;
(q) Implement those municipal, county, watershed and regional comprehensive plans or
components of such plans adopted by the Village of Hales Corners;
(r) Provide for the administration and enforcement of this Chapter; and to provide penalties for
the violation of this Chapter.
SEC. 8-1-5 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
It is not intended by this Chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing
easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted
or issued pursuant to law. However, whenever this Chapter imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions of this Chapter shall govern.
SEC. 8-1-6 INTERPRETATION.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall be held to be minimum
requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the Village and shall not be construed to be
a limitation or repeal of any other power now possessed by the Village of Hales Corners.
SEC. 8-1-7 SEVERABILITY AND NON-LIABILITY.
(a) If any section, clause, provision or portion of this Chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this Chapter shall not be
affected thereby.
(b) If any application of this Chapter to a particular structure, land or water is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgement shall not be
applicable to any other structure, land or water not specifically included in said judgement.
(c) The Village does not guarantee, warrant or represent that only those areas designated as
floodlands will be subject to periodic inundation and hereby asserts that there is no liability
on the part of the Village of Hales Corners, its agencies or employees for any flood damages,
sanitation problems or structural damages that may occur as a result of reliance upon and
conformance with this Chapter.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-1-8
SEC. 8-1-8 REPEAL AND EFFECTIVE DATE.
All other ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Village inconsistent or conflicting with this
Chapter, to the extent of the inconsistency or conflict only, are hereby repealed.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-10-1
CHAPTER 10
Performance Standards -- Industrial and Business Developments
SEC. 8-10-1 CHAPTER INTENT.
It is the intent of this Chapter to use performance standards for the regulation of industrial uses to
facilitate a more objective and equitable basis for control and to insure that the community is
adequately protected from potential hazardous and nuisance-like effects.
SEC. 8-10-2 VIBRATION.
(a) No operation or activity shall transmit any physical vibration that is above the vibration
perception threshold of an individual at or beyond the property line of the source. Vibration
perception threshold means the minimum ground- or structure-borne vibrational motion
necessary to cause a normal person to be aware of the vibration by such direct means as, but
not limited to, sensation by touch or visual observation of moving objects.
(b) Vibrations not directly under the control of the property user and vibrations from temporary
construction or maintenance activities shall be exempt from the above standard.
SEC. 8-10-3 CELLULAR TELEPHONE, MICROWAVE, AND RELATED
COMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ACCESSORY GROUND STRUCTURES.
(a) Cellular Telephone transmission, microwave and related communication towers, antennas
and accessory ground structures shall be allowed as Conditional Uses only in the M-1 Light
Manufacturing District, P-1 Parks & Institutional and on Municipal property. Fencing must
secure each site with accessory ground structures not to exceed dimensions of 12 x 20 feet
with a maximum height of 10 feet. Ground structures shall have a stone aggregate or
masonry exterior and must be in conformance with other ground structures on each site with
respect to size and exterior materials. Landscaping shall be incorporated at each location.
There shall be a limit of 6 ground structures for each site. Antennas shall have a maximum
height of 125 feet. All obsolete or unused facilities must be removed within 90 days of
cessation of operations at the site.
(b) Cellular telephone transmission, microwave and related antennas shall be allowed as
Conditional Uses in B-1, B-2, B-3 and B-4 Zoning Districts when installed upon a building
roof top. Said structures shall not extend 10 feet beyond the upper most portion of the roof.
Reference: Ordinance 00-12
SEC. 8-10-4 EXTERNAL LIGHTING.
No operation or activity shall produce any intense glare or lighting with the source directly visible
beyond the boundary of an Industrial or Business District.
Section 8-10-5
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
SEC. 8-10-5 ODOR.
No operation or activity shall emit any substances or combination of substances in such quantities
that create an objectionable odor as defined in Chapter NR 154.18, Wis. Adm. Code.
SEC. 8-10-6 PARTICULATE EMISSIONS.
No operation or activity shall emit into the ambient air from any direction or portable source any
matter that will affect visibility in excess of the limitations established in Chapter NR 154.11, Wis.
Adm. Code.
SEC. 8-10-7 VISIBLE EMISSIONS.
No operation or activity shall emit into the ambient air from any direct or portable source any matter
that will affect visibility in excess of the limitations established in Chapter NR 154.11(6), Wis. Adm.
Code.
SEC. 8-10-8 HAZARDOUS POLLUTANTS.
No operation or activity shall emit any hazardous substances in such a quantity, concentration or
duration as to be injurious to human health or property, and all emissions of hazardous substances
shall not exceed the limitations established in Chapter NR 154.19, Wis. Adm. Code.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-11-1
CHAPTER 11
Satellite Earth Stations; Television or Radio Antenna Towers;
Wind Energy Systems
SEC. 8-11-1 SATELLITE EARTH STATIONS.
(a) Permit Required. No owner shall, within the Village of Hales Corners, build, construct, use
or place any type of satellite earth station until a building permit has first been obtained.
(b) Definitions.
(1) For purposes of this Section, a "satellite television dish" or "earth station" is defined
as an apparatus capable of receiving communications from a transmitter or a
transmitter relay located in a planetary orbit. They are also commonly referred to as
disks, satellite communications systems or home earth stations.
(2) "Owner" means the holder of record of an estate in possession in fee simple, or for
life, in land or real property, or a vendee of record under a land contract for the sale
of an estate in possession in fee simple or for life but does not include the vendor
under a land contract. A tenant in common or joint tenant shall be considered such
owner to the extent of his interest. The personal representative of at least one (1)
owner shall be considered an owner.
(c) Installation Restrictions. Satellite earth stations installed in any zoning district within the
Village shall comply with the following provisions:
(1) Number of Units. Not more than one (1) satellite earth stations may be allowed per
individual recorded lot except additional stations may be permitted by the Board of
Appeals upon application for a variance in non-residential zones.
(2) Location and Setbacks.
a. Any satellite dish mounting post shall only be located in the rear yard of a
residential lot. Satellite dishes shall comply with the front, rear and side yard
requirements applicable to accessory buildings in that district.
b. If the dish cannot receive a usable satellite signal in the rear yard of any
residential lot but can receive such a signal while located in a side yard, it
may be located only in a side yard after receiving approval from the Board of
Appeals. For corner lots, a side yard is only a yard that does not face a street.
c. No dish shall be placed in the front yard of any residential, business or
industrial lot in the Village.
(3) Mounting. Satellite earth stations attached to the wall or roof of any principal or
accessory structure shall be subject to the structure being constructed to carry all
imposed loading. The Zoning Administrator may require engineering calculations.
(4) Diameter. The diameter of the satellite television dish shall not exceed ten (10) feet
for the ground-mounted dish and six (6) feet for the roof-mounted dish, except for
stations used to provide community antenna television services.
(5) Height.
a. A ground-mounted satellite dish may not exceed twelve (12) feet in height, as
Section 8-11-1
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
measured from the ground to the highest point of the dish.
b. A roof-mounted satellite dish may not exceed eight (8) feet in height above
the surrounding roof line as measured from the lowest point of the existing
roof line.
(6) Wind Pressure. All satellite earth stations shall be permanently mounted in
accordance with the manufacturer's specifications for installation. All such
installations shall meet a minimum wind load design velocity of eighty (80) mph.
(7) Electrical Installations. Electrical installations in connection with earth satellite
receiving stations, including grounding of the system, shall be in accordance with the
National Electrical Safety Code, Wisconsin State Electrical Code and the instructions
of the manufacturer. In cases of conflict, the stricter requirements shall govern. All
cable used to conduct current or signals from the satellite earth station to the
receivers shall be installed underground unless installation site conditions preclude
underground. If a satellite earth station is to be used by two (2) or more residential
property owners, all interconnecting electrical connections, cables and conduits must
also be buried. The location of all such underground lines, cables and conduits shall
be shown on the application for a permit. All satellite earth stations shall be
grounded against direct lightning strikes.
(8) Temporary Placement. No portable or tailer-mounted satellite earth station shall be
allowed, except for temporary installation for on-site testing and demonstration
purposes for periods not exceeding five (5) days. However, such trial placement
shall be in accordance with all provisions of this Section. Failure to comply shall
result in a citation being issued for violation of this Section. Any person making
such temporary placement shall give written notice to the Zoning Administrator of
the date when such placement shall begin and end.
(9) Advertising. No form of advertising or identification, sign or mural is allowed on the
dish or framework other than the customary manufacturer's identification plates.
(10) Interference with Broadcasting. Satellite earth stations shall be filtered and/or
shielded so as to prevent the emission or reflection of an electromagnetic radiation
that would cause any harmful interference with the radio and/or television
broadcasting or reception on adjacent properties. In the event that harmful
interference is caused subsequent to its installation, the owner of the satellite earth
station shall promptly take steps to eliminate the harmful interference in accordance
with Federal Communication Commission regulations.
(11) Compliance with Federal Regulations. The installation and use of every satellite
earth station shall be in conformity with the Federal Cable Communications Policy
Act of 1984 and regulations adopted thereunder.
(12) Color. The color of any satellite dish shall be such that it blends into its
surroundings and shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator as part of the
application.
(d) Variances. Request for variances from the standards established by this Section may be
made to the Board of Appeals pursuant to Section 8-15-1 of this Chapter.
(e) Enforcement.
(1) It shall be unlawful to construct, use, build or locate any satellite television dish in
Section 8-11-1
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
violation of any provisions of this Section. In the event of any violation, the Village
Board, Zoning Administrator or any property owner who would be specifically
damaged by such violation may institute appropriate action or proceedings to enjoin
a violation of this Section.
(2) Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of this
Section shall, upon conviction, be subject to the general penalty found in Chapter 19.
SEC. 8-11-2 RADIO OR TELEVISION ANTENNA TOWERS.
(a) No radio or television antenna tower shall be erected or installed within the front yard. No
tower shall be erected closer than thirty (30) feet from any property line. Anchor locations
for guy wires shall be located no closer than five (5) feet from any property line. The exact
location of the antenna tower shall be subject to approval by the Zoning Administrator.
(b) No radio or television tower shall exceed a height of sixty (60) feet above the ground
measured at grade level, whichever is the minimum.
(c) Radio or television antenna towers shall be erected and installed in accordance with the
Wisconsin State Electrical Code, National Electrical Safety Code and the instructions of the
manufacturer. In cases of conflict, the stricter requirements shall govern.
Reference: Ordinance 97-11
SEC. 8-11-3 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS REQUIRED -- WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS.
(a) Approval Required. No owner shall, within the Village, build, construct, use or place any
type or kind of wind energy system without holding the appropriate conditional use permit
for said system.
(b) Separate Permit Required for Each System. A separate conditional use permit shall be
required for each system. Said permit shall be applicable solely to the systems, structures,
use and property described in the permit.
(c) Basis of Approval. The Plan Commission shall base their determinations on general
considerations as to the effect of such grant on the health, general welfare, safety and
economic prosperity of the Village and of the immediate neighborhood in which such use
would be located. Considerations as to the effect on the established character and quality of
the area, its physical attractiveness, the movement of traffic, the demand for related services,
the possible hazardous, harmful, noxious, offensive or nuisance effect as a result of noise,
dust, smoke or odor and such other factors as would be appropriate to carry out the intent of
the Zoning Code.
(d) Definitions. "Wind energy systems" shall mean "windmills" which are used to produce
electrical or mechanical power.
SEC. 8-11-4 PERMIT PROCEDURE - WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS.
(a) Application. The permit application for a wind energy system shall be made to the Zoning
Administrator on forms provided by the Village. The application shall include the following
Section 8-11-4
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The address of the property on which the system will be located.
(3) Applications for the erection of a wind energy conversion system shall be
accompanied by a plat or survey for the property to be served showing the location of
the generating facility and the means by which the facility will provide power to
structures. If the system is intended to provide power to more than one (1) premises,
the plat or survey shall show all properties to be served and the means of connection
to the wind energy conversion system. A copy of all agreements with system users
off the premises shall accompany the application. The application shall further
indicate the level of noise to be generated by the system and provide assurances as to
the safety features of the system. Energy easements shall accompany the application.
(4) An accurate and complete written description of the use for which special grant is
being requested, including pertinent statistics and operational characteristics.
(5) Plans and other drawings showing proposed development of the site and buildings,
including landscape plans, location of parking and service areas, driveways, exterior
lighting, type of building material, etc., if applicable.
(6) Any other information which the Zoning Administrator, Plan Commission or
Building Inspector may deem necessary to the proper review of the application.
(7) The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and, if the application is
complete and contains all required information, shall refer it to the Plan Commission.
(b) Hearing. Upon referral of the application, the Plan Commission shall schedule a public
hearing thereof following the procedures for conditional use permits in Chapter 6.
(c) Determination. Following public hearing and necessary study and investigation, the Plan
Commission shall, as soon as practical, render its decision and a copy be made a permanent
part of the Commission's minutes. Such decision shall include an accurate description of the
special use permitted, of the property on which permitted, and any and all conditions made
applicable thereto, or, if disapproved, shall indicate the reasons for disapproval. The Plan
Commission may impose any conditions or exemptions necessary to minimize any burden on
the persons affected by granting the special use permit.
(d) Termination. When a special use does not continue in conformity with the conditions of the
original approval, or where a change in the character of the surrounding area or of the use
itself cause it to be no longer compatible with surrounding areas, or for similar cause based
upon consideration for the public welfare, the special grant may be terminated by action of
the Plan Commission following a public hearing thereon.
(e) Changes. Subsequent change or addition to the approved plans or use shall first be
submitted for approval to the Plan Commission and if, in the opinion of the Commission,
such change or addition constitutes a substantial alteration, a public hearing before the Plan
Commission shall be required and notice thereof be given.
(f) Approval Does Not Waive Permit Requirements. The approval of a permit under this
Chapter shall not be construed to waive the requirement to obtain electrical, building or
plumbing permits prior to installation of any system.
Section 8-11-5
SEC. 8-11-5 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS REGARDING WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
(a) Additional Standards. Wind energy conversion systems, commonly referred to as
"windmills," which are used to produce electrical power, shall also satisfy the requirements
of this Section in addition to those found elsewhere in this Chapter.
(b) Application. Applications for the erection of a wind energy conversion system shall be
accompanied by a plat or survey for the property to be served showing the location of the
generating facility and the means by which the facility will provide power to structures. If
the system is intended to provide power to more than one (1) premises, the plat or survey
shall show all properties to be served and the means of connection to the wind energy
conversion system. A copy of all agreements with system users off the premises shall
accompany the application. The application shall further indicate the level of noise to be
generated by the system and provide assurances as to the safety features of the system.
Energy easements shall accompany the application.
(c) Construction. Wind energy conversion systems shall be constructed and anchored in such a
manner to withstand wind pressure of not less than forty (40) pounds per square foot in area.
(d) Noise. The maximum level of noise permitted to be generated by a wind energy conversion
system shall be fifty (50) decibels, as measured on a dB(A) scale, measured at the lot line.
(e) Electro-magnetic Interference. Wind energy conversion system generators and alternators
shall be filtered and/or shielded so as to prevent the emission of radio-frequency energy that
would cause any harmful interference with radio and/or television broadcasting or reception.
In the event that harmful interference is caused subsequent to the granting of a conditional
use permit, the operator of the wind energy conversion system shall promptly take steps to
eliminate the harmful interference in accordance with Federal Communications Commission
regulations.
(f) Location and Height. Wind energy conversion systems shall be located in the rear yard
only and shall meet all setback and yard requirements for the district in which they are
located and, in addition, shall be located not closer to a property boundary than a distance
equal to their height. Wind energy conversion systems are exempt from the height
requirements of this Chapter; however, all such systems over seventy-five (75) feet in height
shall submit plans to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to determine whether the
system is to be considered an object affecting navigable air space and subject to FAA
restrictions. A copy of any FAA restrictions imposed shall be included as a part of the wind
energy conversion system conditional use permit application.
(g) Fence Required. All wind energy conversion systems shall be surrounded by a security
fence not less than six (6) feet in height. A sign shall be posted on the fence warning of high
voltages.
(h) Utility Company Notification. The appropriate electric power company shall be notified,
in writing, of any proposed interface with that company's grid prior to installing said
interface. Copies of comments by the appropriate utility company shall accompany and be
part of this application for a conditional use permit.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-12-1
CHAPTER 12
Accessory Uses and Structures; Fences and Hedges
SEC. 8-12-1 ACCESSORY USES OR STRUCTURES.
(a) Building Permit Required. No owner shall, within the Village of Hales Corners, build,
construct, use or place any type of an accessory building, including prefabricated accessory
buildings, until a permit shall have first been obtained from the Zoning Administrator.
Application for an accessory building permit shall be made in writing to the Zoning
Administrator. With such application, there shall be submitted a complete set of plans and
specifications, including a plot plan or drawing accurately showing the location of the
proposed accessory building with respect to adjoining alleys, lot lines and buildings.
(b) Principal Use to be Present. An accessory use or structure in any zoning district shall not
be established prior to the principal use or structure being present or under construction.
Any accessory use or structure shall conform to the applicable regulations of the district in
which it is located, except as specifically otherwise provided.
(c) Placement Restrictions -- Residential District. An accessory use or structure in Residence
Districts R-1 to R-4 inclusive, and P-1 Institutional, may be established subject to the
following regulations:
(1) Accessory Building Number Limits. In any residential district, in addition to the
principal building, a detached garage or attached garage and one (1) additional
accessory building and one (1) children's play structure may be placed on a lot.
(2) Attached Accessory Buildings. All accessory buildings which are attached to the
principal building shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building.
(3) Detached Accessory Buildings; Lot Area Coverage.
a. No detached accessory building shall occupy any portion of the required
front or side yard.
b. In the case of an interior lot abutting upon one (1) street, no detached
accessory building shall be erected, altered, or moved so as to encroach upon
the front setback of that lot.
c. In the case of a corner lot, no detached accessory building hall be erected,
altered or moved so as to encroach upon the front setback or the side street
setback.
d. Garages and other detached accessory buildings shall be less than fifteen (15)
feet in height.
e. No detached accessory building(s) shall occupy more than fifty percent
(50%) of the required rear yard. The dimensions of any swimming pool,
children's play structure, detached garage, tennis court and other detached
accessory buildings/structures shall be included in the determination of
available lot area coverage for accessory structures.
f. An accessory building shall not be nearer than ten (10) feet to the principal
structure unless the applicable building code regulations in regard to one (1)
Section 8-12-1
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
hour fire-resistive construction are complied with. In no event, can the
accessory uses or structures be forward of the front line of the principal
structure.
g. No detached accessory building shall be erected, altered or moved so as to be
within five (5) feet of any side or rear lot line, or alley way.
h. Any detached accessory building in excess of one hundred (100) square feet
must conform to the construction requirements of a garage.
(d) Use Restrictions - Residential District. Accessory uses or structures in residential districts
shall not involve the conduct of any business, trade or industry except for home occupations
as defined herein and shall not be occupied as a dwelling unit. Accessory buildings shall not
be used for residential purposes.
(e) Placement Restrictions – Nonresidential Districts. Accessory buildings located in B-1, B-
2, B-3, B-4, M-1 or P-1 Districts shall have a side yard setback and rear yard setback of not
less than ten (10) feet. Front yard setbacks shall conform to the setback requirements and
regulations for that district.
(f) Landscaping Units. Accessory vegetation used for landscaping and decorating may be
placed in any required yard area. Permitted vegetation include trees, shrubs and flowers and
gardens. Under no circumstances may a tent be used as a dwelling or an accessory structure.
(g) Temporary Uses. Temporary accessory uses such as real estate sale field offices or shelters
for materials and equipment being used in the construction of the permanent structure may
be permitted by the Zoning Administrator.
(h) Outdoor Lighting. Outdoor lighting installations shall not be permitted closer than three (3)
feet to an abutting property line and, where not specifically otherwise regulated, shall not
exceed fifteen (15) feet in height and shall be adequately shielded or hooded so that no
excessive glare or illumination is cast upon the adjoining properties.
(i) Retaining Walls. Retaining walls may be permitted anywhere on the lot, provided,
however, that no individual wall shall exceed six (6) feet in height, and a terrace of at least
three (3) feet in width shall be provided between any series of such walls.
(j) Children's Play Structures. For purposes of this Section, children's play structures,
including play houses, tree houses or elevated play structures and climbing gyms, shall be
considered accessory structures and shall comply with the requirements of this Section,
whether such play structures are placed on a foundation or not. Swing sets, slides and
sandboxes are not considered children's play structures for purposes of this Section. A
building permit is not required for the construction of a play structure. Play structures shall
not be used for storage or be constructed out of materials that would constitute a nuisance.
(k) Terrace Area Restrictions. In addition to the definitions and restrictions contained in this
Code of Ordinances, no person shall place any accessory structure or use, including
landscaping ornaments, stones and basketball backboard/hoops, in the terrace area or street
right-of-way.
SEC. 8-12-2 OUTSIDE STORAGE OF FIREWOOD.
(a) No person shall store firewood in the front yard on residentially zoned property, except that
Section 8-12-2
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
firewood may be temporarily stored in the front yard for a period of thirty (30) days from the
date of its delivery.
(b) Firewood should be neatly stacked and may not be stacked closer than two (2) feet to any lot
line and not higher than six (6) feet from grade, except adjacent to a fence where firewood
can be stacked against the fence as high as the fence. Fences as used in this Section shall not
include hedges and other vegetation.
(c) All brush, debris and refuse from processing of firewood shall be promptly and properly
disposed of and shall not be allowed to remain on the premises.
(d) Woodpiles that contain diseased wood that is capable of transmitting disease to healthy trees
and woodpiles that harbor or are infested or inhabited by rats or other vermin are public
nuisances and may be abated pursuant to the provisions of this Code of Ordinances.
(e) Not more than ten percent (10%) of the side and rear yard may be used for storage of
firewood at any one (1) time.
SEC. 8-12-3 OUTSIDE STORAGE.
No manure, rubbish, inoperable vehicles, salvage material or miscellaneous refuse may be stored
within any residential district when the same may be construed as a menace to the public health or
safety or may be held to have a depressing influence upon property values in the area. Junk shall be
placed in properly zoned junkyards only.
SEC. 8-12-4 FENCES AND HEDGES.
(a) Fences Defined. For the purpose of this Section, a "fence" is herein defined as any
enclosing or partially enclosing barrier, regardless of kind or type of material used for
construction, except that barriers composed solely of living plants, shrubs, bushes or trees
shall not be construed a fence under this Chapter. The height of a fence shall be determined
by measurements from the uppermost point of the fence to the existing immediately adjacent
ground level of the adjoining property.
(b) Permit Required. A permit from the Building Inspector shall be required for the
construction or erection of any fence in excess of forty-eight (48) inches in height or of any
fence of any height to be located closer to the road than the building setback line established
by this Zoning Code. The fee shall be Fifty Dollars ($50.00).
(c) Building Board. No permit for a fence shall be issued unless it has been found as a fact by
the Building Board, by at least a majority vote, after a review of the property site and an
examination of the application for the fence permit, which shall include exterior elevations
of the proposed structure, that the height or the architectural appeal and functional plan of
the proposed fence or its location on the site will, when so constructed or erected, not be
such as to cause a substantial depreciation in property values in the immediate neighborhood
or as to cause a traffic hazard.
(d) General Requirements.
(1) All fences erected in the front setback and side street setbacks (for corner lots)
require a permit regardless of height.
Section 8-12-4
(2) The structural side of the fence must be facing inward, or toward the owners'
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
property.
(3) A five foot fence must be set one (1) foot off the property line. A six foot fence must
be set two (2) feet off the property line. Fences four feet or under can be placed up
to the property line.
(e) Security Fences. Security fences are permitted, with Plan Commission approval, on the
property lines in all districts except residential districts, but shall not exceed eight (8) feet in
height and shall be of an open type similar to woven wire or wrought iron fencing.
(f) Prohibited Fences. No fence shall be constructed which is in a dangerous condition, or
which conducts electricity or is designed to electrically shock or which uses barbed wire,
provided, however, that barbed wire may be used in industrially zoned areas if the devices
securing the barbed wire to the fence are eight (8) feet above the ground in height and
project toward the fenced property and away from any public area. In no case shall the
barbed wire protrude over any public walk, road or thoroughfare, nor overhang any adjoining
property lines.
(g) Fences to be Repaired. All fences shall be maintained and kept safe and in a good state of
repair, and the finished side or decorative side of a fence shall face adjoining property.
(h) Temporary Fences. Fences erected for the protection of planting or to warn of construction
hazard, or for similar purposes, shall be clearly visible or marked with colored streamers or
other such warning devices at four (4) foot intervals. Such fences shall comply with the
setback requirements set forth in this Section. The issuance of a permit shall not be
necessary for temporary fences as described herein, but said fences shall not be erected for
more than sixty (60) days.
(i) Snow Fences. Snow fences shall be permitted from November 15th through April 15th, at
which time all structures shall be removed.
(j) Nonconforming Fences and Hedges. Any fence or hedge lawfully existing on the effective
date of this Code of Ordinances and not in conformance with this Section may be
maintained, but alterations, modifications or improvements of said fence shall comply with
this Section.
SEC. 8-12-5 SWIMMING POOLS.
(a) Definition. A private or residential swimming pool is an outdoor structure containing a
body of water in a receptacle or other container having a depth for water at any point greater
than one and one-half (1-1/2) feet. Its use is exclusive for the owner, operator or lessee
thereof and his family, and by friends invited to use it, and includes all structural facilities,
appliances and appurtenances, equipment and other items used and intended to be used for
the operation and maintenance of a private or residential swimming pool.
(b) Exempt Pools. Storable children's swimming or wading pools, with a maximum dimension
of fifteen (15) feet and a maximum wall height of fifteen (15) inches and which are so
constructed that it may be readily dissembled for storage and reassembled to its original
integrity are exempt from the provisions of this Section.
(c) Permit Required. Before work is commenced on the construction or erection of private or
Section 8-12-5
residential swimming pools or on any alterations, additions, remodeling or other
improvements, an application for a swimming pool building permit to construct, erect, alter,
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
remodel or add must be submitted in writing to the Building Inspector. Plans and
specifications and pertinent explanatory data should be submitted to the Building Inspector
at the time of application. No work or any part of the work shall be commenced until a
written permit for such work is obtained by the applicant. The permit fee pursuant to the
Village Building Code shall accompany such application.
(d) Construction Requirements. In addition to such other requirements as may be reasonably
imposed by the Building Inspector, the Building Inspector shall not issue a permit for
construction as provided for in Subsection (b), unless the following construction
requirements are observed:
(1) All materials and methods of construction in the construction, alteration, addition,
remodeling or other improvements and pool installation shall be in accord with all
state regulations and code and with any and all Ordinances of the Village now in
effect or hereafter enacted.
(2) All plumbing work shall be in accordance with all applicable Ordinances of the
Village and all State Codes. Every private or residential swimming pool shall be
provided with a suitable draining method and, in no case, shall waters from any pool
be drained into the sanitary sewer system, onto lands of other property owners
adjacent to that on which the pool is located on in the general vicinity.
(3) All electrical installations, including lighting and heating but not limited thereto,
which are provided for, installed and used in conjunction with a private swimming
pool shall be in conformance with the state laws and Village Ordinances regulating
electrical installations.
(e) Setbacks and Other Requirements.
(1) Private swimming pools shall be erected or constructed on rear or side yards only
and only on a lot occupied by a principal building. No swimming pool shall be
erected or constructed on an otherwise vacant lot. A lot shall not be considered
vacant if the owner owns the contiguous lot and said lot is occupied by a principal
building.
(2) No swimming pool shall be located, constructed or maintained closer to any side or
rear lot line than is permitted in the Zoning Code for an accessory building, and in no
case shall the water line of any pool be less than five (5) feet from any lot line.
(f) Fences Required.
(1) Pools within the scope of this Section which are not enclosed with a permanent
building shall be completely enclosed by a fence of sufficient strength to prevent
access to the pool, or shall have a cover or other protective device over such
swimming pool of such a design and material that the same can be securely fastened
in place and when in place shall be capable of sustaining a person weighing two
hundred fifty (250) pounds. Such cover or protective device shall be securely
fastened in place at all times when the swimming pool is not in actual use for
swimming or bathing purposes. Such fence or wall shall not be less than four (4) feet
in height and so constructed as not to have voids, holes or openings larger than four
(4) inches in one (1) dimension. Gates or doors shall be kept locked while the pool is
Section 8-12-5
not in actual use.
(2) The pool enclosure may be omitted where portable pools are installed above ground
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
and have a raised deck around the entire pool perimeter with an attached enclosed
railing or uncovered sidewalls a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches high.
(g) Compliance. All swimming pools existing at the time of passage of this Code of Ordinances
not satisfactorily fenced shall comply with the fencing requirements of this Section or when
water is placed in the pool.
(h) Draining. No private swimming pool shall be constructed so as to allow water therefrom to
drain into any sanitary sewer or septic tank nor to overflow upon or cause damage to any
adjoining property. Provisions may be made for draining the contents of any swimming pool
into a storm sewer.
(i) Filter System Required. All private swimming pools within the meaning of this Chapter
must have, in connection therewith, some filtration system to assure proper circulation of
water therein and maintenance of the proper bacterial quality thereof.
(j) Dirt Bottoms Prohibited. All swimming pools of a permanent nature shall have the sides
and bottom of a smooth finish, and no sand or dirt bottom shall be permitted.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-13-1
CHAPTER 13
Administration
SEC. 8-13-1 GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE SYSTEM.
This Chapter contemplates an administrative and enforcement officer entitled the "Zoning
Administrator" to administer and enforce the same. Certain considerations particularly with
regard to granting of permitted conditional uses, planned unit development conditional uses,
changes in zoning districts and zoning map, and amending the text of this Zoning Chapter
require review and recommendation by the Plan Commission and ultimate action by the Village
Board. A Zoning Board of Appeals is provided to assure proper administration of the Chapter
and to avoid arbitrariness.
SEC. 8-13-2 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
The Village Board shall designate a Village official to serve as the Zoning Administrator and as
the administrative enforcement officer for the provisions of this Chapter. The duty of the Zoning
Administrator shall be to interpret and administer this Chapter and to issue, after on-site
inspection, all permits required by this Chapter. The Zoning Administrator shall further:
(a) Maintain records of all permits issued, inspections made, work approved and other
official actions.
(b) Establish that all necessary permits that are required for floodland uses by state and
federal law have been secured.
(c) Inspect all structures, lands and waters as often as necessary to assure compliance with
this Chapter.
(d) Investigate all complaints made relating to the location of structures and the use of
structures, lands and waters, give notice of all violations of this Chapter to the owner,
resident, agent or occupant of the premises and report uncorrected violations to the
Village Attorney in a manner specified by him.
(e) Prohibit the use or erection of any structure, land or water until he has approved such use
or erection.
(f) Request assistance and cooperation from the Police Department, Village Engineer and
Village Attorney as deemed necessary.
SEC. 8-13-3 ROLE OF SPECIFIC VILLAGE OFFICIALS IN ZONING
ADMINISTRATION.
(a) Plan Commission. The Plan Commission, together with its other statutory duties, shall
make reports and recommendations relating to the plan and development of the Village to
the Village Board, other public officials and other interested organizations and citizens.
In general, the Plan Commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it
to perform its functions and promote municipal planning. Under this Chapter, its
functions are primarily recommendatory to the Village Board pursuant to guidelines set
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-13-3
forth in this Chapter as to various matters and, always, being mindful of the intent and
purposes of this Chapter. Recommendations shall be in writing. A recording thereof in
the Commission's minutes shall constitute the required written recommendation. The
Commission may, in arriving at its recommendation, on occasion of its own volition,
conduct its own public hearing. The Plan Commission shall hold all public hearings for
conditional use permit requests.
(b) Village Board. The Village Board, the governing body of the Village, subject to
recommendations by the Plan Commission and the holding of public hearings, may
amend the zoning map and supplementary floodland zoning map and to amend the text of
this Chapter. The Village Board may delegate to the Plan Commission the responsibility
to hold some or all public hearings as required under this Chapter.
(c) Zoning Board of Appeals. A Zoning Board of Appeals is established to provide an
appeal procedure for persons who deem themselves aggrieved by decisions of
administrative officers in enforcement of this Chapter. See Chapter 15 of this Code for
additional provisions.
SEC. 8-13-4 OCCUPANCY PERMIT.
(a) Occupancy Permit Required. The use or occupancy of any building which is in a B-1,
B-2, B-3, B-4, M-1 or P-1 District under the Zoning Code or the use or occupancy of any
building which is a nonconforming use shall not be changed until a certificate of
occupancy permitting the new use or occupancy is issued by the Zoning Administrator.
No such certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the building shall comply with the
requirements of this Code and any other ordinance of the Village governing the use and
occupancy of buildings. The provisions of this Zoning Code with respect to time
limitations on permits, renewals, appeals, penalties and enforcement shall apply to
occupancy permits.
(b) Application. Application shall be made to the Zoning Administrator on forms provided
by him and the payment of a permit fee of $190.00.
SEC. 8-13-5 SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
(a) Site Plan Approval. All applications for Building Permits for any construction,
reconstruction, expansion or conversion, except for one (1) and two (2) family residences
in Residential Districts, shall require site plan approval by the Plan Commission in
accordance with the requirements of this Section.
(b) Application. The applicant shall also submit a site plan and sufficient plans and
specifications of proposed buildings, machinery and operations to enable the Plan
Commission or its consultants to determine whether the proposed application meets all
the requirements applicable thereto in this Chapter.
(c) Administration. The Zoning Administrator shall make a preliminary review of the
application and plans and refer them, along with a report of his findings, to the Plan
Commission within twenty (20) days. The Plan Commission shall review the application
and may refer the application and plans to any consultants selected by the Village Board
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-13-5
to advise whether the application and plans meet all the requirements applicable thereto
in this Chapter. Within thirty (30) days of its receipt of the application, the Commission
shall authorize the Zoning Administrator to issue or refuse a Permit.
(d) Requirements. In acting on any site plan, the Plan Commission shall consider the
following:
(1) The appropriateness of the site plan and buildings in relation to the physical
character of the site and the usage of adjoining land areas.
(2) The layout of the site with regard to entrances and exits to public streets; the
arrangement and improvement of interior roadways; the location adequacy and
improvement of areas for parking and for loading and unloading and shall, in this
connection, satisfy itself that the traffic pattern generated by the proposed
construction or use shall be developed in a manner consistent with the safety of
residents and the community, and the applicant shall so design the construction or
use as to minimize any traffic hazard created thereby.
(3) The adequacy of the proposed water supply, drainage facilities and sanitary and
waste disposal.
(4) The landscaping and appearance of the completed site. The Plan Commission
may require that those portions of all front, rear and side yards not used for offstreet
parking shall be attractively planted with trees, shrubs, plants or grass lawns
and that the site be effectively screened so as not to impair the value of adjacent
properties nor impair the intent or purposes of this Section. A tree survey and
preservation plan shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements of
Section 8-2-10.
(e) Effect on Municipal Services. Before granting any site approval, the Plan Commission
may, besides obtaining advice from consultants, secure such advice as may be deemed
necessary from the Village Engineer or other municipal officials, with special attention to
the effect of such approval upon existing municipal services and utilities. Should
additional facilities be needed, the Plan Commission shall forward its recommendations
to the Village Board and shall not issue final approval until the Village Board has entered
into an agreement with the applicant regarding the development of such facilities.
(f) Validity of Site Plan Approvals. Where the Plan Commission has approved or
conditionally approved an application for a site plan, such approval shall become null and
void within twelve (12) months of the date of the commission's action unless the use is
commenced, construction is underway or the current owner possesses a valid building
permit under which construction is commenced within six (6) months of the date of
issuance and which shall not be renewed unless construction has commenced and is being
diligently prosecuted. Approximately forty-five (45) days prior to the automatic
expiration of such approval, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the holder by certified
mail of such expiration. The Plan Commission may extend such approval for a period of
ninety (90) days for justifiable cause, if application is made to the Village at least thirty
(30) days before the expiration of said approval.
(g) Site Plan Requirements. In addition to the requirements for Site Plan Approval set forth
under the provisions of Section 8-13-5 "Site Plan Approval" of the Village of Hales
Corners Zoning Code, detailed site plans pertaining to the proposed structure shall be
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-13-5
presented to the Village Plan Commission for review and approval indicating the
following information and data:
(1) Scale and Name of Project. Site Plan drawn to a recognized engineering scale
with the name of project noted.
(2) Owner's and/or Developer's Name and Address. Owner's and/or developer's name
and address noted on the Site Plan.
(3) Architect and/or Engineer's Name and Address. Architect and/or engineer's name
and address noted on the Site Plan.
(4) Date. Date of Site Plan submittal with all dates of revision.
(5) Vicinity Sketch. A vicinity sketch (drawn to scale) which clearly indicates the
subject property within the context of the larger community of which the subject
property is a part showing abutting and nearby streets and street names as well as
any major public facilities (i.e., schools, public parks, public buildings, etc.).
(6) Scale and Site Size. The scale of drawing and the size of the site (in square feet
or acres) noted on the Site Plan.
(7) Existing and Proposed Topography. Existing and proposed topography shown at
a contour interval of not more than two (2) feet at National Geodetic Vertical
Datum of 1929 (mean sea level). A site grading plan may also be required by the
Village Planner/Zoning Administrator and/or Plan Commission.
(8) Soils Data. The characteristics and types of soils related to contemplated specific
uses. Soil borings may be required by the Village Engineer, Village
Planner/Zoning Administrator, and/or Plan Commission.
(9) Off-Street Parking Spaces, Loading, Ingress and Egress, and Driveway Locations
of Adjoining Properties. The total number of off-street parking spaces, loading
areas, drives, curb cuts, and vehicular ingress and egress locations to the site. If
the proposed development abuts an existing or planned collector or arterial street
or highway, as identified on the Village of Hales Corners Master Plan or
component thereof, all driveway locations of all adjoining properties within two
hundred (200) feet of the site shall be graphically indicated and dimensioned
(with distances and widths noted) on the Site Plan.
(10) Type, Size, and Location of All Structures and Signs.
a. The type, size, and location of all structures and signs with all building
and ground-mounted sign dimensions noted on the Site Plan.
b. All building overhangs (such as, but not limited to, building eaves, soffits,
overhanging roofs, and bay windows) including, but not limited to, the
location of all exterior building columns and all other building protrusions
(with or without foundations or footings) shall be graphically indicated on
the Site Plan with their respective dimensions indicated.
c. A tabular calculation of the total maximum allowable sign area for each
type of allowable sign(s) and/or signage for the property shall be provided
and presented on the Site Plan as an integral part of said Site Plan.
Chapter 9 "Signs and Billboards" of the Village of Hales Corners Zoning
Code shall be consulted by the applicant and all such tabular calculations
shall be based
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-13-5
upon the requirements of Chapter 9 "Signs and Billboards" of the Village
of Hales Corners Zoning Code as amended.
(11) Building Height. Height of all building(s), including both principal and
accessory, expressed in both feet and stories.
(12) Existing and Proposed Street Names. Existing and proposed street names (if any
new streets are proposed).
(13) Existing and Proposed Public Street Rights-of-Way or Reservations. Existing and
proposed public street rights-of-way or reservations (if any new streets are
proposed) and widths with existing or proposed centerline elevations, pavement
type, fire lanes, walks, curbs, gutters, culverts, etc.
(14) Building and Yard Setbacks. All building and yard setback lines graphically
indicated on the Site Plan.
(15) North Arrow. North arrow.
(16) Proposed Sanitary Sewers, Storm Sewers, and Water Mains. Existing and general
location of proposed sanitary sewers, storm sewers (including direction of flow),
water mains, and fire hydrants. All locations for the proposed connections to such
utilities shall be indicated on the Site Plan.
(17) Proposed Stormwater Management Facilities. A stormwater management plan
shall be prepared for all proposed development meeting all applicable Village
Code requirements. Plans shall indicate the location of any proposed stormwater
management facilities, including detention/retention area(s).
(18) "Landscape Plan" Required. A "Landscape Plan" meeting the following
requirements shall be submitted with the Site Plan for Plan Commission review
and approval:
a. Proposed Name. The proposed name of the development.
b. Location. The location of the proposed development.
c. Names, Addresses, and Telephone Numbers of the Owners, Subdividers,
Lessee and/or Developer. The names, addresses, and telephone numbers
of the owners, subdividers, lessee and/or developer(s) of the property and
of the designer of the plan.
d. Date. Date of the "Landscape Plan" submittal and all applicable revision
dates.
e. Site Boundary. The boundary line of the site with dimensions and
bearings, indicated by a solid line, and the total land area encompassed by
the site.
f. Landscape Bufferyard Areas. All proposed "Landscape Bufferyards" shall
be clearly delineated and dimensioned and graphically shown in relation to
all proposed lot lines and lots upon which said "Landscape Bufferyards"
are located.
g. Location, Extent, Type, and Sizes of Existing Trees and Natural Resource
Features. Location, extent, type (common name and scientific name in the
case of plant materials), and sizes of all existing trees in all areas of the
proposed development which are designated as a "Landscape Bufferyard."
If any existing vegetation is to be demolished, the extent of such
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-13-5
demolition shall be properly delineated and so noted on the "Landscape
Plan."
h. Location, Extent, Type, and Sizes of Proposed Landscape Materials and
Plantings. Location, extent, type (common name and scientific name in
the case of plant materials), and sizes of proposed landscaping and
landscape plantings in all areas of the proposed development which are
designated as "Landscape Bufferyards" or for areas which are to serve as
landscaped entrances or other special landscaped features of the
development. A summary table of all types and total number of plant
materials to be used shall be clearly indicated.
i. Landscape Plant Material Specifications. All new landscape plant
material shall be grown in a nursery located in Plant Hardiness Zone 4 (as
defined by the U.S. Department of Agriculture) and shall conform to the
applicable requirements as specified in the current edition of American
Standard for Nursery Stock as approved by the American National
Standards Institute, Inc. and sponsored by the American Association of
Nurserymen, Inc. Botanical plant names shall be in accordance with the
current edition of Standardized Plant Names prepared by the American
Joint Committee on Horticultural Nomenclature.
j. Maintenance. Areas of a development designated as landscape areas shall
be maintained by the property owner and kept free of all debris, rubbish,
weeds, and tall grass.
(19) Pedestrian Sidewalks and Walkways. The location of pedestrian sidewalks and
walkways.
(20) Architectural Plans, Elevations, and Perspective Drawings and Sketches.
Architectural plans, elevations, and perspective drawings and sketches illustrating
the design, character, materials, and dimensions of proposed which meet the
following submission requirements:
a. Owner/Developer. Owner's and/or developer's name and address noted.
b. Architect/Engineer. Architect's name and address noted.
c. Date. Date of submittal of plans.
d. Scale. Scale of drawings noted on each drawing.
e. Building Type, Size, and Location. The type, size, and location of all
structures with all building dimensions shown.
f. Height. The height of building(s).
g. Exterior Materials Samples May be Required. Samples of exterior
materials and their colors may be required to be brought to the Plan
Commission meeting.
h. Additional Information May be Required. Additional information and
data which may be required by the Plan Commission, Village
Administrator, or Village Planner/Zoning Administrator may include, but
not be limited to, the following upon request:
1. Photographs from the site of adjacent neighboring structures and/or
property.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-13-5
2. Detailed drawings of decorative elements of the building(s) or
structure(s).
3. Sectional building or site drawings drawn to a recognized
engineering or architectural scale.
(21) "Lighting Plan" Required. A "Lighting Plan" which meets the lighting
regulations set forth in this Ordinance shall be prepared and submitted to the Plan
Commission for review and approval. Said Lighting Plan shall have, at a
minimum, the following elements:
a. A catalog page, cut sheet, or photograph of the luminaire including the
mounting method.
b. A photometric data test report of the proposed luminaire graphically
showing the lighting distribution at all angles vertically and horizontally
around the luminaire.
c. A plot plan, drawn to a recognized engineering or architectural scale,
indicating the location of the luminaire(s) proposed, mounting, and/or
installation height in feet, the overall illumination levels (in footcandles)
and uniformities on the site, and the illumination levels (in footcandles) at
the property boundary lines. This may be accomplished by means of an
isolux curve or computer printout projecting the illumination levels.
d. A graphic depiction of the luminaire lamp (or bulb) concealment and light
cut-off angles.
(22) Easements. The location of all existing and proposed easements on the site
including landscape easements, access easements, utility easements, and all other
easements.
(23) Covenants and Deed Restrictions Required. Written documentation of any
proposed agreements, provisions, declarations, deed restrictions, or covenants
which will govern the use, maintenance, and continued protection of the
development.
(24) Highway Access. Copies of any letters of review or permits granted by applicable
federal, State, or County regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over highway
access, if applicable.
(25) Schedule. A development schedule shall be submitted indicating the following:
a. Project Phasing Plan Required. A project phasing, or staging, plan is
required indicating when various areas, landscape areas, densities,
intensity of development, uses, and public facilities which are planned to
be developed with each phase or stage. The overall design of each stage
shall be shown on the plan and through supporting graphic material.
b. Project Phase Dates and Timing of Development. The approximate dates
for the beginning and completion of each development phase, or stage,
shall be indicated.
c. Land Use Schedule Required. If different land use types are to be
included, the schedule must include the mix of uses to be built in each
stage.
(26) Special Studies May be Required. Fiscal and economic impact analyses, traffic
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-13-5
impact analyses studies performed by a transportation engineer, and/or
environmental impact studies may be required when deemed appropriate by the
Village Administrator, Village Planner/ Zoning Administrator, Village Engineer,
Plan Commission, or the Village Board.
(27) Project Summary. A written project summary indicating operational information,
building schedule, and estimate of project value (including all site improvement
costs) shall be submitted with the Site Plan materials.
(28) Statement of Compatibility with the Adopted Elements of the Village of Hales
Corners Master Plan. A written report shall be submitted with the petition for a
Conditional Use Permit which provides adequate evidence that the proposed
building and overall development project shall not hinder or undermine the
Village's community character, existing retail and commercial sales and service
development, or community facility objectives as set forth in adopted elements of
the Village of Hales Corners Master Plan.
(29) Additional Data May be Required by the Village. Additional data as may be
required by the Plan Commission, Village Administrator, Village Planner/Zoning
Administrator, or Village Engineer to review the Site Plan.
Reference: Ordinance 05-18
SEC. 8-13-6 OFFICIAL MAP.
(a) Purpose. Pursuant to Section 62.23(6), Wis. Stats., the official map of the Village is
established to provide for orderly, safe and economical expansion of the built-up area of
the community designating the location and extent of existing and proposed streets,
highways and parks; to ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of land; to
facilitate adequate provision for transportation, parks, playgrounds and storm water
drainage; and to facilitate further subdivision of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land.
(b) Effect. The official map shall be final and conclusive with respect to the location and
extent of streets, highways and parks shown on the map. The Village Board may change
or add to the map if it is determined to be in the public interest. Changes or additions
shall be made in accordance with procedures in Section 62.23, Wis. Stats. The placing of
proposed streets, highways or parks upon the official map shall not constitute or be
deemed to constitute the opening or establishment of such streets, highways or parks, or
the taking or acceptance of any land for such purposes.
(c) Subdivision Plats and Building Permits. The Plan Commission shall require that all
subdivision plats conform to the official map. All streets within recorded subdivisions
approved by the Plan Commission and Village Board shall become a part of the official
map. No building permit shall be issued for any structure in the bed of any street or
highway shown on the official map, and no permit for the erection of any structure shall
be issued unless a street or highway giving access to the structure has been duly placed
on such map, except as provided in Section 62.23, Wis. Stats. The Building Inspector
shall require each applicant to submit a plot plan or certified survey plat, certified by a
registered surveyor, showing accurately the location of any proposed building with
reference to adjacent streets, highways or parks shown on the official map.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-13-6
(d) Appeals. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to grant relief from the
requirements of this Section in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 62.23(6)(d), (f) and
(g), Wis. Stats.
SEC. 8-13-7 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
(a) Violations. It shall be unlawful to use or improve any structure or land, or to use water
or air in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter. In case of any violation, the
Village Board, the Zoning Administrator, the Plan Commission or any property owner
who would be specifically damaged by such violation may cause appropriate action or
proceedings to be instituted to enjoin a violation of this Chapter or cause a structure to be
vacated or removed.
(b) Remedial Action. Whenever an order of the Zoning Administrator has not been
complied with within thirty (30) days after written notice has been mailed to the owner,
resident agent or occupant of the premises, the Village Board, the Zoning Administrator
or the Village Attorney may institute appropriate legal action or proceedings.
(c) Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of
this Chapter or any order of the Zoning Administrator issued in accordance with this
Chapter or resists enforcement shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a forfeiture
and such additional penalties as provided for in Chapter 19 of this Code or Ordinances.
Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate
offense. The Village shall have any and all other remedies afforded by the Wis. Stats. in
addition to the forfeitures and costs of prosecution provided for in Chapter 19.
Section 8-14-1
CHAPTER 14
Changes and Amendments to the Zoning Code
SEC. 8-14-1 AUTHORITY.
Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning practice requires, the
Village Board may, by ordinance, change the district boundaries established by this Chapter and the
Zoning Map incorporated herein and/or the Supplementary Floodland Zoning Map incorporated
herein, or amend, change or supplement the text of the regulations established by this Chapter or
amendments thereto. Such change or amendment shall be subject to the review and recommendation
of the Plan Commission.
SEC. 8-14-2 INITIATION OF CHANGES OR AMENDMENTS.
The Village Board, the Plan Commission, the Zoning Board of Appeals and other government
bodies and any private petitioners may apply for an amendment to the text of this Chapter to the
District boundaries hereby established or by amendments hereto in the accompanying Zoning Map
made a part of this Chapter and/or the Supplementary Floodland Zoning Map to be made a part of
this Chapter by reference.
SEC. 8-14-3 PROCEDURE FOR CHANGES OR AMENDMENTS.
(a) Request for Changes. Petitions for any change to the district boundaries and map(s) or
amendments to the text regulations shall be addressed to the Village Board and shall be filed
with the Village Administrator. Petitions shall describe the premises to be rezoned or the
portions of text of regulations to be amended, list the reasons justifying the petition, specify
the proposed use, if applicable, and have attached the following, if petition be for change of
district boundaries:
(1) Plot plan, drawn to a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet showing the
area proposed to be rezoned, its location, its dimensions, the location and
classification of adjacent zoning districts and the location and existing use of all
properties within three hundred (300) feet of the area proposed to be rezoned.
(2) Owners' names and addresses of all properties lying within one hundred (100) feet of
the area proposed to be rezoned.
(3) Together with additional information as may be required by the Plan Commission or
Village Board.
(b) Recommendations. The Village Administrator shall cause the petition to be forwarded to
the Plan Commission for its consideration and recommendation. The Plan Commission shall
review all proposed amendments to the text and zoning map(s) within the corporate limits
and shall recommend in writing that the petition be granted as requested, modified or denied.
A recording or the recommendation in the Plan Commission's official minutes shall
constitute the required written recommendation. In arriving at its recommendation, the
Section 8-14-3
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Commission may on occasion, of its own volition, conduct its own public hearing on
proposed amendment(s).
(c) Hearings.
(1) The Village Board, following receipt of recommendation of the Plan Commission,
shall hold a public hearing upon each proposed change or amendment, giving notice
of the time, place and the change or amendment proposed by publication of a Class 2
notice, under Chapter 985 of the Wis. Stats. At least ten (10) days prior, written
notice shall also be given to the clerk of any municipality within one thousand
(1,000) feet of any land to be affected by the proposed change or amendment.
Failure to comply with this provision shall not, however, invalidate any previous or
subsequent action on the application.
(2) The Village Board shall hold public hearings as required under this Section.
(d) Board's Action. Following such hearing and after consideration of the Plan Commission's
recommendations, the Village Board shall vote on the proposed ordinance effecting the
proposed change or amendment.
(e) Fee. The fee for a zoning change or amendment shall be Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00).
SEC. 8-14-4 PROTEST.
(a) In the event of a protest against amendment to the zoning map, duly signed and
acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more, either of the areas of the land
included in such proposed change, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the
land immediately adjacent extending one hundred (100) feet therefrom, or by the owners of
twenty percent (20%) or more of the land exclusive of right-of-way directly opposite thereto
extending one hundred (100) feet from the street frontage of such opposite land, such
changes or amendments shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of threefourths
(3/4) of the full Village Board membership.
(b) In the event of protest against amendment to the text of the regulations of this Chapter, duly
signed and acknowledged by twenty percent (20%) of the number of persons casting ballots
in the last general election, it shall cause a three-fourths (3/4) vote of the full Village Board
membership to adopt such amendment.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-15-1
CHAPTER 15
Appeals
SEC. 8-15-1 APPEALS TO THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
(a) Scope of Appeals. Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved
by any officer, department, board or bureau of the Village affected by any decision of the
administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within reasonable thirty (30) days of the
alleged grievance or judgment in question by filing with the officer(s) from whom the appeal
is taken and with the Board of Appeals a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof,
together with payment of a filing fee as may be established by the Village Board. The
officer(s) from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Appeals all
papers constituting the record of appeals upon which the action appeals from was taken.
(b) Stay of Proceedings. An appeal shall stay all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certified to the Board of
Appeals that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause
immediate peril to life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise
than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Appeals or by a court of
record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due
cause shown.
(c) Meetings.
(1) Open to Public. All meetings and hearing of the Board of Appeals shall be open to
the public, except that the Board may go into executive session to deliberate after a
hearing or an appeal. The final vote on an appeal shall be taken in open session by
roll call vote, recorded and open for public inspection in the Board's office. Public
notice of all regular and special meetings shall be given to the pubic and news media
as required by the Wisconsin Open Meeting Law.
(2) Special Meetings. Special meetings may be called by the Chairman or by the
Secretary of the Board of Appeals at the request of two (2) members. Notice of a
special meeting shall be mailed to each member at least forty-eight (48) hours prior
to the time set for the meeting, or announcement of the meeting shall be made at any
meeting at which all members are present.
(3) Hearings. Hearings may be held at any regular or special meeting at the time set by
the Chairman.
(4) Quorum. A quorum for any meeting or hearing shall consist of four (4) members,
but a lesser number may meet and adjourn to a specified time.
(d) Powers of Zoning Board of Appeals. In addition to these powers enumerated elsewhere in
this Code of Ordinances, the Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
(1) Errors. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning Administrator, Building
Inspector or other administrative officials in the enforcement of the Zoning Code or
any ordinance adopted under Sections 61.35, 62.23, 62.231 (wetlands), 87.30 or
Section 8-15-1
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
144.26 (flood plains) or Chapter 91 (farmland preservation), Wis. Stats.
(2) Variances. To hear and rule on appeals for variances not contrary to the pubic
interest where, owing to practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit
and purposes of this Chapter shall be observed and the public safety, welfare and
justice secured.
(3) Interpretations. To hear and decide application for interpretations of the zoning
regulations and the boundaries of the zoning districts after the Plan Commission has
made a review and recommendation.
(4) Substitutions. To hear and grant applications for substitution of more restrictive
nonconforming uses for existing nonconforming uses provided no structural
alterations are to be made and the Plan Commission has made a review and
recommendation. Whenever the Board permits such a substitution, the use may not
thereafter be changed without application.
(5) Unclassified Uses. To hear and grant applications for unclassified and unspecified
uses provided that such uses are similar in character to the principal uses permitted in
the district and the Plan Commission has made a review and recommendation.
(6) Temporary Uses. To hear and grant applications for temporary uses, in any district
provided that such uses are of a temporary nature, do not involve the erection of a
substantial structure and are compatible with the neighboring uses and the Plan
Commission has made a review and recommendation. The permit shall be
temporary, revocable, subject to any condition required by the Board of Zoning
Appeals and shall be issued for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months.
Compliance with all other provisions of this Chapter shall be required.
(e) Board Action. In exercising the powers under Subsection (d), the Board of Appeals may
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or
determination as ought to be made and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the officer
from whom the appeal is taken, and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit.
(f) Voting.
(1) Personal Interest. No Board of Appeals member shall participate in the decision of,
or vote upon, any case in which the member is financially interested, directly or
indirectly. The Chairman shall direct an alternate member to act instead.
Disqualification of a member for interest shall not decrease the number of votes
required for acting upon any matter, but such member may be counted in determining
whether a quorum is present for the transaction of business.
(2) Record of Vote. The Secretary shall record the vote of each member on every
question in the minutes or, if the member is absent or fails to vote, shall indicate such
fact in the record of the proceedings.
SEC. 8-15-2 APPLICATIONS FOR HEARINGS.
(a) Time of Appeal. Appeals shall be filed within thirty (30) days after the date of receipt of the
written decision or order from which the appeal is taken by filing in duplicate a notice of
Section 8-15-2
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
appeal with the Village Administrator. The date of receipt of the decision shall not be
counted in determining the time for filing of the appeal. Sundays and holidays shall be
counted, except if the last day falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the time for filing
shall be extended to the next secular day.
(b) Who May Appeal. Appeals or applications to the Board may be made by:
(1) The owner, mortgagee, purchaser under a land contract, optionee or occupant under a
written lease for one (1) year or more of the property for which relief is sought.
(2) Any officer (other than the Zoning Administrator), department, board or bureau
affected by a decision or order of the Zoning Administrator.
(3) Any person aggrieved and whose use and enjoyment of property within the Village is
directly and adversely affected by a decision or order of the Building Inspector,
Zoning Administrator or the requested Board action.
(c) Appeal and Application Forms. Every appeal or application shall be made upon forms
furnished by the Village Administrator which have been approved by the Board of Appeals.
A scale drawing shall accompany each form showing the location and size of the property,
existing improvements, all abutting properties and improvements thereon and change or
addition requested. The applicant or appellant shall provide all information requested on the
form and any additional information requested in writing by the Chairman or Secretary of
the Board of Appeals which is necessary to inform the Board of the facts of the appeal.
Failure to supply such information shall be grounds for dismissal of the appeal or
application.
(d) Filing Appeal or Application. The appellant or applicant shall file the required appeal form
in duplicate with the Village Administrator. The Village Administrator shall deliver one (1)
copy to the Zoning Administrator or other officer or body from whose decision an appeal is
taken. Upon receipt of an appeal, the Zoning Administrator or other officer or body
responsible for the original determination shall transmit to the Secretary of the Board of
Appeals all notes or papers relating to the order or decision from which the appeal is being
taken.
(e) Election to Have Appeal or Application Handled as a Contested Case. The applicant or
appellant may elect to have the appeal or application handled as a contested case. A
contested case includes the right of all parties to cross-examine witnesses, to object to
improper evidence and to have a record of the proceedings made by a court reporter or
qualified stenographer or by tape recording. Election to have the matter treated as a
contested case must be made in writing at the time of filing of the appeal or application.
(f) Fee. All appeals and applications filed with the Village Administrator shall be accompanied
by payment as established by the Village Board. If the appellant or applicant elects the
contested-case method, he or she shall also pay the amount determined by the Board of
Appeals to cover the additional administrative costs involved.
(g) Insufficient Notice. No appeal or application shall be considered by the Board of Appeals
unless it is made on the required form. Upon receipt of any communication purporting to be
an appeal or application, the Village Administrator shall supply the applicant with the proper
forms which must be filed within ten (10) days, in addition to the thirty (30) days specified
in Subsection (a), in order to be considered by the Board of Appeals.
Section 8-15-3
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
SEC. 8-15-3 HEARINGS.
(a) Notice of Hearing. Notice of time, date and place of the hearing of an appeal or application
shall be given in the following manner:
(1) By mail or personal service to the appellant or applicant and to the Zoning
Administrator or other administrative official or body from whose decision an appeal
is taken and Secretary of the Plan Commission not less than ten (10) days prior to the
date of the hearing.
(2) In every case involving a variance, exception, planned unit development or public
utility exception, the Village Administrator shall mail notice to the owners of record
of all land within the area included in the application and within one hundred (100)
feet of any part of the building or premises affected not less than ten (10) days prior
to the hearing. Names and last-known addresses of such owners shall be furnished
by the applicant at the time of filing the appeal or application.
(3) By publication of a Class 2 notice under Chapter 985, Wis. Stats.
(4) Notice of an application for construction of a building in the bed of a future street,
highway or parkway shall be published in the official newspaper not less than fifteen
(15) days prior to the hearing.
(5) Notice of an application for a proposed special exception in a shoreland-wetland
district shall be mailed to the district office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
(b) Time of Hearing, Docketing. Each appeal or application properly filed shall be numbered
serially, docketed in a special book provided therefor and placed upon the calendar by the
Secretary of the Board of Appeals. Cases docketed more than fifteen (15) days preceding a
regular meeting shall be set for hearing at such meeting. Cases docketed seven (7) days or
less prior to a regular meeting shall be scheduled by the Secretary, or his designee, for a
hearing on the second regular meeting day thereafter unless otherwise directed by the
Chairman.
(c) Appearances. The appellant or applicant may appear in person or by his agent or attorney.
In the absence of an appearance for or against an appeal or application, the Board of Appeals
may dismiss the appeal or application or may dispose of the matter on the record before it.
(d) Oath. Unless waived by the appellant or applicant and the Chairman, all witnesses shall be
sworn before testifying by the Chairman or presiding officer.
(e) Compelling Attendance of Witness. The Chairman, or, in his absence, the presiding
officer, may compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. Written request for subpoenas
shall be filed with the Secretary of the Board of Appeals not less than two (2) days prior to
the hearing except by special permission of the Chairman.
(f) Order of Hearing. Appeals and applications shall be heard in numerical order except for
good cause shown.
(g) Order of Business.
(1) General Hearing. At the hearing, the order of business shall be as follows:
a. Statement of the nature of the case by the Chairman.
b. Appellant's side of the case.
Section 8-15-3
c. Questions by Board members.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
d. Zoning Administrator's side of the case.
e. Questions by Board members.
f. Statements by interested persons such as neighbors or abutting landowners.
g. Questions by Board members.
h. Appellant's or applicant's rebuttal.
(2) Contested Cases. If the applicant or appellant elects to have his or her appeal or
application treated as a contested case, the order of business shall be as follows:
a. Call to order by the Chairman.
b. Appellant or applicant's opening statement.
c. Zoning Administrator's opening statement.
d. Opening statement of persons aggrieved and other interested parties. The
right to make an opening statement is limited to persons who will present
evidence.
e. Applicant's or appellant's case-in-chief.
f. Questions by Board members.
g. Cross-examination. No more than one (1) person for each party shall crossexamine
witnesses. The Chairman may limit the number of parties who may
cross-examine.
h. Zoning Administrator's case-in-chief.
i. Questions by Board members.
j. Cross-examination as under (2)g.
k. Case-in-chief of other parties.
l. Questions by Board members.
m. Cross-examination under (2)g.
n. Rebuttal by appellant or applicant. Rebuttal is limited to matters raised by
the adverse parties by way of evidence or argument.
o. Statements of opinion of neighbors or abutting land owners -- not subject to
cross-examination.
p. Closing statements of those who made or waived opening statements.
(h) Evidence and Official Notice. Except in contested case hearings, written and oral
testimony will be received. In contested case hearings, no hearsay evidence will be allowed
or relied upon as the sole evidence of any factual determination. The Board of Appeals may
take official notice of the ordinances of the municipality, the zoning and location of the
subject property and geographical features or other facts which are common knowledge in
the municipality or can be verified by reference to public record. In contested case hearings,
all witnesses shall be sworn and no person shall be permitted to testify unless he or she
submits to cross-examination. See Section 227.08, Wis. Stats.
(i) Adjournments. When all appeals or applications cannot be disposed of on the day set, the
Board of Appeals may adjourn from day to day or to a day certain, as it may order and such
adjourned day shall be construed as a continuance of the hearing. Notice of such
adjournment shall be given to the absent members of the Board of Appeals.
(j) Withdrawal. An appellant or applicant may withdraw an appeal at any time prior to the
Section 8-15-3
decision, but a pending motion to grant or dismiss the appeal shall have precedence over
withdrawal. Withdrawal of the appeal shall not entitle the appellant or applicant to
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
remission of the filing fee.
SEC. 8-15-4 DECISION AND DISPOSITION OF CASES.
(a) Time of Decision. The Board of Appeals shall render its decision either at the termination
of the hearing or within thirty (30) days thereafter and shall notify the parties in interest and
the Zoning Administrator in writing of its decision.
(b) Form of Decision. The final disposition of an appeal or application shall be in the form of a
written decision or order signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Board of Appeals.
Such decision shall state the reasons for the Board's determination with findings of fact and
conclusions of law and shall either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part, dismiss the appeal or grant or deny
the special exception, conditional use or variance. Copies of the decision shall be sent to the
applicant, Village Administrator, and any Village committee involved.
(c) Basis of Decision; Findings. At the conclusion of a hearing, the Board should reduce to
writing its findings of fact and conclusions of law regarding the proper interpretation and
application of the Zoning Code.
(d) Vote Required. All orders or decisions of the Board of Appeals granting a variance,
exception or reversing any action or order of the administrator require the affirmative vote of
four (4) members. Whenever only four (4) members of the Board are present and the vote
stands three (3) to one (1) in favor of the appellant or applicant, the matter shall be laid over
for consideration and final determination at the next meeting of the Board or a special
meeting noticed and called for that purpose.
(e) Conditions. Variances or conditions imposed in any permit shall be stated in the decision or
order embodying the Board's decision and shall also be set forth in the building, or
occupancy permit issued under that order by the Zoning Administrator. A permit shall be
valid only as long as the conditions upon which it is granted are observed. Whenever the
Board grants an application or appeal affecting the use of any premises, such authorization
shall be deemed revoked unless the owner, occupant or his agent shall, upon request, file
with the Board Secretary a written report certifying that all conditions or limitations imposed
by the Board have been conformed to and maintained. Variances or substitutions approved
by the Board shall expire six (6) months after issuance if the performance of work is required
and substantial work has not commenced.
(f) Filing of Decision. Every order or decision of the Board of Appeals shall be immediately
filed with the Secretary who shall thereupon forward the decision to the Village
Administrator and mail a copy to the applicant or appellant. Copies of decisions granting
variances in a floodplain, shoreland or wetland district shall be mailed to the district office of
the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(g) Reconsideration.
(1) Resubmission. No appeal or application which has been dismissed or denied shall be
considered again without material alteration or revision within one (1) year of the
Section 8-15-4
Board's decision, except pursuant to court order or by motion to reconsider made by
a member voting with the majority or as provided in Subsection (g)(2) below.
(2) Rehearing. No rehearing shall be held except upon the affirmative vote of four (4) or
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
more members of the Board upon finding that substantial, new evidence is submitted
which could not reasonably have been presented at the previous hearing. Requests
for rehearing shall be in writing, shall state the reasons for the request and shall be
accompanied by necessary data and diagrams. Rehearings shall be subject to the
same notice requirements as original hearings.
SEC. 8-15-5 VARIATIONS.
(a) Purpose.
(1) A request for a variance may be made when an aggrieved party can submit proof that
strict adherence to the provisions of this Zoning Code would cause him undue
hardship or create conditions causing greater harmful effects than the initial
condition. A variance granted to a nonconforming use brings that use into
conformance with the district and zoning requirements.
(2) The Board of Appeals may authorize upon appeal, in specific cases, such variance
from the terms of the Zoning Code as will not be contrary to the public interest,
where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of the
Zoning Code will result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of the Zoning
Code shall be observed and substantial justice done. No variance shall have the
effect of allowing in any district uses prohibited in that district, permit a lower
degree of flood protection than the flood protection elevation for the particular area
or permit standards lower than those required by state law.
(3) For the purpose of this Section, "unnecessary hardship" shall be defined as an
unusual or extreme decrease in the adaptability of the property to the uses permitted
by the zoning district which is caused by facts, such as rough terrain or good soil
conditions, uniquely applicable to the particular piece of property as distinguished
from those applicable to most or all property in the same zoning district.
(b) Application for Variation. The application for variation shall be filed pursuant to Section
8-15-2.
(c) Public Hearing of Application. The public hearing for a variance shall be conducted
pursuant to Section 8-15-3.
(d) Prohibited Variances. The Board of Appeals shall not grant use variances in floodplain or
wetland and conservancy districts. In all other districts, no use variance shall be granted
unless the applicant has first petitioned for a zoning amendment or a conditional use permit,
if applicable, and upon a showing that no lawful and feasible use of the subject property can
be made in the absence of such variance. Any use variance granted shall be limited to the
specific use described in the Board's decision and shall not permit variances in yard, area or
other requirements of the district in which located.
(e) Action of the Board of Appeals; Standards. For the Board of Appeals, it must find that:
(1) Denial of variation may result in hardship to the property owner due to
Section 8-15-5
physiographical consideration. There must be exceptional, extraordinary or unusual
circumstances or conditions applying to the lot or parcel, structure, use or intended
use that do not apply generally to other properties or uses in the same district and the
granting of the variance would not be of so general or recurrent nature as to suggest
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
that the Zoning Code should be changed.
(2) The conditions upon which a petition for a variation is based are unique to the
property for which variation is being sought and that such variance is necessary for
the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights possessed by other
properties in the same district and same vicinity.
(3) The purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a desire to increase the
value or income potential of the property.
(4) The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious
to the other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is
located.
(5) The proposed variation will not undermine the general spirit and specific purposes of
the Zoning Code, specifically the standards of Section 8-6-7.
(f) Conditions. The Board of Appeals may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the
premises benefited by a variance as may be necessary to comply with the standards
established in this Section.
SEC. 8-15-6 REVIEW BY COURT OF RECORD.
Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Appeals may present to a court of
record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal and specifying the grounds
of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within thirty (30) days after the filing
of the decision in the offices of the Board of Appeals.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-16-1
CHAPTER 16
Definitions
SEC. 8-16-1 DEFINITIONS.
(a) For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall be used, unless a different
definition is specifically provided for in a section. Words used in the present tense include
the future; the singular number includes the plural number; and the plural number includes
the singular number. The word "shall" is mandatory and not permissive.
(1) Abutting. Have a common property line or district line.
(2) Accessory Use or Structure. A use or detached structure subordinate to the principal
use of a structure, parcel of land or water and located on the same lot or parcel
serving a purpose incidental to the principal use or the principal structure.
(3) Acre, Net. The actual land devoted to the land use, excluding public streets, public
lands or unusable lands, and school sites contained within 43,560 square feet.
(4) Alley. A public way which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting
property.
(5) Amusement Places, Outdoor. A place in the open air used for entertainment or
recreation and, by way of illustration but not of exclusion, the following shall be
included: amusement go-carts, trampolines, ferris wheels and merry-go-rounds.
(6) Apartment. A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure which is
arranged, designed, used or intended to be used as a single housekeeping unit.
Complete kitchen facilities, permanently installed, must always be included for each
apartment.
(7) Arterial Street. A public street or highway used or intended to be used primarily for
large volume or heavy through traffic. Arterial streets shall include freeways and
expressways as well as arterial streets, highways and parkways.
(8) Basement. That portion of any structure located partly below the average adjoining
lot grade which is not designed or used primarily for year-around living
accommodations.
(9) Berm. A mound of earth typically located within a bufferyard to shield noise, lights,
or other nuisances.
(10) Block. A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public
parks or other recognized lines of demarcation.
(11) Boarding House. A building other than a hotel or restaurant where meals or lodging
are regularly furnished by prearrangement for compensation for four (4) or more
persons not members of a family, but not exceeding twenty (20) persons and not
open to transient customers.
(12) Buffering Area. An area designated to neutralize the transition from a business use
site to a residential use site. Planting in this area shall be, among others, for the
purpose of shielding of lights of the business area from the residential area and the
business operations. Such area shall be landscaped and maintained in an attractive
Section 8-16-1
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
manner and shall be planted with trees, bushes and shrubs forming an effective
screen. Plantings shall not be made of seedlings but from stock that is capable of
attaining a good growth within a period of five (5) years. Such plantings to be made
from lilacs, honeysuckle or other native varieties that will, at maturity reach a height
of ten (10) to fifteen (15) feet and form a dense growth.
No accessory buildings or vehicular parking shall be permitted thereon.
Replacement shall be required for any subsequently destroyed, eroded or dead
plantings in order to preserve the protective shield between properties. In the event
such screening is provided by a solid fence or masonry wall, the owner must
maintain or replace such fence or wall in order to maintain an attractive buffer.
(13) Bufferyard, Landscape. An area of land within the boundaries of a lot or site,
generally adjacent to and parallel with the property line, either consisting of natural
existing vegetation or using trees, shrubs, fences, walls, and/or earthen berms, or
other visual and/or sound barriers designed to limit continuously the view and/or
sound from the lot, site, or land use to adjacent lots, sites, or land uses. Landscape
bufferyards are delineated graphically on the face of the Site Plan, Landscape Plan,
Certified Survey Map (a delineated easement), Subdivision Plat (a delineated
easement), or Condominium Plat (as a common element). Landscape bufferyards are
to be counted towards the landscape surface ratio (LSR) and setback requirements set
forth herein.
(14) Buildable Lot Area. The portion of a lot remaining after required yards have been
provided.
(15) Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls used or
intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, equipment,
machinery or materials. When a building is divided into separate parts by unpierced
walls extending from the ground up, each part shall be deemed a separate building.
(16) Building Area. The total area bounded by the exterior walls of a building at the floor
levels, but not including basement, garages, porches, and unfinished attics.
(17) Building, Detached. A building surrounded by open space on the same lot.
(18) Building, Heights of. The vertical distance from the average curb level in front of
the lot or the finished grade at the building line, whichever is higher, to the highest
point of the coping of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average
height of the highest gable of a gambrel, hip or pitch roof.
(19) Building, Principal. A building in which the principal use of the lot on which it is
located is conducted.
(20) Building Setback Line. A line parallel to the lot line at a distance parallel to it,
regulated by the yard requirements set up in this Code.
(21) Building Site Area. The ground area of a building or buildings, together with all
open spaces, as required by this Chapter.
(22) Business. An occupation, employment or enterprise which occupies time, labor and
materials, or wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold, or where services are offered.
(23) Caliper. A measurement of the diameter of a tree taken six (6) inches from the
Section 8-16-1
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
ground level for trees up to and including four (4) inch caliper sizes, and twelve (12)
inches above ground level for larger sizes.
(24) Channel. A natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks to confine
and conduct the normal flow of water.
(25) Club. An association of persons for some common purpose, but not including a
group organization primarily or which is actually engaged to render a service which
is customarily carried on as a business. A road-house or tavern shall not be
construed as a club.
(26) Commercial. Any use of structure or premises in which commodities are raised,
produced, manufactured, rented, sold or stored for profit or in which plants or
animals are propagated or raised, in excess of the consumption requirements of the
family or families residing in said structure or on said premises.
(27) Community Living Arrangement. The following facilities licensed or operated or
permitted under the authority of the Wis. Stats: Child welfare agencies under Section
48.60, group foster homes for children under Section 48.02(7m) and communitybased
residential facilities under Section 50.01, but does not include day care centers,
nursing homes, general hospitals, special hospitals, prisons and jails. The
establishment of a community living arrangement shall be in conformance with
applicable Sections of the Wis. Stats., including Sections 46.03(22), 69.97(15),
62.23(7)(i) and 62.23(7a), and amendments thereto, and also the Wis. Adm. Code.
(28) Conditional Uses. Uses of a special nature as to make impractical their
predetermination as a permitted use in a district.
(29) Conservation Standards. Guidelines and specifications for soil and water
conservation practices and management enumerated in the Technical Guide,
prepared by the USDA Soil Conservation Service for Milwaukee County, adopted by
the County Soil and Water Conservation District Supervisors, and containing
suitable alternatives for the use and treatment of land based upon its capabilities from
which the landowner selects that alternative which best meets his needs in
developing his soil and water conservation.
(30) Controlled Access Arterial Street. The condition in which the right of owners or
occupants of abutting land or other persons to access, light, air or view in connection
with an arterial street is fully or partially controlled by public authority.
(31) Corner Lot. On corner lots, the front and street side setback shall be measured from
the street lines. The setback from the side street shall be equal to the required front
set back where ever possible. Said corner lots shall be consisting of a parcel of
property abutting on two (2) or more streets at their intersection providing that the
interior angle of such intersection is less than one hundred thirty-five degrees (135°).
Corner lots shall meet front yard setback requirements for all street sides.
(32) Cut-off. The point at which all light rays emitted by a lamp, light source, or
luminaire are completely eliminated (cut-off) at a specific angle above the ground.
(33) Cut-off Angle. The angle formed by a line drawn from the direction of light rays at
the light source and a line perpendicular to the ground from the light source above
which no light is emitted.
Section 8-16-1
(34) Cut-off Type Luminaire. A luminaire with elements such as shields, reflectors, or
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
refractor panels which direct and cut off the light at an angle that is less than ninety
(90) degrees.
(35) dBA. The A-weighting scale of sound measurement as expressed in decibels.
(36) Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to construction of additions or substantial improvements to
buildings, structures, or accessory uses, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation or drilling operations or disposition of materials.
(37) District, Basic. A part or parts of the Village for which the regulations of this
Chapter governing the use and location of land and building are uniform.
(38) District, Overlay. Overlay districts, also referred to herein as regulatory areas,
provide for the possibility of superimposing certain additional requirements upon a
basic zoning district without disturbing the requirements of the basic district.
(39) Drive-in Uses. Any business establishment where the normal operation thereof
encourages the customer to remain in an automobile while purchasing, being served
or consuming products sold on the premises. By way of illustration, but not of
limitation, such use shall include gasoline service stations, gasoline filling stations,
custard stands, drive-in banks and savings and loans, drive-in restaurants where food
is consumed outside the building even when the drive-in operation is seasonal or
only part of the overall operation, frozen milkstands, mechanical garages when
gasoline is sold as an incidental service and any other use determined by the Plan
Commission to be of the same general character as the foregoing.
(40) Dwelling. A building designed or used exclusively as a residence or sleeping place,
but does not include boarding or lodging houses, motels, hotels, tents, cabins or
mobile homes.
(41) Dwelling Unit. A group of rooms constituting all or part of a dwelling, which are
arranged, designed, used or intended for use exclusively as living quarters for one (1)
family.
(42) Dwelling Efficiency. A dwelling unit consisting of one (1) principal room with no
separate sleeping rooms.
(43) Dwelling, Single-Family. A detached building designed for or occupied by one (1)
family.
(44) Dwelling, Two-Family. A detached building containing two (2) separate dwelling
(or living) units, designed for occupancy by not more than two (2) families.
(45) Dwelling, Multiple-Family. A residential building designed for or occupied by three
(3) or more families, with the number of families in residence not to exceed the
number of dwelling units provided.
(46) E.I.F.S. Exterior insulation and finish systems for buildings which are multi-layered
exterior wall systems that are used on both commercial buildings and residential
buildings.
(47) Essential Services. Services provided by public and private utilities, necessary for
the exercise of the principal use or service of the principal structure. These services
include underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, steam, water, sanitary
Section 8-16-1
sewerage, storm water drainage, and communications systems and accessories
thereto, such as poles, towers, wires, mains, drains, vaults, culverts, laterals, sewers,
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
pipes, catch basins, water storage tanks, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call
boxes, traffic signals, pumps, lift stations and hydrants, but not including buildings.
(48) Family. The body of persons who live together in one (1) dwelling unit, not to
exceed five (5) persons not related, as a single housekeeping entity.
(49) Farming -- General. General farming shall include floriculture, forest and game
management, orchards, raising of grain, grass, mint and seedcrops, raising of fruits,
nuts and berries, sod farming and vegetable farming. General farming includes the
operating of such an area for one (1) or more of the above uses with the necessary
accessory uses for treating or storing the produce, provided, however, that the
operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal farming
activities.
(50) Farmstead. A single-family residential structure located on a parcel of land, which
primary land use is associated with agriculture.
(51) Floor Area -- Business and Manufacturing Buildings. For the purpose of
determining off-street parking and off-street loading requirements, the sum of the
gross horizontal areas of the floors of the building, or portion thereof, devoted to a
use requiring off-street parking or loading. This area shall include elevators and
stairways, accessory storage areas located within selling or working space occupied
by counters, racks or closets and any basement floor area devoted to retailing
activities, to the production or processing of goods, or to business or professional
offices. However, floor area, for the purposes of determining off-street parking
spaces, shall not include floor area devoted primarily to storage purposes except as
otherwise noted herein.
(52) Floor Area, Gross. The gross floor area of a building or buildings shall be the sum of
the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of such building or buildings--
measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the centerline of party
walls separating two buildings. In particular, "gross floor area" shall include:
a. Basement space if at least one-half (0.5) of the basement story height is
above the established curb or ground level;
b. Elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor;
c. Floor space used for mechanical equipment where the structural headroom
exceeds seven and one-half (7.5) feet; except equipment, open or enclosed,
located on the roof; i.e., bulkheads, water tanks, and cooling towers;
d. Attic floor space where the structural headroom exceeds seven and one-half
(7.5) feet;
e. Interior balconies and mezzanines;
f. Enclosed porches, but not terraces and breezeways;
g. Accessory structures.
(53) Footcandle. A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of which are one
(1) foot from a uniform point source of one (1) candle.
(54) Foster Family Home. The primary domicile of a foster parent which is four (4) or
fewer foster children and which is licensed under Section 48.62 of the Wis. Stats. and
Section 8-16-1
amendments thereto.
(55) Frontage. All the property abutting on one (1) side of a street between two (2)
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
intersecting streets or all of the property abutting on one (1) side of a street between
an intersecting street and the dead end of a street.
(56) Garage, Mechanical. Any building or premises where automotive vehicles are
repaired, rebuilt, reconstructed or stored for compensation.
(57) Garage -- Private. A detached accessory building or portion of the principal
building, designed, arranged, used or intended to be used for storage of automobiles
of the occupant of the premises.
(58) Garage -- Public. Any building or portion thereof, not accessory to a residential
building or structure, used for equipping, servicing, repairing, leasing or public
parking of motor vehicles.
(59) Group Foster Home. Any facility operated by a person required to be licensed by the
State of Wisconsin under State Statute Section 48.62 for the care and maintenance of
five (5) to eight (8) foster children.
(60) Home Occupation. Any occupation for gain or support conducted entirely and only
by members of a family within a residential building, provided that no article is sold
or offered for sale, except such as may be produced in the household by members of
the family, and that no display of products shall be visible from the street and that no
accessory building shall be used for such home occupation.
(61) Hotel. A building in which lodging, with or without meals, is offered to transient
guests for compensation and in which there are more than five (5) sleeping rooms
with no cooking facilities in any individual room or apartment.
(62) Impervious Surface. Impervious surfaces are those which do not absorb water.
Impervious surfaces consist of all buildings, parking areas, driveways, packed stone,
roads, sidewalks, decks, and any areas of concrete or asphalt. For lumberyards or
similar uses, areas of stored lumber constitute impervious surfaces.
(63) Institution. A building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or a nonprofit
establishment for public use.
(64) Junk. Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material or debris, whether or not stored or used
in conjunction with dismantling, processing, salvage, storage, baling, disposal or
other use or disposition. Junk includes, but is not limited to, vehicles, tires, vehicle
parts, equipment, paper, rags, metal, glass, building materials, household appliances,
brush, wood and lumber.
(65) Junkyard. Any area, lot, land, parcel, building or structure or part thereof used for
the storage, collecting, processing, purchase, sale or abandonment of wastewater,
rags, scrap metal or other scrap or discarded goods, materials, machinery or two (2)
or more unregistered, inoperable motor vehicles or other type of junk.
(66) Land Consolidation. The combining of two (2) or more separate existing parcels of
land or existing lots, or portions thereof, through the act or process of the
combination of tax key numbers, lot line adjustment, the exchange of property
between abutting property owners, Subdivision platting, Certified Survey Map, or
Condominium platting.
Section 8-16-1
(67) Landscape Surface Area. Surface area of land not covered by any building or
impervious surface; pervious surface that is maintained as a natural area and left
undisturbed or to support plant life.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
(68) Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR). The ratio derived by dividing the area of
landscaped surface by the base site area.
(69) Landscaping. Living material, such as grass, groundcover, flowers, shrubs, vines,
hedges, and trees; and nonliving durable material such as rocks, pebbles, sand,
mulch, wood chips or bark, walls, and fences, but not including paving.
(70) Loading Area. A completely off-street space or berth on the same lot for the loading
or unloading of freight carriers, having adequate ingress and egress to a public street
or alley.
(71) Lodging House. A building where lodging only is provided for compensation for not
more than four (4) persons not members of the family.
(72) Lot. A parcel of land having frontage on a public street or other officially approved
means of vehicular access, occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal
structure or use and of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use,
width, frontage, area, yard, and open space provisions as set forth in this Ordinance
and the Village Zoning Code as pertaining to the zoning district wherein located.
(73) Lot Area. The area contained within the exterior, or peripheral, boundaries or lot
lines of a lot excluding street and/or alley rights-of-way and excluding land under
navigable bodies of water.
(74) Lot, Corner. A lot abutting two (2) or more streets at their intersection provided that
the corner of such intersection shall have an angle of one hundred thirty-five degrees
(135°) or less, measured on the lot side.
(75) Lot, Interior. A lot situated on a single street which is bounded by adjacent lots
along each of its other lines and is not a corner lot.
(76) Lot, Substandard. A parcel of land held in separate ownership having frontage on a
public street, or other approved means of access, occupied or intended to be occupied
by a principal building or structure, together with accessory buildings and uses,
having insufficient size to meet the lot width, lot area, yard, off-street parking areas
of other open space provisions of this Code as pertaining to the district wherein
located.
(77) Lot, Through. A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) substantially
parallel streets and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot, both street lines shall
be deemed front lot lines.
(78) Lot Coverage (residential). The area of a lot occupied by the principal building or
buildings and accessory building.
(79) Lot Coverage (except residential). The area of a lot occupied by the principal
building or buildings and accessory buildings including any driveways, parking
areas, loading areas, storage areas and walkways.
(80) Lot Line. A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate ownership,
except that where any portion of the lot extends into the abutting street or alley, the
lot line shall be deemed to be the abutting street or alley right-of-way line.
Section 8-16-1
(81) Lot Lines and Area. The peripheral boundaries of a parcel of land and the total area
lying within such boundaries.
(82) Lot of Record. An area of land designated as a lot on a plat of Subdivision or
Certified Survey Map recorded or registered pursuant to statute existing at the time
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
of the adoption of this Ordinance.
(83) Lot Width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at the
building setback line.
(84) Luminaire. A complete lighting unit consisting of a light source and all necessary
mechanical, electrical, and decorative parts.
(85) Minor Structures. Any small, movable accessory erection or construction such as
birdhouses, tool houses, pet houses, play equipment, arbors and walls and fences
under four (4) feet in height.
(86) Mobile Home. A manufactured home that is HUD certified and labeled under the
National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. A mobile
home is a transportable structure, being eight (8) feet or more in width (not including
the overhang of the roof), building on a chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
(87) Mobile Home Lot. A parcel of land for the placement of a single mobile home and
the exclusive use of its occupants.
(88) Mobile Home Park. A parcel of land which has been developed for the placement of
mobile homes and is owned by an individual, a firm, trust, partnership, public or
private association, or corporation. Individual lots within a mobile home park are
rented to individual mobile home users.
(89) Mobile Home Subdivision. A land subdivision, as defined by Chapter 236 of the
Wis. Stats. and any Village Land Division Ordinance, with lots intended for the
placement of individual mobile home units. Individual homesites are in separate
ownership as opposed to the rental arrangements in mobile home parks.
(90) Modular Unit. A modular unit is a factory fabricated transportable building unit
designed to be used by itself or to be incorporated with similar units at a building site
into a modular structure to be used for residential, business, educational or industrial
purposes.
(91) Nonconforming Uses. Any structure, use of land, use of land and structure in
combination or characteristic of use (such as yard requirement or lot size) which was
existing at the time of the effective date of this Code or amendments thereto and
which is not in conformance with this Code. Any such structure conforming in
respect to use but not in respect to frontage, width, height, area, yard, parking,
loading or distance requirements shall not be considered a nonconforming use, but
shall be considered nonconforming with respect to those characteristics.
(92) Nursing Home. An establishment used as a dwelling place by the aged, infirm,
chronically ill or incurably afflicted, in which not less than three (3) persons live or
are kept or provided for on the premises for compensation, excluding clinics and
hospitals and similar institutions devoted to the diagnosis, treatment or the care of the
sick or injured.
Section 8-16-1
(93) Parking Lot (Business). A lot where automobiles are parked temporarily, but not
including the wrecking of automobiles.
(94) Parties in Interest. Includes all abutting property owners, all property owners within
one hundred (100) feet, and all property owners of opposite frontages.
(95) Professional Office. When conducted in a residential district, a professional office
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
shall be incidental to the residential occupation; shall be conducted by a member of a
resident family entirely within a residential building; and shall include only the
offices of doctors or practitioners, ministers, architects, landscape architects,
professional engineers, lawyers, authors, musicians and other recognized
professional occupations occasionally conducted within residences.
(96) Public Airport. Any airport which complies with the definition contained in Section
114.013(3), Wis. Stats., or any airport which serves or offers to serve common
carriers engaged in air transport.
(97) Rear Yard. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which shall
be the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and a line parallel
thereto through the nearest point of the principal structure. This yard shall be
opposite the street yard or one (1) of the street yards on a corner lot.
(98) Retail. The sale of goods or merchandise in small quantities to the consumer.
(99) Roofline. The top or bottom edge of a roof or building parapet, whichever,
excluding any cupolas, pylons, chimneys, or other minor projections.
(100) Service Stations. Any building, structure, premises or other place used for
dispensing, sale or offering for sale of any motor fuel or oils having pumps and
storage tanks of a total capacity of not more than six thousand (6,000) gallons; also
where battery, tire and other similar services are rendered, located wholly within lot
lines. When such dispensing, sale or offering for sale of any fuels or oils is
incidental to the conduct of a mechanical garage, the premises shall be classified as a
mechanical garage.
(101) Setback. The minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest
point of the foundation of that portion of the building to be enclosed. The overhang
cornices shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches. Any overhang of the cornice in
excess of thirty-six (36) inches shall be compensated by increasing the setback.
Uncovered steps shall not be included in measuring the setback.
(102) Side Yard. A yard extending from the street yard to the rear yard of the lot, the
width of which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the side lot line
and a line parallel thereto through the nearest point of the principal structure.
(103) Signs. Any medium, including its structure, words, letters, figures, numerals,
phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, designs, trade names or trademarks by which
anything is made known and which are used to advertise or promote an individual,
firm, association, corporation, profession, business, commodity or product and which
is visible from any public street or highway.
(104) Storage, Outdoor. The keeping of goods or materials, excluding junk, outside of a
building, and which shall be considered as an accessory use, unless specifically
indicated as a principal use under this Ordinance.
Section 8-16-1
(105) Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the
surface of the next floor above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space
between the floor and the ceiling next above it. Any portion of a story exceeding
fourteen (14) feet in height shall be considered as an additional story for each
fourteen (14) feet or fraction thereof. A basement having one-half (1/2) or more of
its height above grade shall be deemed a story for purposes of height regulation.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
(106) Story, Half. That portion of a building under a gable, hip or mansard roof, the wall
plates of which, on at least two (2) opposite exterior walls, are not more than four
and one-half (4-1/2) feet above the finished floor of such story. In the case of one (1)
family dwellings, two (2) family dwellings and multi-family dwellings less than
three (3) stories in height, a half (1/2) story in a sloping roof shall not be counted as a
story for the purposes of this Code.
(107) Street. Property other than an alley or private thoroughfare or travelway which is
subject to public easement or right-of-way for use as a thoroughfare and which is
twenty-one (21) feet or more in width.
(108) Street Yard. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which
shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the existing street or highway
right-of-way line and a line parallel thereto through the nearest point of the principal
structure. Corner lots shall have two (2) street yards.
(109) Structural Alterations. Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as
bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders which affects the structural
strength, fire hazard, internal circulation or exits of such building.
(110) Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a permanent
location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the
ground.
(111) Temporary Structure. A movable structure not designed for human occupancy nor
for the protection of goods or chattels and not forming an enclosure, such as
billboards.
(112) Tree. Any self-supporting, woody plant together with its root system, growing upon
the earth usually with one (1) trunk, or a multi-stemmed trunk system, supporting a
definitely formed crown.
(113) Tree, Canopy. A tree whose leaves would occupy the upper level of a forest in a
natural ecological situation. This type of tree is often referred to as a shade tree.
(114) Tree, Evergreen. A tree which is coniferous, has needles, and retains its foliage yearround.
This type of tree is often referred to as an evergreen trees.
(115) Tree, Understory. A tree whose leaves would occupy the lower level of a forest in a
natural ecological situation. This type of tree is often referred to as an ornamental
tree.
(116) Use. The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereof is designed,
arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
(117) Use, Accessory. A subordinate building or use which is located on the same lot on
which the principal building or use is situated and which is reasonably necessary and
incidental to the conduct of the primary use of such building or main use, when
Section 8-16-1
permitted by district regulations.
(118) Use, Principal. The main use of land or building as distinguished from subordinate
or accessory use.
(119) Utilities. Public and private facilities, such as water wells, water and sewage
pumping stations, water storage tanks, electrical power substations, static transformer
stations, telephone and telegraph exchanges, microwave radio relays and gas
regulation stations, inclusive of associated transmission facilities, but not including
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
sewage disposal plants, municipal incinerators, warehouses, shops, storage yards and
power plants.
(120) Vision Clearance. An unoccupied triangular space at the street corner of a corner lot
which is bounded by the street lines and a setback line connecting points specified by
measurement from the corner on each street line.
(121) Yard. An open space on the same lot with a structure, unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upward except the vegetation. The street and rear yards extend the
full width of the lot.
(122) Yard, Front. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the
front line of the lot and the nearest line of the building. The side where the address is
shall be considered the front yard.
(123) Yard, Rear. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the
rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the principal building.
(124) Yard, Side. That part of the yard lying between the main buildings and a side lot
line, and extending from the required front yard (or from the front lot line, if there is
no required front yard) to the required rear yard.
(125) Zero Lot Line. The concept whereby two (2) respective dwelling units within a
building shall be on separate and abutting lots and shall meet on the common
property line between them, thereby having zero space between said units.
(126) Zoning Lot. A single tract of contiguous land located within a single block which is
a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or
control. Therefore, a "zoning lot" may or may not coincide with a lot of record.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-2-1
CHAPTER 2
General Provisions
SEC. 8-2-1 JURISDICTION AND GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(a) Jurisdiction. The jurisdiction of this Chapter shall apply to all structures, lands, water and
air within the corporate limits of the Village of Hales Corners.
(b) Compliance. No new structure, new use of land, water or air or change in the use of land,
water or air shall hereafter be permitted and no structure or part thereof shall hereafter be
located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or structurally altered
without a permit and without full compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and all
other applicable local, county and state regulations.
(c) District Regulations to be Complied With. Except as otherwise provided, the use and
height of buildings hereafter erected, converted, moved, enlarged or structurally altered and
the use of any land shall be in compliance with the regulations established herein for the
district in which such building or land is located.
(d) One Main Building per Lot. Every building hereafter erected, converted, enlarged or
structurally altered shall be located on a lot and in no case shall there be more than one (1)
main building on one (1) lot, except as may be approved by the Plan Commission.
SEC. 8-2-2 USE REGULATIONS.
Only the following uses and their essential services may be allowed in any district:
(a) Permitted Uses. Permitted uses, being the principal uses, specified for a district.
(1) B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, M-1, and P-1 uses are permitted only after a site plan/building
plans are approved by the Plan commission, to certify that such a site, building and
use complies with the provisions of this zoning code. This shall apply to all building
construction and all improvements and/or expansions and/or all changes of use or
expansion of parking areas. Excepted from this requirement are minor repairs,
interior revisions, exterior changes that do not require aesthetic or square footage
revisions and normal maintenance. In considering the application, the Plan
Commission shall take into account the basic intent of this zoning code to ensure
aesthetically pleasing, efficient and appropriate development of land in the
community and ensure that every reasonable step has been taken to avoid
depreciating effects on surrounding property values.
(b) Accessory Uses. Accessory uses and structures as specified are permitted in any district but
not until their principal structure is present or under construction.
(c) Conditional Uses. Provisions applicable to conditional uses.
(1) Conditional uses and their accessory uses are considered as special uses requiring,
for their authorization, review, public hearing and approval by the Plan Commission
in accordance with Chapter 5 of this Code excepting those existing at time of
adoption of the Zoning Code.
(2) Conditional use(s), when replaced by permitted use(s), shall terminate. In such
Section 8-2-2
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
case(s), the reestablishment of any previous conditional use(s), or establishment of
new conditional use(s) shall require review, public hearing and approval by the Plan
Commission in accordance with Chapter 5 of this Code.
(3) Conditional uses authorized by Plan Commission resolution shall be established for a
period of time to a time certain or until a future happening or event at which the same
shall terminate.
(4) Conditional uses authorized by the Plan Commission shall not be subject to
substitution with other conditional uses, either regular or limited, whether similar
type or not, without Plan Commission approval and the procedures required in
Chapter 5 of this Code.
(d) Uses Not Specified in Code.
(1) Uses not specified in this Chapter which are found by the Plan Commission to be
sufficiently similar to specified permitted uses for a district shall be allowed by the
Zoning Administrator.
(2) Uses not specified in this Chapter and which are found sufficiently similar to
specified conditional uses permitted for a district may be permitted by the Plan
Commission after public hearing and approval in accordance with Chapter 5 of this
Code.
SEC. 8-2-3 SITE REGULATIONS.
(a) Street Frontage. To be buildable, a lot shall comply with the frontage requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located.
(b) Principal Structures. All principal structures shall be located on a lot. Only one (1)
principal structure shall be located, erected or moved onto a lot. The Plan Commission may
permit more than one (1) principal structure per lot in any district where more than one (1)
such structure is needed for the orderly development of the parcel or when a condominium is
planned. Where additional structures are permitted, the Plan Commission may impose
additional yard requirements, landscaping requirements or parking requirements, or require a
minimum separation distance between principal structures.
(c) Dedicated Street. Building permits shall only be issued for a lot which abuts a public street
dedicated to its proposed width.
(d) Site Suitability. No land shall be used or structure erected where the land is held unsuitable
for such use or structure by the Plan Commission by reason of flooding, concentrated runoff,
inadequate drainage, adverse soil or rock formation, unfavorable topography, low
percolation rate or bearing strength, erosion susceptibility or any other feature likely to be
harmful to the health, safety, prosperity, aesthetics and general welfare of this community.
The Plan Commission, in applying the provisions of the Section, shall, in writing, recite the
particular facts upon which it bases its conclusion that the land is not suitable for certain
uses. The applicant shall have an opportunity to present evidence contesting such
unsuitability if he so desires. Thereafter, the Plan Commission may affirm, modify or
withdraw its determination of unsuitability.
(e) Preservation of Topography. In order to protect the property owner from possible damage
Section 8-2-3
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
due to change in the existing grade of adjoining lands and to aid in preserving and protecting
the natural beauty and character of the landscape, no change in the existing topography of
any land shall be made which would result in increasing any portion of the slope to a ratio
greater than one and one-half (1-1/2) horizontal to one (1) vertical, within a distance of
twenty (20) feet from the property line, except with the written consent of the owner of the
abutting property and with the approval of the Plan Commission, or which would alter the
existing drainage or topography in any way as to adversely affect the adjoining property. In
no case shall any slope exceed the normal angle of slippage of the material involved, and all
slopes shall be protected against erosion. Retaining walls may be permitted on a sitespecific
basis as allowed by the Director of Public Works.
(f) Decks. For purposes of this Chapter, decks and porches, when covered by a roof and/or
elevated 24" or more from grade, shall be considered a part of a building or structure.
(g) Service Station and Public Parking Lot Locations. No service station, mechanical garage
or public parking lot shall be erected, operated or maintained where an entrance or exit for
motor cars is located on the same side of the street within two hundred (200) feet of a
pedestrian entrance or exit from a public or private school, park, parkway, playground,
public library, church, hospital, home for children or the aged or other public or semi-public
institution.
(h) Transmission Lines; Railroads. No high-tension steel tower transmission lines, railroads
or railways shall be constructed on rights-of-way acquired after December 10, 1956, unless
authorization therefor is obtained from the Plan Commission.
(i) Corner Lots. Specific setbacks for corner lots shall conform to the requirements of each
particular use district wherever possible. Where specific setbacks as therein defined are
impossible, no building shall be erected, altered or moved so as to be nearer the street line on
the long side of the lot than one-fifth (1/5) of the width of the lot or so as to be nearer the
street line on the short side of the lot than the front setback requirement for such street in the
particular use district.
(j) Vehicular Circulation Between Adjacent Properties. The provision for circulation
between adjacent nonresidential uses, lots, and parcels shall be provided through coordinated
land access drives and access easements and/or jointly used off-street parking lots as may be
required by the Plan Commission in the B-1, B-2, B-3, and B-4 Districts.
(k) Prohibition of Long-Term Truck Parking Unless Screened from View. In all zoning
districts:
(1) No truck, trailer, or commercial vehicle of any kind shall be permitted to be parked
on the property for a period of more than twenty-four (24) hours unless said vehicle
is temporarily present for the purpose of loading or unloading. No truck, trailer, or
commercial vehicle shall be parked overnight, except within screened enclosures.
(2) Trucks, trailers, or commercial vehicles of any kind shall be permitted to be parked
on the property for a period of more than 24 hours if said trucks, trailers, or
commercial vehicles are located within areas screened from view of any public street
right-of-way, public park or public open space area, and from the view from all
residential zoning districts. The screening of all such areas shall consist of the
following:
Section 8-2-3
a. Solid walls or solid fences of at least the height of the trucks, trailers, or
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
commercial vehicles proposed to be screened as approved by the Plan
Commission. In addition, all such areas shall provide a contiguous landscape
bufferyard with a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet. The following
minimum number, types, and sizes of plant materials shall be provided per
one-hundred (100) linear feet of landscape bufferyard length and fraction
thereof. Fractional plants resulting from this computation of required plant
materials shall be rounded to the next whole number. Preserved existing
plants shall be credited towards these requirements on a one-for-one basis
based upon plant type.
Type of Plants Required Minimum Quantity
Required Per 100 Feet
of Bufferyard Length
Minimum Size
Required at Time of
Installation
Canopy/Shade Trees 2 3 inch caliper
Understory Trees 3 2 inch caliper
Evergreen Trees 3 6 feet tall
Shrubs 14 2 feet tall
b. Walls, fencing, and landscaping for screening shall be maintained in good
condition and kept litter-free.
c. Required landscape plant material types for the above required landscape
bufferyard may be substituted for other types based upon the following:
Section 8-2-3
Required Plant Material Type Acceptable Substitutions
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
1 Canopy Tree:
Single Stem or
Multi-stem Clump:
2 Understory Trees
2 inch caliper each
or
2 Coniferous Trees
6 feet in height each
or
1 Understory Tree
2 inch caliper each
Plus
1 Coniferous Tree
6 feet in height each
1 Coniferous Tree 1 Understory Tree
1.5 inch caliper each
1 Understory Tree 1 Coniferous Tree
6 feet in height each
1 Shrub 1 Understory Tree
1.5 inch caliper each
or
1 Coniferous Tree
4 feet in height each
(l) Outdoor Trash Dumpster and Garbage Receptacles (Trash and Garbage Storage). The
following requirements shall be met for all outdoor trash dumpsters and garbage receptacles
located in the R-4, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, M-1, and P-1 Districts:
(1) Trash Dumpster and Garbage Receptacle Enclosures Required. All garbage cans,
trash dumpsters, trash containers, and other storage devices situated on any property
shall be closed containers with lids and shall be concealed or suitably screened from
public view. Where such facilities are provided outside a building, they shall be
screened by an enclosure consisting of sight-proof fencing (wood or masonry) and/or
coniferous landscaping materials of an adequate height (at the time of installation) to
totally screen the trash storage areas from view from public rights-of-way and
adjacent property.
(2) Trash Dumpster and Garbage Receptacle Maintenance Required. Fencing and
landscaping for such areas shall be maintained in good condition and kept litter-free.
All garbage cans, trash containers, and other garbage storage devices shall be
emptied and the contents thereof properly disposed of not less than once every seven
days.
(3) Unenclosed Storage of Trash or Waste Prohibited. No portion of the lot shall be
used for open or unenclosed storage of trash or waste of any kind.
(4) Trash Dumpster and Garbage Receptacle Location in Off-street Parking Space or
Drive Prohibited. No trash dumpster or other trash or waste receptacle shall be
permitted in any off-street parking space or drive.
Section 8-2-3
(5) Paved Slab Required. All trash dumpsters and garbage receptacles shall be placed
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
upon a paved slab.
(6) Adequate Size to Accommodate Recycling Materials. All trash dumpster and
garbage receptacle areas shall be of an adequate size to accommodate the storage of
materials to be recycled.
(7) Building Permit Required for the Construction of Garbage, Trash, Waste, and
Dumpster Enclosures. A Building Permit shall be required for the construction of
any garbage, trash, waste, or dumpster enclosure.
(8) Materials of Enclosures. All outdoor trash dumpsters and garbage receptacle
enclosures shall be constructed of masonry materials of a type and color which match
the building to which they are accessory to.
(9) Maximum Height of Enclosure. All outdoor trash dumpsters and garbage receptacle
enclosures shall be of a height necessary to completely visually screen the outdoor
trash dumpsters and garbage receptacles which they enclose. In no case, however,
shall such enclosures be higher than eight (8) feet nor less than six (6) feet in height.
(m) Exterior Lighting Standards. The following requirements shall be met for all exterior
lighting located in the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, M-1, and P-1 Districts:
(1) Exterior Lighting Limited to Total Cutoff-type Luminaires (With Angle Greater than
90º). The maximum permitted illumination shall be two (2) footcandles as measured
at the property line and may be as high as five (5) footcandles at illuminated
entryways from public street rights-of-way to the off-street parking lot as measured
at the right-of-way line.
(2) Maximum Permitted Luminaire Height. The maximum permitted luminaire height
shall be twenty-eight (28) feet as measured from surrounding grade to the bottom of
the luminaire except that said height shall be reduced to a maximum height of fifteen
(15) feet when said luminaire is placed within fifty (50) feet of a residential zoning
district. [Note: This standard does not address illumination levels or fixture height
which may be required by the Village of Hales Corners for the adequate lighting of
public street rights-of-way. It represents maximum illumination levels on private
property.]
(3) Light Measurement. For the purposes of this Ordinance, light shall be measured as
follows:
a. Metering Equipment. Lighting levels shall be measured in footcandles with a
direct-reading, portable light meter. The meter shall be read within an
accuracy of plus or minus five (5) percent. The meter shall have been tested,
calibrated, and certified by an independent commercial photometric
laboratory or the manufacturer within thirty (30) days of its use.
b. Method of Measurement. The meter sensor shall be mounted not more than
six inches above ground level in a horizontal position at the interior line of
the bufferyard or at the property line, as required herein. Readings shall be
taken only after the cell has been exposed long enough to provide a constant
reading. In order to eliminate the effects of moonlight and other ambient
light, measurements shall be made after dark with the light source in question
Section 8-2-3
on, then with the same source off. The differences between the two (2)
readings shall be compared to the maximum permitted illumination allowed
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
under this Ordinance.
(n) Building Design Requirements. The following standards and requirements for
architectural review are used by the Plan Commission in its review of the architecture for
proposed new buildings and building expansions located in the B-1, B-2, B-3, and B-4
Districts. These standards are also intended to be a design aid for builders and owners to use
in the preparation of architectural plans. A Building Permit shall not be issued for any
building which does not meet the requirements of this Section. To implement this
Ordinance, the following architectural review standards and requirements are hereby
established and shell be met:
(1) Exterior Building Materials and Material Compatibility.
a. No less than seventy (70) percent of any building facade elevation (excluding
window areas) shall be clad with full-size masonry units or natural stone.
b. All sides of the exterior of buildings shall be of compatible materials with
equal design consideration and consistent architectural detailing of the
building facades. No building shall be permitted where any exposed building
facade is constructed or faced with a finished material which is aesthetically
incompatible with other building facades in the area or which presents an
unattractive appearance to the public and surrounding properties.
c. Building elevations clad with a singular exterior surface material shall
provide some additional architectural design element(s) to break up the plane
of the wall. This may be done by the addition of window(s), gable end wall
treatments, siding design and accent panels, or other architectural design
treatments consistent with the principal building design.
(2) Prohibited Exterior Building Materials. The use of the following building materials
shall be prohibited on the exterior facades of buildings:
a. Plain concrete.
b. Plain concrete block.
c. Metal siding.
d. Corrugated metal building skins.
e. Plywood and wood panel composite siding.
f. Vinyl and fiber cement siding.
g. Reflective glass which may pose a safety hazard or nuisance due to glare.
h. More than thirty (30) percent of any building facade (excluding window
areas) clad with exterior insulation and finish system (E.I.F.S.) materials.
(3) Building Colors.
a. Since the selection of building colors has a significant aesthetic and visual
impact upon the public and neighboring properties, color shall be selected in
general harmony with the other colors used on the building as well as the
existing area or neighborhood buildings.
b. Building colors shall be non-reflective, neutral, or earth tones. The use of
high intensity colors, metallic colors, or fluorescent colors on building facade
Section 8-2-3
elevations shall be prohibited. Building trim and architectural accent features
may be brighter colors, but such colors shall not be metallic or fluorescent,
and shall not be specific to particular uses or tenants. Standard corporate and
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
trademark colors shall be permitted only on sign face and sign copy areas
only.
(4) Related Building Elements. Down spouts, roof ladders, and related elements shall be
designed to be compatible with building architecture and shall function to avoid
staining the building facades. These various elements shall be painted in order to
blend with the building's architecture and complement the color scheme of the
building's trim and detail.
(5) Rear Service Doors. Rear service doors may be solid doors but shall be compatible
in door style with the main entrance doors of the building. In addition, such rear
service doors shall also complement the architecture of the building and contribute to
its overall visual appearance.
(6) Meters and Valves. All utility meters, gas valves, etc. are to be painted in a color
which blends with the architecture and color of the building.
(7) Building Rooftop Equipment. All rooftop equipment, antennas, and similar
protrusions shall not be visible to a person standing on the ground in an area the
public frequents. Parapet walls, individual screens, or building elements shall be
used to completely screen these elements from view. Individual screens shall relate
to the building’s style of architecture and (when located on the ground) be
landscaped appropriately as determined by the Plan Commission. Solar collectors
shall only be permitted at locations on structures as are approved by the Plan
Commission. Additional screening of building rooftop equipment may be required
by the Plan Commission due to the proximity of multi-story buildings.
(8) Mechanical Penthouses or Accessory Buildings. Where mechanical penthouses are
installed, they shall be designed to blend into the building's architecture and shall not
cause the building's total height to exceed the maximum height allowed. A
penthouse shall not be counted as a story, provided that:
a. The penthouse is less than ten (10) feet in height; and,
b. The penthouse floor area covers less than twenty-five (25) percent of the roof
area.
c. In the event that a ground-located mechanical accessory building is used, it
shall be fully screened from view by a combination of earthen berms and
evergreen trees or shrubs.
(9) Waiver of Standards. The Plan Commission may waive any of the above building
design standards by a three-quarters (3/4) vote of Plan Commission members in
attendance, but only if supplemental design elements or improvements are
incorporated into the project which compensate for the waiver of the particular
standard.
Reference: Ordinance 05-18
Section 8-2-4
SEC. 8-2-4 HEIGHT AND AREA EXCEPTIONS.
(a) Height. The district height limitation stipulated elsewhere in this Chapter may be exceeded,
but such modifications shall be in accord with the following:
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
(1) Architectural projections, such as spires, belfries, parapet walls, cupolas, domes and
flues are exempt from the height limitations of this Chapter.
(2) Special structures, such as elevator penthouses, gas tanks, grain elevators, radio and
television receiving antennas, manufacturing equipment and necessary mechanical
appurtenances, cooling towers, fire towers, substations, smoke stacks and flag poles
are exempt from the height limitations of this Chapter.
(3) Essential services, utilities, water towers, electric power and communication
transmission lines are exempt from the height limitations of this Chapter.
(4) Communication structures, such as radio and television transmission and relay
towers, aerials and observation towers, shall not exceed in height three (3) times their
distance from the nearest lot line. No structure or tower shall be erected closer than
thirty (30) feet from any property line.
(5) Public or semi-public facilities, such as schools, churches, hospitals, monuments,
sanitariums, libraries, governmental offices and stations, may be erected to a height
of sixty (60) feet, provided all required yards are increased not less than one (1) foot
for each foot the structure exceeds the district's maximum height requirement.
(b) Yards. The yard requirements stipulated elsewhere in this Chapter may be modified as
follows:
(1) Uncovered stairs, landings and fire escapes may project into any yard but not to
exceed six (6) feet and not closer than three (3) feet to any lot line.
(2) Architectural projections, such as flues, sills, eaves, belt courses and ornaments, may
project into any required yard, provided, however, that none of the aforesaid
projections shall project into the minimum side yard more than one-third of the width
of such side yard and in no case more than thirty six (36) inches.
(3) Essential services, utility electric power and communication transmission lines are
exempt from the yard and distance requirements of this Chapter.
(4) Landscaping and vegetation are exempt from the yard requirements of this Chapter,
with the exception that any landscaping or vegetation shall be subject to the
restrictions in Section 8-8-1.
(5) Required street yards may be decreased to the average of the existing street yards of
the abutting structures on each side but in no case less than fifteen (15) feet.
(c) Uses. The following uses shall be permitted in any district provided that such uses do not
alter the character of the premises in respect to their use for the purpose permitted in such
respective district.
(1) Real estate offices of a temporary character not to exceed two (2) years when located
on premises being offered for sale.
(2) Temporary buildings and uses for construction purposes for a period not to exceed
one (1) year.
Reference: Ordinance 97-11
Section 8-2-4
(d) Lots of Record. Any such lot shown upon a recorded subdivision or any lot for which a
deed is of record in the office of the Register of Deeds of Milwaukee County as of December
10, 1956, may be used as a building site, subject to the required setbacks and other
regulations for the District in which the lot is located.
Reference: Ordinance 06-07
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
SEC. 8-2-5 REDUCTION OR JOINT USE.
No lot, yard, parking area, building area or other space shall be reduced in area or dimensions so as
not to meet the provisions of this Chapter. No part of any lot, yard, parking area or other space
required for a structure or use shall be used for any other structure or use.
SEC. 8-2-6 SCREENS AND BUFFERS.
(a) Required Screens and Buffers. Where screens or buffers are required by this Chapter or
are required as a condition by the Plan Commission to reduce the impact of proposed uses on
adjacent properties, the following standards shall be followed. Buffer yards and screens may
be required jointly or separately.
(b) Buffer Yards. Buffer yards are horizontal separations along lot lines that are intended to
increase the physical separation between incompatible uses. The width of a required buffer
yard shall be determined by the Plan Commission. The minimum width shall be ten (10)
feet.
(c) Screens. Screens are barriers located in a limited space [ten (10) feet or less] intended to
perform a buffering effect, particularly for noise reduction or visual screening. Screens may
consist of existing or planted vegetation, fences, walls, earth berms or similar techniques.
Plant screens shall be sufficient to provide a year-round screen within three (3) years of
installation. Walls or earth berms shall be required where noise reduction is necessary.
Screen plantings shall be permanently maintained by the owner of the property, and any
plant materials which do not live shall be replaced within six (6) months.
SEC. 8-2-7 AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS REQUIREMENTS.
(a) No gasoline in excess of fifty (50) gallons shall be stored in tanks or containers above
ground, unless specifically permitted by the Plan Commission.
(b) The building height shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet.
(c) No gasoline pumps shall be located closer than twenty (20) feet (measured from the
centerline of said pumps) to the nearest lot line or an established street or highway where the
width of such street or highway has been established pursuant to Section 80.64, Wis. Stats.
On a corner lot when a gasoline pump or series of pumps is placed in a pump island parallel
to the lot line or at an angle to the lot line, the end pump nearest to the street shall be located
no closer than thirty (30) feet (measured along the axis of said pump island) to the street line
of said street.
(d) There shall be no storage or display of items which would detract from the aesthetic
Section 8-2-7
appearance, such as, but not limited to, used tires, storage drums, replaced mufflers, used car
parts, etc.
(e) No automotive or vehicle repairs shall be permitted unless they are conducted within the
building.
(f) Advertising displays shall only be related to the business conducted on the premises.
(g) The premises shall not be used in the used car business.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
(h) Wrecked vehicles shall not remain on the premises for a period in excess of twenty-four (24)
hours.
(i) All illuminations shall be so shielded or directed that it will not unduly interfere with
neighboring residential property used for residential purposes.
(j) No such station shall be erected, operated or maintained where an entrance or exit for motor
cars is located on the same side of the street within two hundred (200) feet to a pedestrian
entrance or exit from a public or private school, park, parkway, playground, public library,
church, hospital, home for children or the aged or other public or semi-public institutions.
SEC. 8-2-8 HISTORICAL PRESERVATION.
(a) Purpose and Intent. It is hereby declared a matter of public policy that the protection,
enhancement, perpetuation, and use of improvements or sites of special character or special
architectural, archeological, or historic interest or value is a public necessity and is required
in the interest of the health, prosperity, safety, and welfare of the people. The purpose of this
section is to:
(1) Effect and accomplish the protection, enhancement, and preservation of such
improvements, sites, and districts which represent or reflect elements of the cultural,
social, economic, political, and architectural history of the Village.
(2) Safeguard the Village’s historic, prehistoric, and cultural heritage, as embodied or
reflected in such historic structures, sites, and districts.
(3) Stabilize and improve property values and enhance the visual and aesthetic character
of the Village.
(4) Protect and enhance the Village’s attractions to residents, tourists, and visitors and
serve as a support and stimulus to business and industry.
(b) Definitions. The definitions shall be as follows:
(1) “Certificate of Appropriateness” means the certificate issued by the Village Board
upon recommendation of the Commission approving alteration, rehabilitation,
construction, reconstruction, or demolition of a historic structure, historic site, or any
improvement in a historic district.
(2) “Commission” means the Historic Preservation Commission created under this
section.
(3) “Historic district” is an area designated by the Village Board on recommendation of
the Commission that contains two or more historic improvements or sites.
(4) “Historic site” means any parcel of land of historic significance due to a substantial
value in tracing the history or prehistory of man, or upon which a historic event has
occurred, and which has been designated as a historic site under this section, or an
Section 8-2-8
improvement parcel or part thereof on which is situated a historic structure and any
abutting improvement parcel or part thereof used as and constituting part of the
premises on which the historic structure is situated.
(5) “Historic structure” means any improvement which has special character or special
historic interest or value as part of the development, heritage, or cultural
characteristics of the Village, State, or nation and which has been designated as a
historic structure pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
(6) “Improvement” means any building, structure, place, work of art, or other object
constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment,
including streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, lighting fixtures, signs, and the like.
(c) Historic Preservation Commission Composition. A Historic Preservation Commission is
hereby created, consisting of seven (7) members. Of the membership, if reasonably available
in the community, one shall be a registered architect, one shall be a historian, one shall be a
licensed real estate broker, one shall be a Village Trustee, and three shall be citizen
members. Each member shall have, to the highest extent practicable, a known interest in
historic preservation. The Village President shall appoint the Commissioners subject to
confirmation by the Village Board. Commissioners shall serve staggered two (2) year terms
expiring April 30. The Village Trustee shall serve during the Trustee’s elected term.
(d) Historic Structure, Historic Site, and Historic District Designation Criteria.
(1) For purposes of this ordinance, a historic structure, historic site, or historic district
designation may be placed on any site, natural or improved, including any building,
improvement, or structure located thereon, or any area of particular historic,
architectural, archeological, or cultural significance to the Village, such as historic
structures, sites, or districts which:
a. Exemplify or reflect the broad cultural, political, economic, or social history
of the nation, State, or community; or
b. Are identified with historic personages or with important events in national,
State, or local history; or
c. Embody the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type or
specimen inherently valuable for a study of a period, style, method of
construction, or of indigenous materials or craftsmanship; or
d. Are representative of the notable work of a master builder, designer, or
architect who influenced his or her age; or
e. Have yielded or may be likely to yield information important to prehistory or
history.
(2) The Commission shall adopt specific operating guidelines for historic structure,
historic site, and historic district designation providing such are in conformance with
the provisions of this ordinance, which guidelines shall be in effect upon approval by
the Village Board and the filing of a copy thereof in the office of the Village Clerk.
(e) Powers and Duties.
(1) Designation. The Commission shall have the power, subject to subsection (f), to
recommend the designation of historic structures, historic sites, and historic districts
within the Village limits. Such designations shall be made based upon the criteria set
Section 8-2-8
forth under subsection (d). Historic structures, sites, and districts shall be approved
as so designated by the Village Board. Once designated, such historic structures,
sites, and districts shall be subject to all the provisions of this ordinance.
(2) Regulation of Construction, Reconstruction, Alteration, and Demolition.
a. No person or entity and no person or entity owning or in charge of a historic
structure, historic site, or structure within a historic district shall reconstruct,
alter, or demolish all or any part of the exterior of such property or construct
any improvements upon such designated property or properties or cause to
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
permit any such work to be performed upon such property or demolish such
property unless a Certificate of Appropriateness has been granted by the
Historic Preservation Commission. Also, unless such Certificate has been
granted by the Commission, the Building Inspector shall not issue a permit
for any such work.
b. Upon filing of any application for a Certificate of Appropriateness with the
Commission, the Commission shall approve the application unless:
1. In the case of a designated historic structure or historic site, the
proposed work would detrimentally change, destroy, or adversely
affect any exterior feature of the improvement or site upon which said
work is to be done;
2. In the case of the construction of a new improvement upon a historic
site or within a historic district, the exterior of such improvement
would adversely affect or not harmonize with the external appearance
of other neighboring improvements on such site or within the district;
3. In the case of any property located in a historic district, the proposed
construction, reconstruction, exterior alteration, or demolition does
not conform to the purpose and intent o this section and to the
objectives and design criteria of the historic preservation plan for said
district;
4. The building or structure is of such architectural or historical
significance that its demolition would be detrimental to the public
interest and contrary to the general welfare of the people of the
Village and State; or
5. In the case of a request for the demolition of a deteriorated building
or structure, any economic hardship or difficulty claimed by the
owner is self-created or is the result of any failure to maintain the
property in good repair.
c. If the Commission determines that the application for a Certificate of
Appropriateness and the proposed changes are consistent with the character
and features of the property or district, it shall issue the Certificate of
Appropriateness. The Commission shall make this decision within forty-five
(45) days of the filing of the application.
d. The issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness shall not relieve the
applicant from obtaining other permits and approvals required by the Village.
Section 8-2-8
A building permit or other municipal permit shall be invalid if it is obtained
without the presentation of the Certificate of Appropriateness required for the
proposed work.
e. Ordinary maintenance and repairs may be undertaken without a Certificate of
Appropriateness provided that the work involves repairs to existing features
of a historic structure or site or the replacement of elements of a structure
with pieces identical in appearance and provided that the work does not
change the exterior appearance of the structure or site and does not require
the issuance of a building permit.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
(3) Appeals. Should the Commission fail to issue a Certificate of Appropriateness due
to the failure of the proposal to conform to the guidelines, the applicant may appeal
such decision to the Village Board within thirty (30) days of the date of such
decision. In addition, if the Commission fails to issue a Certificate of
Appropriateness, the Commission shall, with the cooperation of the applicant,
reasonably work with the applicant in an attempt to obtain a Certificate of
Appropriateness within the guidelines of this ordinance.
(4) Recognition of Historic Structures, Sites, and Districts. At such times as a historic
structure, site, or district has been properly designated, the Commission and Village
Board, in cooperation with the property owner, may cause to be prepared and erected
on such property at Village expense, a suitable plaque declaring that such property is
a historic structure, site, or district.
(f) Procedures. Designation of Historic Structures, Historic Sites, and Historic Districts.
(1) Historic Structures and Sites.
a. The Commission may, upon receipt of an application by itself, the Village
Board, or any other interested person or entity, after written notice by mail to
affected property owners as set forth below, recommend the designation of
historic structures and historic sites, or recommend to rescind such prior
designation, after consideration of the criteria in subjection (d) above. At
least ten (10) days prior to such action, the Commission shall notify the
owners of record, as listed in the office of the Village Assessor, who are
owners of property in whole or in part within the boundaries of the property
affected.
b. The Commission may in addition to the notified persons, hear expert
witnesses and shall have the power to subpoena such witnesses and records
as it deems necessary. The Commission may conduct an independent
investigation into the proposed designation or rescission.
c. Upon receipt of a recommendation from the Commission, the Village Board
shall hold a public hearing upon the application. Notice of the hearing shall
be made pursuant to subsection (f)(1) above 10 days prior to the hearing.
Following the hearing, the Village Board may approve, deny, or modify the
Commission’s recommendation, considering the criteria set forth under
subsection (d) above. After the designation or rescission has been made by
the Village Board, notification shall be sent to the property owner or owners.
Section 8-2-8
Notification shall also be given to the Building Inspector, Plan Commission,
Assessor, and Village Administrator. The Village Board shall cause the
designation or rescission to be recorded, at Village expense, in the office of
the Milwaukee County Register of Deeds.
(2) Historic Districts.
a. For preservation purposes, the Historic Preservation Commission shall
recommend the selection of geographically defined areas within the Village
to be designated as Historic Districts and shall prepare a historic preservation
plan for each area. A Historic District may be designated for any
geographical area of particular historic, architectural, or cultural significance
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
to the Village, after application of the criteria in subsection (d) above. Each
historic preservation plan prepared for or by the Historic Preservation
Commission shall include a cultural and architectural analysis supporting the
historic significance of the area, the specific guidelines for development, and
a statement of preservation objectives. All designations and plans under this
subsection shall be subject to the approval of the Village Board.
b. The Village Board shall hold a public hearing when considering the plan for
a Historic District as recommended by the Commission. Notice of the time,
place, and purpose of the public hearing shall be sent by the Village Clerk to
members of the Commission, the owners of record as listed in the office of
the Village Assessor, who are owners of the property within the proposed
Historic District or are situated in whole or in part within two hundred (200)
feet of the boundaries of the proposed Historic District. Said notice is to be
sent at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the public hearing. Following
the public hearing, the Village Board shall vote to approve, deny, or modify
the plan. After the designation has been made by the Village Board,
notification shall be sent to the property owner or owners. Notification shall
also be given to the Building Inspector, Plan Commission, Assessor, and
Village Administrator. The Village Board shall cause the designation to be
recorded at Village expense in the office of the Milwaukee County Register
of Deeds.
(g) Interim Control. No building permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector for
alternation, construction, demolition, or removal of a nominated historic structure, historic
site, or any property or structure within a nominated historic district from the date of the
meeting of the Historic Preservation Commission at which a nomination by application form
is first presented until the final disposition of the nomination by the Village Board, unless
such alteration, removal, or demolition is authorized by formal resolution of the Village
Board as necessary for public health, welfare, or safety. In no event shall the delay be for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
(h) Penalties for Violations. Any person or entity violating any provision of this section shall
be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) for each separate violation. Each and every day during which
a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. Notice of violations shall be issued
by the Building Inspector. Reference: Ordinance 99-07 & 00-06
Section 8-2-9
SEC. 8-2-9 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
(a) Intent. The intent of this Section is to provide a means to accommodate a small family
business in a residential district without the necessity of a rezone into a business district.
Approval of an expansion of a limited family business or home occupation at a future time
beyond the limitations of this Section is not to be anticipated; relocation of the business to an
area that is appropriately zoned may be necessary.
(b) Definition. An occupation or office for gain or support conducted entirely and only by the
resident(s) of and within a residential dwelling unit in a residential zoning district. Home
Occupations and Residential Professional Offices include but are not limited to: home office
which conduct answering services, resume and document typing, computer programming,
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
bookkeeping and accounting, and design services; offices for attorneys, doctors, and
architects; production of hand made crafts and goods; home offices for contractors,
surveyors, and landscapers; and any activity similar in nature to the aforesaid enumerated
uses, all of which are accessory to a principal residential use.
(c) Occupations Prohibited. Notwithstanding the forgoing subsection (b), the following Home
Occupations and Residential Offices are prohibited.
(1) Any occupation or office which promotes or requires customers or clients to visit the
residential property on a continuous or congregate basis, whereby the number of
pedestrian or vehicular visits or persons per visit tends to unreasonably disturb or
disrupt the peace and quiet of the residential neighborhood and surrounding
properties.
(2) Any occupation or office which promotes or requires employees to visit or work at
the residential property or to be dispatched from said residential property.
(3) Any occupation which creates loud or obnoxious noise or odors or unreasonable
glare of illumination.
(4) Any occupation or office which generates unusual numbers of deliveries or pick-ups
by parcel carriers, whereby the number of deliveries or pickups tends to
unreasonably disturb or disrupt the peace and quiet of the residential neighborhood
and surrounding properties.
(5) Any occupation involving vehicle mechanical repair, body work or painting.
(d) Exception. Baby-sitting, day care, and community-based residential facilities activities are
exempt from subsections (c)(1) and (2) above, providing that such occupations comply with
all other state and local requirements.
(e) Requirements. All Home Occupations and Residential Professional Offices not prohibited
under this section shall be subject to the following additional requirements:
(1) The home occupation or office must be located within the principal dwelling unit.
(2) Only one motor vehicle (auto, truck, or van) per residential dwelling unit, utilized in
the operation of a Home Occupation or Residential Professional Office, may be
parked or stored upon residential property. Vehicles with a gross weight of more
than 8,000 lbs. or a wheel base greater than 129 inches are prohibited for any Home
Occupation or Residential Professional Office use. Trailers used in the operation of
a Home Occupation or Residential Office shall not be parked outside on any
residential
Section 8-2-9
property.
(3) No waste materials or debris arising from a Home Occupation or Residential
Professional Office use are to be brought to or stored upon any residential property.
(4) One non-illuminated sign (identification plate) of not more than one and one-half (1-
1/2) sq. ft. in area is permitted. Said sign shall state only the name or profession of
the home occupation or office and is to be used for identification purposes only.
Said identification plate must be placed at least three (3) feet back of the front
property line.
SEC. 8-2-10 LANDSCAPING.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
(a) Intent. The general intent and purposes of this section are to preserve existing trees and
vegetation and to establish and maintain new landscaping in the Village to control soil
erosion and water pollution, abate air pollution, moderate climate, conserve energy, buffer
noise, protect wildlife and ecosystems, preserve historic features, provide visual and
aesthetic value, protect and enhance property values, and preserve and reinforce the historic
part setting of the community.
(b) Landscape Plan Submittal. A landscape plan shall be submitted for all development for
which an application is required for a site plan under sub. 8-2-2(a)(1); Chapter 6,
“Conditional Uses”; and Chapter 4, “Planned Unit Developments”. The Plan Commission
shall review all landscape plans and may approve, modify, or deny any landscape plan
application, considering the intent, purposes, and provisions of this section. Landscape plan
approval and implementation is a required condition for any development for which a
landscape plan must be submitted.
(c) Tree Preservation.
(1) Definitions.
a. “Specimen Trees” as used in this subsection are as follows:
Botanical Name Common Name Minimum DBH
Acer rubrum Red Maple 10”
Acer saccharum Sugar Maple 12”
Amelanchier All Serviceberry 6”
Betula allerghaniensis Yellow Birch 8”
Betula nigra River Birch 10”
Carya species All Hickory 12”
Celtis species All Hackberry 12”
Fagus species All Beech 12”
Fraxinus americana White Ash 16”
Juglans cincerea Butternut 12”
Juniperus virginiana Eastern Red Cedar 8”
Latrix species All Tamarack 10”
Ostrya virginiana Ironwood 6”
Pinus strobus White Pine 12”
Section 8-2-10
Prunas serotina Black Cherry 12”
Quercus species All Oak 12”
Robina pseudoacacia Black Locust 10”
Thuja species All Arborvitae 8”
Tilia americana Basswood 20”
A specimen tree is also any tree determined by the Village Forester to be of
high value relative to the purposes of this section, because of its species, size,
age, location, or historical significance.
b. “Woodlands” as used in this section means a biological community
dominated by trees and other woody plants covering a land area of 10,000
square feet or greater. Woodlands include areas that have at least 100 trees
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
per acre with at least 50 percent of those trees having a two-inch or greater
diameter-at-breast-height and such ratio and percent shall be prorated in
determining the existence of woodlands areas greater than or less than one
acre.
c. “Diameter-at-breast-height (DBH)” is tree diameter measured in inches at a
height of 4.5 feet above the ground.
d. “Village Forester” as used in this section shall have the meaning as set forth
in section 12.13 of the Municipal Code, or his/her designee.
(2) The provisions of this Tree Preservation subsection shall apply to all developments
of one acre or greater, for which a landscape plan must be submitted under sub. 8-2-
10(b) above. This subsection does not apply to any development or application for
development for detached single-family homes or government uses.
(3) A landscape plan required under sub. 8-2-10(b) shall include a tree inventory,
specifying the location, size, and type of all specimen trees and woodlands. The
inventory shall include a reference to any listed tree that the applicant believes to be
damaged, diseased, or dying.
(4) Every reasonable effort shall be made to retain and preserve specimen trees and
woodlands on the property to be developed, through the integration of those
specimen trees and woodlands existing on the site into the proposed development.
The landscape plan shall include information specifying the methods to be used to
preserve specimen trees and woodlands and shall identify any specimen trees and
woodlands proposed to be removed. Removal of any specimen trees and woodlands
may only be performed pursuant to an approved landscape plan specifying such
removal. No person or entity shall in any way remove any specimen tree or
woodlands or portion of woodlands not specified for removal under an approved
landscape plan.
(5) Any specimen tree or woodlands which have been identified upon an approved
landscape plan for removal must be replaced by the planting of a tree or trees in
accordance with the following criteria:
a. Replacement trees shall either:
1. Equal or exceed 75% of the DBH of each tree removed; or
Section 8-2-10
2. Consist of smaller trees, not less than 2.5 inches in diameter, which in
total equal or exceed the DBH of the original tree(s) removed.
b. If subs. a.1. or 2. above are not physically feasible for a development, due to
limited planting area to support proper replacement tree spacing and such
development is found by the Plan Commission to be of benefit in promoting
the health, safety, welfare, and economic well-being of the community, the
Plan Commission may authorize a $100 per removed tree inch fees-in-lieu of
tree replacement to be paid to the Village Tree Fund. The Village Tree Fund
shall be held in a segregated account by the Village Treasurer for
disbursement only for the purchase and planting of trees within the Village
pursuant to the direction of the Village Board, with expenditures of such
funds to be made within a reasonable time from their receipt. Such fees-inlieu
of tree replacement shall be paid by a developer to the Village prior to
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
the issuance of any building permit. The Plan Commission may consult with
the Ecology Committee, Village Forester, and others in making its
determinations under this subsection.
c. Replacement trees shall be of a type and size suitable for the site as
determined by the Plan Commission. The use of native species is
encouraged.
d. The Village Forester shall inspect sites to verify tree inventories submitted by
applicants and to examine trees reported as damaged, diseased, or dying. The
Village Forester may exempt or partially exempt existing tree(s) from the
requirements of this subsection, where the Village Forester determines such
tree(s) are damaged, diseased, or dying and such written determination shall
either be set forth upon or be attached to a landscape plan submitted for
approval.
Reference: Ordinance 01-05
SEC. 8-2-11 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS. Chapter 13 of the
Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewerage District (MMSD) Rules on Surface Water and Storm Water
runoff management (effective 1/1/02) are hereby adopted by reference. Future amendments to the
MMSD rules are also adopted by reference.
The MMSD Rules on stormwater runoff management and plan submittal requirements shall be
complied with in addition to the other stormwater provisions of this ordinance including, but not
limited to, plat approval under Chapter 236, construction site erosion control, and post construction
stormwater quality best management practices to abate pollutant runoff. A violation of MMSD
Rules shall be a violation of this chapter.
Reference: Ordinance 02-19
8-2-12 CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION CONTROL AND STORM WATER
MANAGEMENT.
Section 8-2-12
(a) Authority.
(1) This ordinance is adopted under the authority granted by s. 61.354, Wis. Stats. This
ordinance supersedes all provisions of an ordinance previously enacted under s.
61.35 Wis. Stats., that relate to construction site erosion control and storm water
management regulations. Except as otherwise specified in s. 61.354, Wis. Stats., s.
61.35, Wis. Stats., applies to this ordinance and to any amendments to this ordinance.
(2) The provisions of this ordinance are deemed not to limit any other lawful regulatory
powers of the same governing body.
(3) The Village of Hales Corners hereby designates the Zoning Administrator, or
designee, as may be so designated by the Village Clerk or by the Village Board, to
serve as necessary in the absence of the Zoning Administrator, from time to time, to
administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
(4) The requirements of this ordinance do not pre-empt more stringent erosion and
sediment control and storm water management requirements that may be imposed by
any of the following:
a. Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative rules, permits or
approvals including those authorized under ss. 281.16 and 283.33, Wis. Stats.
b. Targeted non-agricultural performance standards promulgated in rules by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under s. NR 151.004, Wis.
Adm. Code.
(b) Findings of Fact.
(1) The Village of Hales Corners finds that runoff from land disturbing construction
activity carries a significant amount of sediment and other pollutants to the waters of
the state in the Village of Hales Corners.
(2) The Village of Hales Corners finds that uncontrolled, post-construction runoff has a
significant impact upon water resources and the health, safety and general welfare of
the community and diminishes the public enjoyment and use of natural resources.
Specifically, uncontrolled post-construction runoff can:
a. Degrade physical stream habitat by increasing stream bank erosion,
increasing streambed scour, diminishing groundwater recharge, diminishing
stream base flows and increasing stream temperature.
b. Diminish the capacity of lakes and streams to support fish, aquatic life,
recreational and water supply uses by increasing pollutant loading of
sediment, suspended solids, nutrients, heavy metals, bacteria, pathogens and
other urban pollutants.
c. Alter wetland communities by changing wetland hydrology and by increasing
pollutant loads.
d. Reduce the quality of groundwater by increasing pollutant loading.
e. Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by overtaxing
storm sewers, drainage ways, and other minor drainage facilities.
f. Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by increasing
major flood peaks and volumes.
g. Undermine floodplain management efforts by increasing the incidence and
Section 8-2-12
levels of flooding.
(c) Purpose and Intent
(1) Purpose. The general purpose of this ordinance is to establish long-term, postconstruction
runoff management requirements that will diminish the threats to public
health, safety, welfare and the aquatic environment and to minimize the amount of
sediment and other pollutants carried by runoff or discharged from land disturbing
activity to waters of the state in and of the Village of Hales Corners. Specific
purposes are to:
a. Further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions.
b. Prevent and control the adverse effects of storm water; prevent and control
soil erosion; prevent and control water pollution; protect spawning grounds,
fish and aquatic life; control building sites, placement of structures and land
uses; preserve ground cover and scenic beauty; and promote sound economic
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
growth.
c. Control exceedance of the safe capacity of existing drainage facilities and
receiving water bodies; prevent undue channel erosion; control increases in
the scouring and transportation of particulate matter; and prevent conditions
that endanger downstream property.
(2) Intent. It is the intent of the Village of Hales Corners that this ordinance regulates
post-construction storm water discharges to waters of the state. This ordinance may
be applied on a site-by-site basis. The Village of Hales Corners recognizes,
however, that the preferred method of achieving the storm water performance
standards set forth in this ordinance is through the preparation and implementation of
comprehensive, systems-level storm water management plans that cover hydrologic
units, such as watersheds, on a municipal and regional scale. Such plans may
prescribe regional storm water devices, practices or systems, any of which may be
designed to treat runoff from more than one site prior to discharge to waters of the
state. Where such plans are in conformance with the performance standards
developed under s. 281.16, Wis. Stats., for regional storm water management
measures and have been approved by the Village of Hales Corners, it is the intent of
this ordinance that the approved plan be used to identify post-construction
management measures acceptable for the community.
(d) Applicability and Jurisdiction.
(1) Erosion Control Applicability.
a. This ordinance applies to the following land disturbing construction activities
except as provided under sub. b.:
i. A construction site, which has 5 or more acres of land disturbing
construction activity.
ii. A construction site, which has one or more acres of land disturbing
construction activity.
b. This ordinance does not apply to the following:
i. Land disturbing construction activity that includes the construction of
a building and is otherwise regulated by the Wisconsin Department of
Section 8-2-12
Commerce under s. COMM 21.125 or COMM 50.115, Wis. Adm.
Code.
ii. A construction project that is exempted by federal statutes or
regulations from the requirement to have a national pollutant
discharge elimination system permit issued under chapter 40, Code of
Federal Regulations, part 122, for land disturbing construction
activity.
iii. Nonpoint discharges from agricultural facilities and practices.
iv. Nonpoint discharges from silviculture activities.
v. Routine maintenance for project sites under 5 acres of land
disturbance if performed to maintain the original line and grade,
hydraulic capacity or original purpose of the facility.
c. Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in paragraph (a), this
ordinance applies to construction sites of any size that, in the opinion of the
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Zoning Administrator or designee, or designee, are likely to result in runoff
that exceeds the safe capacity of the existing drainage facilities or receiving
body of water, that causes undue channel erosion, that increases water
pollution by scouring or the transportation of particulate matter or that
endangers property or public safety.
d. Jurisdiction. This ordinance applies to land disturbing construction activity
on construction sites located within the boundaries and jurisdiction of the
Village of Hales Corners.
(2) Post-Construction Applicability.
a. Where not otherwise limited by law, this ordinance applies after final
stabilization to a site of land disturbing construction activity meeting any of
the criteria in this paragraph, unless the site is otherwise exempt under
paragraph (b).
i. A post construction site that had 5 or more acres of land disturbing
construction activity.
ii. A post-development construction site that had one or more acres of
land disturbing construction activity.
b. A site that meets any of the criteria in this paragraph is exempt from the
requirements of this ordinance.
i. A redevelopment post-construction site with no increase in exposed
parking lots or roads.
ii. A post-construction site with less than 10% connected
imperviousness based on complete development of the postconstruction
site, provided the cumulative area of all parking lots and
rooftops is less than one acre.
iii. Nonpoint discharges from agricultural facilities and practices.
iv. Nonpoint discharges from silviculture activities.
Section 8-2-12
v. Routine maintenance for project sites under 5 acres of land
disturbance if performed to maintain the original line and grade,
hydraulic capacity or original purpose of the facility.
vi. Underground utility construction such as water, sewer and fiberoptic
lines. This exemption does not apply to the construction of any
above ground structures associated with utility construction.
c. Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in paragraph a., this
ordinance applies to post-construction sites of any size that, in the opinion of
the Zoning Administrator or designee, is likely to result in runoff that
exceeds the safe capacity of the existing drainage facilities or receiving body
of water, that causes undue channel erosion, that increases water pollution by
scouring or the transportation of particulate matter or that endangers property
or public safety.
d. Jurisdiction. This ordinance applies to post construction sites in the Village
of Hales Corners.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
(3) Exclusions. This ordinance is not applicable to activities conducted by a state
agency, as defined under s. 227.01 (1), Wis. Stats., but also including the office of
district attorney, which is subject to the state plan promulgated or a memorandum of
understanding entered into under s. 281.33 (2), Wis. Stats.
(e) Definitions.
(1) “Administering authority” means a governmental employee, agent, assign, or a
regional planning commission empowered under s. 61.354 Wis. Stats., that is
designated by the Village of Hales Corners, to administer this ordinance.
(2) “Agricultural facilities and practices” has the meaning in s. 281.16(1), Wis. Stats.
(3) “Average annual rainfall” means a calendar year of precipitation, excluding snow,
which is considered typical.
(4) "Best management practice” or “BMP” means structural or non-structural measures,
practices, techniques or devices employed to avoid or minimize soil, sediment or
pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state.
(5) “Business day” means a day the office of the Village of Hales Corners is routinely
and customarily open for business.
(6) “Cease and desist order” means a court-issued order to halt land disturbing
construction activity that is being conducted without the required permit.
(7) “Combined sewer system” means a system for conveying both sanitary sewage and
storm water runoff.
(8) “Connected imperviousness" means an impervious surface that is directly connected
to a separate storm sewer or water of the state via an impervious flow path.
(9) “Construction site” means an area upon which one or more land disturbing
construction activities occur, including areas that are part of a larger common plan of
development or sale where multiple separate and distinct land disturbing construction
activities may be taking place at different times on different schedules but under one
plan.
Section 8-2-12
(10) “Design storm” means a hypothetical discrete rainstorm characterized by a specific
duration, temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return frequency, and total depth of
rainfall.
(11) “Development” means residential, commercial, industrial or institutional land uses
and associated roads.
(12) “Division of land” means any lawful division of land, whether constituting a
subdivision or a division by certified survey map, as defined and/or otherwise
authorized under Ch. 236, Stats., and/or the Municipal Code, or such other division
as may be allowed under the Municipal Code, if any, all of the foregoing Statutes and
Code, as amended from time to time.
(13) “Effective infiltration area” means the area of the infiltration system that is used to
infiltrate runoff and does not include the area used for site access, berms, or
pretreatment
(14) “Erosion” means the process by which the land’s surface is worn away by the action
of wind, water, ice or gravity.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
(15) “Erosion and sediment control plan” means a comprehensive plan developed to
address pollution caused by erosion and sedimentation of soil particles or rock
fragments during construction.
(16) "Exceptional resource waters" means waters listed in s. NR 102.11, Wis. Adm.
Code.
(17) “Final stabilization” means that all land disturbing construction activities at the
construction site have been completed and that a uniform perennial vegetative cover
has been established, with a density of at least 70 percent of the cover, for the
unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or that employ
equivalent permanent stabilization measures.
(18) “Financial guarantee” means a performance bond, maintenance bond, surety bond,
irrevocable letter of credit, or similar guarantees submitted to the Zoning
Administrator or designee, by the responsible party to assure that requirements of the
ordinance are carried out in compliance with the storm water management plan.
(19) “Governing body” means the Village of Hales Corners Board of Trustees.
(20) “Impervious surface” means an area that releases as runoff all or a large portion of
the precipitation that falls on it, except for frozen soil. Rooftops, sidewalks,
driveways, parking lots and streets are examples of areas that typically are
impervious.
(21) “In-fill area” means an undeveloped area of land located within existing
development.
(22) “Infiltration” means the entry of precipitation or runoff into or through the soil.
(23) “Infiltration system” means a device or practice such as a basin, trench, rain garden
or swale designed specifically to encourage infiltration, but does not include natural
infiltration in pervious surfaces such as lawns, redirecting of rooftop downspouts
onto lawns or minimal infiltration from practices, such as swales or road side
channels designed for conveyance and pollutant removal only.
(24) “Karst feature” means an area or surficial geologic feature subject to bedrock
Section 8-2-12
dissolution so that it is likely to provide a conduit to groundwater, and may include
caves, enlarged fractures, mine features, exposed bedrock surfaces, sinkholes,
springs, seeps or swallets.
(25) “Land disturbing construction activity” means any man-made alteration of the land
surface resulting in a change in the topography or existing vegetative or nonvegetative
soil cover, that may result in runoff and lead to an increase in soil erosion
and movement of sediment into waters of the state. Land disturbing construction
activity includes clearing and grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench
dewatering, filling and grading activities.
(26) “Maintenance agreement” means a legal document that provides for long-term
maintenance of storm water management practices.
(27) “MEP” or “maximum extent practicable” means a level of implementing best
management practices in order to achieve a performance standard specified in this
chapter which takes into account the best available technology, cost effectiveness
and other competing issues such as human safety and welfare, endangered and
threatened resources, historic properties and geographic features. MEP allows
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
flexibility in the way to meet the performance standards and may vary based on the
performance standard and site conditions.
(28) “New development” means development resulting from the conversion of previously
undeveloped land or agricultural land uses.
(29) “Off-site” means located outside the property boundary described in the permit
application.
(30) “On-site” means located within the property boundary described in the permit
application.
(31) "Ordinary high-water mark" has the meaning given in s. NR 115.03(6), Wis. Adm.
Code.
(32) “Outstanding resource waters” means waters listed in s. NR 102.10, Wis. Adm.
Code.
(33) “Percent fines” means the percentage of a given sample of soil, which passes through
a # 200 sieve.
Note to Users: Percent fines can be determined using the "American Society for Testing and
Materials", volume 04.02, "Test Method C117-95 Standard Test Method for Materials Finer
than 75-mum (No. 200) Sieve in Material Aggregates by Washing". Copies can be obtained
by contacting the American society for testing and materials, 100 Barr Harbor Drive,
Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959, or phone 610-832-9585, or on line at:
"http://www.astm.org/".
(34) “Performance standard” means a narrative or measurable number specifying the
minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or practice.
(35) “Permit” means a written authorization made by the Zoning Administrator or
designee, to the applicant to conduct land disturbing construction activity or to
discharge post-construction runoff to waters of the state.
(36) “Permit administration fee” means a sum of money paid to the Village of Hales
Corners by the permit applicant for the purpose of recouping the expenses incurred
Section 8-2-12
by the authority in administering the permit.
(37) “Pervious surface” means an area that releases as runoff a small portion of the
precipitation that falls on it. Lawns, gardens, parks, forests or other similar vegetated
areas are examples of surfaces that typically are pervious.
(38) “Pollutant” has the meaning given in s. 283.01 (13), Wis. Stats.
(39) “Pollution” has the meaning given in s. 281.01 (10), Wis. Stats.
(40) “Post-construction site" means a construction site following the completion of land
disturbing construction activity and final site stabilization.
(41) “Pre-development condition” means the extent and distribution of land cover types
present before the initiation of land disturbing construction activity, assuming that all
land uses prior to development activity are managed in an environmentally sound
manner.
(42) “Preventive action limit” has the meaning given in s. NR 140.05(17), Wis. Adm.
Code.
(43) "Redevelopment” means areas where development is replacing older development.
(44) “Responsible party” means any entity holding fee title to the property or performing
services to meet the performance standards of this ordinance through a contract or
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
other agreement as this ordinance applies to erosion control; and “Responsible party”
under this ordinance as it applies to storm water management means any entity
holding fee title to the property or other person contracted or obligated by other
agreement to implement and maintain post-construction storm water BMP’s.
(45) “Runoff” means storm water or precipitation including rain, snow or ice melt or
similar water that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized flow.
(46) “Sediment” means solid material that is transported by runoff, suspended within
runoff or deposited by runoff away from its original location.
(47) “Separate storm sewer” means a conveyance or system of conveyances including
roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed
channels or storm drains, which meets all of the following criteria:
a. Is designed or used for collecting water or conveying runoff.
b. Is not part of a combined sewer system.
c. Is not draining to a storm water treatment device or system.
d. Discharges directly or indirectly to waters of the state.
(48) “Site” means the entire area included in the legal description of the land on which the
land disturbing construction activity is proposed in the permit application.
(49) “Stop work order” means an order issued by the Zoning Administrator or designee,
which requires that all construction activity on the site be stopped.
(50) “Storm water management plan” means a comprehensive plan designed to reduce the
discharge of pollutants from storm water after the site has under gone final
stabilization following completion of the construction activity.
(51) “Storm water management system plan” is a comprehensive plan designed to reduce
the discharge of runoff and pollutants from hydrologic units on a regional or
municipal scale.
(52) "Technical standard" means a document that specifies design, predicted performance
Section 8-2-12
and operation and maintenance specifications for a material, device or method.
(53) “Top of the channel” means an edge, or point on the landscape, landward from the
ordinary high-water mark of a surface water of the state, where the slope of the land
begins to be less than 12% continually for at least 50 feet. If the slope of the land is
12% or less continually for the initial 50 feet, landward from the ordinary high-water
mark, the top of the channel is the ordinary high-water mark.
(54) “TR-55” means the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service (previously Soil Conservation Service), Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds, Second Edition, Technical Release 55, June 1986.
(55) “Type II distribution” means a rainfall type curve as established in the “United States
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Technical Paper 149,
published 1973”. The Type II curve is applicable to all of Wisconsin and represents
the most intense storm pattern.
(56) “Waters of the state” has the meaning given in s. 281.01 (18), Wis. Stats.
(57) “Zoning Administrator” means the person or entity occupying the Office of Zoning
Administrator of the Village of Hales Corners or being authorized by the Village
Clerk or the Village Board in the absence of the Zoning Administrator, to perform
the duties of the Office of Zoning Administrator of the Village of Hales Corners.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
(f) Technical Standards.
(1) Construction Site Erosion Control Design Criteria, Standards, and Specifications.
All BMPs required to comply with this ordinance shall meet the design criteria,
standards and specifications based on any of the following:
a. Applicable design criteria, standards and specifications identified in the
Wisconsin Construction Site Best Management Practice Handbook, WDNR
Pub. WR-222 November 1993 Revision.
b. Other design guidance and technical standards identified or developed by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under subchapter V of chapter
NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code.
c. For this ordinance, average annual basis is calculated using the appropriate
annual rainfall or runoff factor, also referred to as the R factor, or an
equivalent design storm using a type II distribution, with consideration given
to the geographic location of the site and the period of disturbance.
Note to Users: The USLE and its successors RUSLE and RUSLE2, utilize an R
factor which has been developed to estimate annual soil erosion, averaged over
extended time periods. The R factor can be modified to estimate monthly and singlestorm
erosion. A design storm can be statistically calculated to provide an equivalent
R factor as an average annual calculation.
(2) Other Standards. Other technical standards not identified or developed in sub. (1)
may be used provided that the methods have been approved by the Zoning
Administrator or designee.
(3) Storm Water Management Technical Standards. The following methods shall be
used in designing the water quality, peak flow shaving and infiltration components of
storm water practices needed to meet the water quality standards of this ordinance:
Section 8-2-12
a. Technical standards identified, developed or disseminated by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources under subchapter V of chapter NR 151,
Wis. Adm. Code.
b. Where technical standards have not been identified or developed by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, other technical standards may
be used provided that the methods have been approved by the Zoning
Administrator or designee.
c. In this ordinance, the following year and location has been selected as
average annual rainfall(s): Milwaukee, 1969 (Mar. 28-Dec. 6).
(g) Erosion Control Performance Standards.
(1) Responsible Party. The responsible party shall implement an erosion and sediment
control plan, developed in accordance with Section (k) that incorporates the
requirements of this section.
(2) Plan. A written plan shall be developed in accordance with Section (k) and
implemented for each construction site.
(3) Erosion and Other Pollutant Control Requirements. The plan required under sub. (2)
shall include the following:
a. BMPs that, by design, achieve to the maximum extent practicable, a
reduction of 80% of the sediment load carried in runoff, on an average annual
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
basis, as compared with no sediment or erosion controls until the
construction site has undergone final stabilization. No person shall be
required to exceed an 80% sediment reduction to meet the requirements of
this paragraph. Erosion and sediment control BMPs may be used alone or in
combination to meet the requirements of this paragraph. Credit toward
meeting the sediment reduction shall be given for limiting the duration or
area, or both, of land disturbing construction activity, or other appropriate
mechanism.
Note to Users: Soil loss prediction tools that estimate the sediment load leaving the
construction site under varying land and management conditions, or methodology
identified in subch. V. of ch. NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code, may be used to calculate
sediment reduction.
b. Notwithstanding par. a., if BMPs cannot be designed and implemented to
reduce the sediment load by 80%, on an average annual basis, the plan shall
include a written and site-specific explanation as to why the 80% reduction
goal is not attainable and the sediment load shall be reduced to the maximum
extent practicable.
c. Where appropriate, the plan shall include sediment controls to do all of the
following to the maximum extent practicable:
i. Prevent tracking of sediment from the construction site onto roads
and other paved surfaces.
ii. Prevent the discharge of sediment as part of site de-watering.
iii. Protect the separate storm drain inlet structure from receiving
sediment.
Section 8-2-12
d. The use, storage and disposal of chemicals, cement and other compounds and
materials used on the construction site shall be managed during the
construction period, to prevent their entrance into waters of the state.
However, projects that require the placement of these materials in waters of
the state, such as constructing bridge footings or BMP installations, are not
prohibited by this paragraph.
(4) Location. The BMPs used to comply with this section shall be located prior to runoff
entering waters of the state.
Note to Users: While regional treatment facilities are appropriate for control of postconstruction
pollutants, they should not be used for construction site sediment removal.
(5) Alternate Requirements. The Zoning Administrator or designee, may establish storm
water management requirements more stringent than those set forth in this section if
the Zoning Administrator or designee, determines that an added level of protection is
needed for sensitive resources.
(h) Storm Water Management Performance Standards.
(1) Responsible Party. The responsible party shall implement a post-construction
storm water management plan that incorporates the requirements of this section.
(2) Plan. A written storm water management plan in accordance with Section (l) shall be
developed and implemented for each post-construction site.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
(3) Requirements. The plan required under sub. (2) shall include the following:
a. Total Suspended Solids. BMPs shall be designed, installed and maintained
to control total suspended solids carried in runoff from the post-construction
site as follows:
i. For new development, by design, reduce to the maximum extent
practicable, the total suspended solids load by 80%, based on the
average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff management
controls. No person shall be required to exceed an 80% total
suspended solids reduction to meet the requirements of this
subdivision.
ii. For redevelopment, by design, reduce to the maximum extent
practicable, the total suspended solids load by 40%, based on the
average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff management
controls. No person shall be required to exceed a 40% total
suspended solids reduction to meet the requirements of this
subdivision.
iii. For in-fill development under 5 acres that occurs within 10 years
after October 1, 2002, by design, reduce to the maximum extent
practicable, the total suspended solids load by 40%, based on an
average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff management
controls. No person shall be required to exceed a 40% total
suspended solids reduction to meet the requirements of this
subdivision.
iv. For in-fill development that occurs 10 or more years after October 1,
2002, by design, reduce to the maximum extent practicable, the total
Section 8-2-12
suspended solids load by 80%, based on an average annual rainfall,
as compared to no runoff management controls. No person shall be
required to exceed an 80% total suspended solids reduction to meet
the requirements of this subdivision.
v. Notwithstanding subds. i. to iv., if the design cannot achieve the
applicable total suspended solids reduction specified, the storm water
management plan shall include a written and site-specific explanation
why that level of reduction is not attained and the total suspended
solids load shall be reduced to the maximum extent practicable.
Note to Users: Pollutant loading models such as SLAMM, P8 or equivalent
methodology may be used to evaluate the efficiency of the design in reducing
total suspended solids.
b. Peak Discharge.
i. By design, BMPs shall be employed to maintain or reduce the peak
runoff discharge rates, to the maximum extent practicable, as
compared to pre-development conditions for the 2-year, 24-hour
design storm applicable to the post-construction site. Predevelopment
conditions shall assume “good hydrologic conditions”
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
for appropriate land covers as identified in TR-55 or an equivalent
methodology. The meaning of “hydrologic soil group” and “runoff
curve number” are as determined in TR-55. However, when predevelopment
land cover is cropland, rather than using TR-55 values
for cropland, the runoff curve numbers in Table 1 shall be used.
Table 1 – Maximum Pre-Development Runoff Curve Numbers for Cropland Areas
Hydrologic Soil Group A B C D
Runoff Curve Number 56 70 79 83
Note to Users: The curve numbers in Table 1 represent mid-range values for soils
under a good hydrologic condition where conservation practices are used and are
selected to be protective of the resource waters.
ii. This subsection of the ordinance does not apply to any of the
following:
A. A post-construction site where the change in hydrology due
to development does not increase the existing surface water
elevation at any point within the downstream receiving water
by more than 0.01 of a foot for the 2-year, 24-hour storm
event. Note to Users: Hydraulic models such as HEC-RAS or
another methodology may be used to determine the change in
surface water elevations.
B. A redevelopment post-construction site.
C. An in-fill development area less than 5 acres.
Section 8-2-12
Note to Users: The intent of the peak discharge standard is to
minimize streambank erosion, under bank-full conditions. For water
quantity concerns, the post-development peak flow rate for the 10,
25, 50 and 100 year - 24 hour storm events should also be controlled
either at or below pre-development discharge rates.
c. Infiltration. BMPs shall be designed, installed, and maintained to infiltrate
runoff to the maximum extent practicable in accordance with the following,
except as provided in subds. i. through viii.
i. For residential developments one of the following shall be met:
A. Infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the postdevelopment
infiltration volume shall be at least 90% of the
pre-development infiltration volume, based on an average
annual rainfall. However, when designing appropriate
infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than
1% of the project site is required as an effective infiltration
area.
B. Infiltrate 25% of the post-development runoff from the 2 year
-24 hour design storm with a type II distribution. Separate
curve numbers for pervious and impervious surfaces shall be
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
used to calculate runoff volumes and not composite curve
numbers as defined in TR-55. However, when designing
appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no
more than 1% of the project site is required as an effective
infiltration area.
ii. For non-residential development, including commercial, industrial
and institutional development, one of the following shall be met:
A. Infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the postdevelopment
infiltration volume shall be at least 60% of the
pre-development infiltration volume, based on an average
annual rainfall. However, when designing appropriate
infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than
2% of the project site is required as an effective infiltration
area.
B. Infiltrate 10% of the runoff from the 2 year - 24 hour design
storm with a type II distribution. Separate curve numbers for
pervious and impervious surfaces shall be used to calculate
runoff volumes, and not composite curve numbers as defined
in TR-55. However, when designing appropriate infiltration
systems to meet this requirement, no more than 2% of the
project site is required as an effective infiltration area.
iii. Pre-development condition shall be the same as in par. b.
Note to Users: A model that calculates runoff volume, such as SLAMM, P8,
or an equivalent methodology may be used.
Section 8-2-12
iv. Before infiltrating runoff, pretreatment shall be required for parking
lot runoff and for runoff from new road construction in commercial,
industrial and institutional areas that will enter an infiltration system.
The pretreatment shall be designed to protect the infiltration system
from clogging prior to scheduled maintenance and to protect
groundwater quality in accordance with subd. viii. Pretreatment
options may include, but are not limited to, oil/grease separation,
sedimentation, biofiltration, filtration, swales or filter strips.
Note to Users: To achieve the infiltration requirement for the parking lots or
roads, maximum extent practicable should not be interpreted to require
significant topography changes that create an excessive financial burden. To
minimize potential groundwater impacts, it is desirable to infiltrate the
cleanest runoff. To achieve this, a design may propose greater infiltration of
runoff from low pollutant sources such as roofs, and less from higher
pollutant source areas such as parking lots.
v. Exclusions. The runoff from the following areas are prohibited from
meeting the requirements of this paragraph:
A. Areas associated with tier 1 industrial facilities identified in s.
NR 216.21(2)(a), Wis. Adm. Code, including storage,
loading, rooftop and parking.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
B. Storage and loading areas of tier 2 industrial facilities
identified in s. NR 216.21(2)(b), Wis. Adm. Code.
C. Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas.
D. Areas within 1000 feet upgradient or within 100 feet
downgradient of karst features.
E. Areas with less than 3 feet separation distance from the
bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of seasonal
high groundwater or the top of bedrock, except this subd. v.E.
does not prohibit infiltration of roof runoff.
F. Areas with runoff from industrial, commercial and
institutional parking lots and roads and residential arterial
roads with less than 5 feet separation distance from the
bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of seasonal
high groundwater or the top of bedrock.
G. Areas within 400 feet of a community water system well as
specified in s. NR 811.16(4), Wis. Adm. Code, or within 100
feet of a private well as specified in s. NR 812.08(4), Wis.
Adm. Code, for runoff infiltrated from commercial, industrial
and institutional land uses or regional devices for residential
development.
H. Areas where contaminants of concern, as defined in s. NR
720.03(2), Wis. Adm. Code are present in the soil through
which infiltration will occur.
Section 8-2-12
I. Any area where the soil does not exhibit one of the following
soil characteristics between the bottom of the infiltration
system and the seasonal high groundwater and top of
bedrock: at least a 3-foot soil layer with 20% fines or greater;
or at least a 5-foot soil layer with 10% fines or greater. This
does not apply where the soil medium within the infiltration
system provides an equivalent level of protection. This subd.
V.I. does not prohibit infiltration of roof runoff.
Note to Users: The areas listed in subd. v. are prohibited from
infiltrating runoff due to the potential for groundwater contamination.
vi. Exemptions. The following are not required to meet the requirements
of this paragraph:
A. Areas where the infiltration rate of the soil is less than 0.6
inches/hour measured at the site.
B. Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet for
commercial and industrial development.
C. Redevelopment post-construction sites.
D. In-fill development areas less than 5 acres.
E. Infiltration areas during periods when the soil on the site is
frozen.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
F. Roads in commercial, industrial and institutional land uses,
and arterial residential roads.
vii. Where alternate uses of runoff are employed, such as for toilet
flushing, laundry or irrigation, such alternate use shall be given equal
credit toward the infiltration volume required by this paragraph.
viii. A. Infiltration systems designed in accordance with this
paragraph shall, to the extent technically and economically
feasible, minimize the level of pollutants infiltrating to
groundwater and shall maintain compliance with the
preventive action limit at a point of standards application in
accordance with ch. NR 140, Wis. Adm. Code. However, if
site specific information indicates that compliance with a
preventive action limit is not achievable, the infiltration BMP
may not be installed or shall be modified to prevent
infiltration to the maximum extent practicable.
B. Notwithstanding subd. par. A.., above, the discharge from
BMPs shall remain below the enforcement standard at the
point of standards application.
d. Protective Areas.
i. “Protective area” means an area of land that commences at the top of
the channel of lakes, streams and rivers, or at the delineated boundary
of wetlands, and that is the greatest of the following widths, as
measured horizontally from the top of the channel or delineated
Section 8-2-12
wetland boundary to the closest impervious surface. However, in this
paragraph, “protective area” does not include any area of land
adjacent to any stream enclosed within a pipe or culvert, such that
runoff cannot enter the enclosure at this location.
A. For outstanding resource waters and exceptional resource
waters, and for wetlands in areas of special natural resource
interest as specified in s. NR 103.04, 75 feet.
B. For perennial and intermittent streams identified on a United
States geological survey 7.5-minute series topographic map,
or a county soil survey map, whichever is more current, 50
feet.
C. For lakes, 50 feet.
D. For highly susceptible wetlands, 50 feet. Highly susceptible
wetlands include the following types: fens, sedge meadows,
bogs, low prairies, conifer swamps, shrub swamps, other
forested wetlands, fresh wet meadows, shallow marshes, deep
marshes and seasonally flooded basins. Wetland boundary
delineations shall be made in accordance with s. NR
103.08(1m). This paragraph does not apply to wetlands that
have been completely filled in accordance with all applicable
state and federal regulations. The protective area for
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
wetlands that have been partially filled in accordance with all
applicable state and federal regulations shall be measured
from the wetland boundary delineation after fill has been
placed.
E. For less susceptible wetlands, 10 percent of the average
wetland width, but no less than 10 feet nor more than 30 feet.
Less susceptible wetlands include degraded wetlands
dominated by invasive species such as reed canary grass.
F. In subd. i.A., D. and E., determinations of the extent of the
protective area adjacent to wetlands shall be made on the
basis of the sensitivity and runoff susceptibility of the
wetland in accordance with the standards and criteria in s. NR
103.03.
G. For concentrated flow channels with drainage areas greater
than 130 acres, 10 feet.
ii. This paragraph applies to post-construction sites located within a
protective area, except those areas exempted pursuant to subd. iv.
iii. The following requirements shall be met:
A. Impervious surfaces shall be kept out of the protective area to
the maximum extent practicable. The storm water
management plan shall contain a written site-specific
explanation for any parts of the protective area that are
disturbed during construction.
Section 8-2-12
B. Where land disturbing construction activity occurs within a
protective area, and where no impervious surface is present,
adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover of 70% or
greater shall be established and maintained. The adequate
sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover shall be sufficient to
provide for bank stability, maintenance of fish habitat and
filtering of pollutants from upslope overland flow areas under
sheet flow conditions. Non-vegetative materials, such as rock
riprap, may be employed on the bank as necessary to prevent
erosion, such as on steep slopes or where high velocity flows
occur.
Note to Users: It is recommended that seeding of non-aggressive
vegetative cover be used in the protective areas. Vegetation that is
flood and drought tolerant and can provide long-term bank stability
because of an extensive root system is preferable. Vegetative cover
can be measured using the line transect method described in the
University of Wisconsin Extension publication number A3533, titled
"Estimating Residue Using the Line Transect Method".
C. Best management practices such as filter strips, swales, or wet
detention basins, that are designed to control pollutants from
non-point sources may be located in the protective area.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Note to Users: Other regulations, such as ch. 30, Wis. Stats., and chs.
NR 103, 115, 116 and 117, Wis. Adm. Code, and their associated
review and approval process may apply in the protective area.
iv. This paragraph does not apply to:
A. Redevelopment post-construction sites.
B. In-fill development areas less than 5 acres.
C. Structures that cross or access surface waters such as boat
landings, bridges and culverts.
D. Structures constructed in accordance with s. 59.692(1v), Wis.
Stats.
E. Post-construction sites from which runoff does not enter the
surface water, except to the extent that vegetative ground
cover is necessary to maintain bank stability.
Note to Users: A vegetated protective area to filter runoff pollutants from
post-construction sites described in subd. 4.E. is not necessary since
runoff is not entering the surface water at that location. Other practices,
necessary to meet the requirements of this section, such as a swale or
basin, will need to be designed and implemented to reduce runoff
pollutants before the runoff enters a surface water of the state.
e. Fueling and Vehicle Maintenance Areas. Fueling and vehicle maintenance
areas shall, to the maximum extent practicable, have BMPs designed,
Section 8-2-12
installed and maintained to reduce petroleum within runoff, such that the
runoff that enters waters of the state contains no visible petroleum sheen.
Note to Users: A combination of the following BMPs may be used: oil and grease
separators, canopies, petroleum spill cleanup materials, or any other structural or
non-structural method of preventing or treating petroleum in runoff.
f. Swale Treatment for Transportation Facilities.
i. Applicability. Except as provided in subd. ii., transportation facilities
that use swales for runoff conveyance and pollutant removal meet all
of the requirements of this section, if the swales are designed to the
maximum extent practicable to do all of the following:
A. Be vegetated. However, where appropriate, non-vegetative
measures may be employed to prevent erosion or provide for
runoff treatment, such as rock riprap stabilization or check
dams.
Note to Users: It is preferred that tall and dense vegetation be
maintained within the swale due to its greater effectiveness at
enhancing runoff pollutant removal.
B. Carry runoff through a swale for 200 feet or more in length
that is designed with a flow velocity no greater than 1.5 feet
per second for the peak flow generated using either a 2-year,
24-hour design storm or a 2-year storm with a duration equal
to the time of concentration as appropriate. If a swale of 200
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
feet in length cannot be designed with a flow velocity of 1.5
feet per second or less, then the flow velocity shall be reduced
to the maximum extent practicable.
Note to Users: Check dams may be included in the swale design to
slow runoff flows and improve pollutant removal. Transportation
facilities with continuous features such as curb and gutter, sidewalks
or parking lanes do not comply with the design requirements of this
paragraph. However, a limited amount of structural measures such as
curb and gutter may be allowed as necessary to account for other
concerns such as human safety or resource protection.
ii. Exemptions. The Zoning Administrator or designee, may, consistent
with water quality standards, require other provisions of this section
be met on a transportation facility with an average daily travel of
vehicles greater than 2500 and where the initial surface water of the
state that the runoff directly enters is any of the following:
A. An outstanding resource water.
B. An exceptional resource water.
C. Waters listed in s. 303(d) of the federal clean water act that
are identified as impaired in whole or in part, due to nonpoint
source impacts.
Section 8-2-12
D. Waters where targeted performance standards are developed
under s. NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code, to meet water quality
standards.
Note to Users: The Department of Natural Resource's regional storm
water staff can determine if additional BMPs, beyond a water quality
swale, are needed under this paragraph.
(4) General Considerations for On-site and Off-site Storm Water Management Measures.
The following considerations shall be observed in managing runoff:
a. Natural topography and land cover features such as natural swales, natural
depressions, native soil infiltrating capacity, and natural groundwater
recharge areas shall be preserved and used, to the extent possible, to meet the
requirements of this section.
b. Emergency overland flow for all storm water facilities shall be provided to
prevent exceeding the safe capacity of downstream drainage facilities and
prevent endangerment of downstream property or public safety.
(5) Location and Regional Treatment Option.
a. The BMPs may be located on-site or off-site as part of a regional storm water
device, practice or system.
b. Post-construction runoff within a non-navigable surface water that flows into
a BMP, such as a wet detention pond, is not required to meet the performance
standards of this ordinance. Post-construction BMPs may be located in nonnavigable
surface waters.
c. Except as allowed under par. d., post-construction runoff from new
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
development shall meet the post-construction performance standards prior to
entering a navigable surface water.
d. Post-construction runoff from any development within a navigable surface
water that flows into a BMP is not required to meet the performance
standards of this ordinance if:
i. The BMP was constructed prior to the effective date of this ordinance
and the BMP either received a permit issued under ch. 30, Stats., or
the BMP did not require a ch. 30, Wis. Stats., permit; and
ii. The BMP is designed to provide runoff treatment from future upland
development.
e. Runoff from existing development, redevelopment and in-fill areas shall meet
the post-construction performance standards in accordance with this
paragraph.
i. To the maximum extent practicable, BMPs shall be located to treat
runoff prior to discharge to navigable surface waters.
ii. Post-construction BMPs for such runoff may be located in a
navigable surface water if allowable under all other applicable
federal, state and local regulations such as ch. NR 103, Wis. Adm.
Code and ch. 30, Wis. Stats.
Note to Users: This allows the location of BMPs in navigable surface waters
Section 8-2-12
where necessary to augment management practices upstream of the navigable
surface water to meet the performance standards.
f. The discharge of runoff from a BMP, such as a wet detention pond, or after a
series of such BMPs is subject to this chapter.
Note to Users: This section does not supersede any other applicable federal, state or
local regulation such as ch. NR 103, Wis. Adm. Code and ch. 30, Wis. Stats.
g. The Zoning Administrator or designee, may approve off-site management
measures provided that all of the following conditions are met:
i. The Zoning Administrator determines that the post-construction
runoff is covered by a storm water management system plan that is
approved by the Zoning Administrator or designee, and that contains
management requirements consistent with the purpose and intent of
this ordinance.
ii. The off-site facility meets all of the following conditions:
A. The facility is in place.
B. The facility is designed and adequately sized to provide a
level of storm water control equal to or greater than that
which would be afforded by on-site practices meeting the
performance standards of this ordinance.
C. The facility has a legally obligated entity responsible for its
long-term operation and maintenance.
h. Where a regional treatment option exists such that the Zoning Administrator
or designee, exempts the applicant from all or part of the minimum on-site
storm water management requirements, the applicant shall be required to pay
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
a fee in an amount determined in negotiation with the Zoning Administrator
or designee. In determining the fee for post-construction runoff, the Zoning
Administrator or designee, shall consider an equitable distribution of the cost
for land, engineering design, construction, and maintenance of the regional
treatment option.
(6) Alternate Requirements. The Zoning Administrator or designee, may establish storm
water management requirements more stringent than those set forth in this section if
the Zoning Administrator or designee, determines that an added level of protection is
needed to protect sensitive resources.
(i) Erosion Control Permitting Requirements, Procedures, and Fees.
(1) Permit Required. No responsible party may commence a land disturbing construction
activity subject to this ordinance without receiving prior approval of an erosion and
sediment control plan for the site and a permit from the Zoning Administrator or
designee.
(2) Permit Application and Fees. At least one responsible party desiring to undertake a
land disturbing construction activity subject to this ordinance shall submit an
application for a permit and an erosion and sediment control plan that meets the
requirements of Section (k) and shall pay an application fee of $150.00 to the Village
of Hales Corners. By submitting an application, the applicant is authorizing the
Section 8-2-12
Zoning Administrator or designee, to enter the site to obtain information required for
the review of the erosion and sediment control plan.
(3) Review and Approval of Permit Application. The Zoning Administrator or designee,
shall review any permit application that is submitted with an erosion and sediment
control plan, and the required fee. The following approval procedure shall be used:
a. Within five business days of the receipt of a complete permit application, as
required by sub. (2), the Zoning Administrator or designee, shall inform the
applicant whether the application and plan are approved or disapproved
based on the requirements of this ordinance.
b. If the permit application and plan are approved, the Zoning Administrator or
designee, shall issue the permit.
c. If the permit application or plan is disapproved, the Zoning Administrator or
designee, shall state in writing the reasons for disapproval.
d. The Zoning Administrator or designee, may request additional information
from the applicant. If additional information is submitted, the Zoning
Administrator or designee, shall have five business days from the date the
additional information is received to inform the applicant that the plan is
either approved or disapproved.
e. Failure by the Zoning Administrator or designee, to inform the permit
applicant of a decision within five business days of a required submittal shall
be deemed to mean approval of the submittal and the applicant may proceed
as if a permit had been issued.
(4) Surety Bond. As a condition of approval and issuance of the permit, the Zoning
Administrator or designee, may require the applicant to deposit a surety bond or
irrevocable letter of credit to guarantee a good faith execution of the approved
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
erosion control plan and any permit conditions.
(5) Permit Requirements. All permits shall require the responsible party to:
a. Notify the Zoning Administrator or designee, within 48 hours of
commencing any land disturbing construction activity.
b. Notify the Zoning Administrator or designee, of completion of any BMPs
within 14 days after their installation.
c. Obtain permission in writing from the Zoning Administrator or designee,
prior to any modification pursuant to Section (k)(3) of the erosion and
sediment control plan.
d. Install all BMPs as identified in the approved erosion and sediment control
plan.
e. Maintain all road drainage systems, stormwater drainage systems, BMPs and
other facilities identified in the erosion and sediment control plan.
f. Repair any siltation or erosion damage to adjoining surfaces and drainage
ways resulting from land disturbing construction activities and document
repairs in a site erosion control log.
g. Inspect the BMPs within 24 hours after each rain of 0.5 inches or more which
results in runoff during active construction periods, and at least once each
Section 8-2-12
week, make needed repairs and document the findings of the inspections in a
site erosion control log with the date of inspection, the name of the person
conducting the inspection, and a description of the present phase of the
construction at the site.
h. Allow the Zoning Administrator or designee, to enter the site for the purpose
of inspecting compliance with the erosion and sediment control plan or for
performing any work necessary to bring the site into compliance with the
control plan. Keep a copy of the erosion and sediment control plan at the
construction site.
(6) Permit Conditions. Permits issued under this section may include conditions
established by Zoning Administrator or designee, in addition to the requirements set
forth in sub. (5), where needed to assure compliance with the performance standards
in Section (g).
(7) Permit Duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid for a period of 180
days, or the length of the building permit or other construction authorizations,
whichever is longer, from the date of issuance. The Zoning Administrator or
designee, may extend the period one or more times for up to an additional 180 days.
The Zoning Administrator or designee, may require additional BMPs as a condition
of the extension if they are necessary to meet the requirements of this ordinance.
(8) Maintenance. The responsible party throughout the duration of the construction
activities shall maintain all BMPs necessary to meet the requirements of this
ordinance until the site has undergone final stabilization.
(j) Storm Water Management Permitting Requirements, Procedures, and Fees
(1) Permit Required. No responsible party may undertake a land disturbing construction
activity without receiving a post-construction runoff permit from the Zoning
Administrator prior to commencing the proposed activity.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
(2) Permit Application and Fees. Unless specifically excluded by this ordinance, any
responsible party desiring a permit shall submit to the Zoning Administrator or
designee, a permit application made on a form provided by the Zoning Administrator
or designee, for that purpose.
a. Unless otherwise excepted by this ordinance, a permit application must be
accompanied by a storm water management plan, a maintenance agreement
and a non-refundable permit administration fee.
b. The storm water management plan shall be prepared to meet the requirements
of Sections (h) and (l), the maintenance agreement shall be prepared to meet
the requirements of Section (m), the financial guarantee shall meet the
requirements of Section (n), and fees shall be those established by the Village
of Hales Corners as set forth in Section (o).
(3) Review and Approval of Permit Application. The Zoning Administrator or designee,
shall review any permit application that is submitted with a storm water management
plan, maintenance agreement, and the required fee. The following approval
procedure shall be used:
a. Within five business days of the receipt of a complete permit application,
Section 8-2-12
including all items as required by sub. (2), the Zoning Administrator or
designee, shall inform the applicant whether the application, plan and
maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved based on the
requirements of this ordinance.
b. If the storm water permit application, plan and maintenance agreement are
approved, or if an agreed upon payment of fees in lieu of storm water
management practices is made, the Zoning Administrator or designee, shall
issue the permit.
c. If the storm water permit application, plan or maintenance agreement is
disapproved, the Zoning Administrator or designee, shall detail in writing the
reasons for disapproval.
d. The Zoning Administrator or designee, may request additional information
from the applicant. If additional information is submitted, the Zoning
Administrator or designee, shall have five business days from the date the
additional information is received to inform the applicant that the plan and
maintenance agreement are either approved or disapproved.
e. Failure by the Zoning Administrator or designee, to inform the permit
applicant of a decision within five business days of a required submittal shall
be deemed to mean approval of the submittal and the applicant may proceed
as if a permit had been issued.
(4) Permit Requirements. All permits issued under this ordinance shall be subject to the
following conditions, and holders of permits issued under this ordinance shall be
deemed to have accepted these conditions. The Zoning Administrator or designee,
may suspend or revoke a permit for violation of a permit condition, following written
notification of the responsible party. An action by the Zoning Administrator or
designee, to suspend or revoke this permit may be appealed in accordance with
section (r).
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
a. Compliance with this permit does not relieve the responsible party of the
responsibility to comply with other applicable federal, state, and local laws
and regulations.
b. The responsible party shall design and install all structural and non-structural
storm water management measures in accordance with the approved storm
water management plan and this permit.
c. The responsible party shall notify the Zoning Administrator or designee, at
least five business days before commencing any work in conjunction with
the storm water management plan, and within five business days upon
completion of the storm water management practices. If required as a special
condition under sub. (5), the responsible party shall make additional
notification according to a schedule set forth by the Zoning Administrator or
designee, so that practice installations can be inspected during construction.
d. Practice installations required as part of this ordinance shall be certified "as
built" by a licensed professional engineer. Completed storm water
management practices must pass a final inspection by the Zoning
Section 8-2-12
Administrator or designee, or its designee to determine if they are in
accordance with the approved storm water management plan and ordinance.
The Zoning Administrator or designee, or its designee shall notify the
responsible party in writing of any changes required in such practices to
bring them into compliance with the conditions of this permit.
e. The responsible party shall notify the Zoning Administrator or designee, of
any significant modifications it intends to make to an approved storm water
management plan. The Zoning Administrator or designee, may require that
the proposed modifications be submitted to it for approval prior to
incorporation into the storm water management plan and execution by the
responsible party.
f. The responsible party shall maintain all storm water management practices in
accordance with the storm water management plan until the practices either
become the responsibility of the Village of Hales Corners or are transferred
to subsequent private owners as specified in the approved maintenance
agreement.
g. The responsible party authorizes the Zoning Administrator or designee, to
perform any work or operations necessary to bring storm water management
measures into conformance with the approved storm water management plan,
and consents to a special assessment or charge against the property as
authorized under subch. VII of ch. 66, Wis. Stats., or to charging such costs
against the financial guarantee posted under Section (n).
h. If so directed by the Zoning Administrator or designee, the responsible party
shall repair at the responsible party's own expense all damage to adjoining
municipal facilities and drainage ways caused by runoff, where such damage
is caused by activities that are not in compliance with the approved storm
water management plan.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
i. The responsible party shall permit property access to the Zoning
Administrator or designee, or its designee for the purpose of inspecting the
property for compliance with the approved storm water management plan and
this permit.
j. Where site development or redevelopment involves changes in direction,
increases in peak rate and/or total volume of runoff from a site, the Zoning
Administrator or designee, may require the responsible party to make
appropriate legal arrangements with affected property owners concerning the
prevention of endangerment to property or public safety.
k. The responsible party is subject to the enforcement actions and penalties
detailed in Section (q), if the responsible party fails to comply with the terms
of this permit.
(5) Permit Conditions. Permits issued under this subsection may include conditions
established by Zoning Administrator or designee, in addition to the requirements
needed to meet the performance standards in Section (h) or a financial guarantee as
Section 8-2-12
provided for in section (k).
(6) Permit Duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid from the date of
issuance through the date the Zoning Administrator or designee, notifies the
responsible party that all storm water management practices have passed the final
inspection required under sub. (4)d.
(k) Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, Statement, and Amendments.
(1) Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.
a. An erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared and submitted to the
Zoning Administrator or designee.
b. The erosion and sediment control plan shall be designed to meet the
performance standards in Section (g) and other requirements of this
ordinance.
c. The erosion and sediment control plan shall address pollution caused by soil
erosion and sedimentation during construction and up to final stabilization of
the site. The erosion and sediment control plan shall include, at a minimum,
the following items:
i. The name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the site,
and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant, together with the
name of the applicant’s principal contact at such firm. The
application shall also include start and end dates for construction.
ii. Description of the site and the nature of the construction activity,
including representation of the limits of land disturbance on a United
States Geological Service 7.5 minute series topographic map.
iii. A sequence of construction of the development site, including
stripping and clearing; rough grading; construction of utilities,
infrastructure, and buildings; and final grading and landscaping.
Sequencing shall identify the expected date on which clearing will
begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, areas of
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
clearing, installation of temporary erosion and sediment control
measures, and establishment of permanent vegetation.
iv. Estimates of the total area of the site and the total area of the site that
is expected to be disturbed by construction activities.
v. Estimates, including calculations, if any, of the runoff coefficient of
the site before and after construction activities are completed.
vi. Calculations to show the expected percent reduction in the average
annual sediment load carried in runoff as compared to no sediment or
erosion controls.
vii. Existing data describing the surface soil as well as subsoils.
viii. Depth to groundwater, as indicated by Natural Resources
Conservation Service soil information where available.
ix. Name of the immediate named receiving water from the United States
Geological Service 7.5 minute series topographic maps.
d. The erosion and sediment control plan shall include a site map. The site map
Section 8-2-12
shall include the following items and shall be at a scale not greater than 100
feet per inch and at a contour interval not to exceed five feet.
i. Existing topography, vegetative cover, natural and engineered
drainage systems, roads and surface waters. Lakes, streams,
wetlands, channels, ditches and other watercourses on and
immediately adjacent to the site shall be shown. Any identified 100-
year flood plains, flood fringes and floodways shall also be shown.
ii. Boundaries of the construction site.
iii. Drainage patterns and approximate slopes anticipated after major
grading activities.
iv. Areas of soil disturbance.
v. Location of major structural and non-structural controls identified in
the plan.
vi. Location of areas where stabilization practices will be employed.
vii. Areas which will be vegetated following construction.
viii. Areal extent of wetland acreage on the site and locations where storm
water is discharged to a surface water or wetland.
ix. Locations of all surface waters and wetlands within one mile of the
construction site.
x. An alphanumeric or equivalent grid overlying the entire construction
site map.
e. Each erosion and sediment control plan shall include a description of
appropriate controls and measures that will be performed at the site to
prevent pollutants from reaching waters of the state. The plan shall clearly
describe the appropriate control measures for each major activity and the
timing during the construction process that the measures will be
implemented. The description of erosion controls shall include, when
appropriate, the following minimum requirements:
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
i. Description of interim and permanent stabilization practices,
including a practice implementation schedule. Site plans shall ensure
that existing vegetation is preserved where attainable and that
disturbed portions of the site are stabilized.
ii. Description of structural practices to divert flow away from exposed
soils, store flows or otherwise limit runoff and the discharge of
pollutants from the site. Unless otherwise specifically approved in
writing by the Zoning Administrator or designee, or designee,
structural measures shall be installed on upland soils.
iii. Management of overland flow at all sites, unless otherwise controlled
by outfall controls.
iv. Trapping of sediment in channelized flow.
v. Staging construction to limit bare areas subject to erosion.
vii. Protection of downslope drainage inlets where they occur.
Section 8-2-12
vii. Minimization of tracking at all sites.
viii. Clean up of off-site sediment deposits.
ix. Proper disposal of building and waste materials at all sites.
x. Stabilization of drainage ways.
xi. Control of soil erosion from dirt stockpiles.
xii. Installation of permanent stabilization practices as soon as possible
after final grading.
xiii. Minimization of dust to the maximum extent practicable.
f. The erosion and sediment control plan shall require that velocity dissipation
devices be placed at discharge locations and along the length of any outfall
channel, as necessary, to provide a non-erosive flow from the structure to a
water course so that the natural physical and biological characteristics and
functions are maintained and protected.
Note to Users: The plan requirements of this subsection will meet the erosion control
plan requirements of s. NR 216.46, Wis. Adm. Code, when prepared in accordance
with good engineering practices and the design criteria, standards and specifications
outlined in the Wisconsin Construction Site Best Management Practice Handbook
(WDNR Pub. WR-222 November 1993 Revision).
(3) Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Statement. For each construction site identified
under Section (d)(1)c., an erosion and sediment control plan statement shall be
prepared. This statement shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator or designee.
The control plan statement shall briefly describe the site, including a site map.
Further, it shall also include the best management practices that will be used to meet
the requirements of the ordinance, including the site development schedule.
(4) Amendments. The applicant shall amend the plan if any of the following occur:
a. There is a change in design, construction, operation or maintenance at the site
which has the reasonable potential for the discharge of pollutants to waters of
the state and which has not otherwise been addressed in the plan.
b. The actions required by the plan fail to reduce the impacts of pollutants
carried by construction site runoff.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
c. The Zoning Administrator or designee, notifies the applicant of changes
needed in the plan.
(l) Storm Water Management Plan.
(1) Plan Requirements. The storm water management plan required under section (h)(2)
shall contain at a minimum the following information:
a. Name, address, and telephone number for the following or their designees:
landowner; developer; project engineer for practice design and certification;
person(s) responsible for installation of storm water management practices;
and person(s) responsible for maintenance of storm water management
practices prior to the transfer, if any, of maintenance responsibility to another
party.
b. A proper legal description of the property proposed to be developed,
referenced to the U.S. Public Land Survey system or to block and lot
numbers
Section 8-2-12
within a recorded land subdivision plat.
c. Pre-development site conditions, including:
i. One or more site maps at a scale of not less than 1 inch equals 40
feet. The site maps shall show the following: site location and legal
property description; predominant soil types and hydrologic soil
groups; existing cover type and condition; topographic contours of
the site at a scale not to exceed two feet; topography and drainage
network including enough of the contiguous properties to show
runoff patterns onto, through, and from the site; watercourses that
may affect or be affected by runoff from the site; flow path and
direction for all storm water conveyance sections; watershed
boundaries used in hydrology determinations to show compliance
with performance standards; lakes, streams, wetlands, channels,
ditches, and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the
site; limits of the 100 year floodplain; location of wells and wellhead
protection areas covering the project area and delineated pursuant to
s. NR 811.16, Wis. Adm. Code.
ii. Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed to show
compliance with performance standards. All major assumptions used
in developing input parameters shall be clearly stated. The
geographic areas used in making the calculations shall be clearly
cross-referenced to the required map(s).
d. Post-development site conditions, including:
i. Explanation of the provisions to preserve and use natural topography
and land cover features to minimize changes in peak flow runoff rates
and volumes to surface waters and wetlands.
ii. Explanation of any restrictions on storm water management measures
in the development area imposed by wellhead protection plans and
ordinances.
iii. One or more site maps at a scale of not less than 1 inch equals 40 feet
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
showing the following: post-construction pervious areas including
vegetative cover type and condition; impervious surfaces including
all buildings, structures, and pavement; post-construction topographic
contours of the site at a scale not to exceed two feet; postconstruction
drainage network including enough of the contiguous
properties to show runoff patterns onto, through, and from the site;
locations and dimensions of drainage easements; locations of
maintenance easements specified in the maintenance agreement; flow
path and direction for all storm water conveyance sections; location
and type of all storm water management conveyance and treatment
practices, including the on-site and off-site tributary drainage area;
location and type of conveyance system that will carry runoff from
the drainage and treatment practices to the nearest adequate outlet
Section 8-2-12
such as a curbed street, storm drain, or natural drainage way;
watershed boundaries used in hydrology and pollutant loading
calculations and any changes to lakes, streams, wetlands, channels,
ditches, and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the
site.
iv. Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed to show
compliance with performance standards. The computations shall be
made for each discharge point in the development, and the
geographic areas used in making the calculations shall be clearly
cross-referenced to the required map(s).
v. Results of investigations of soils and groundwater required for the
placement and design of storm water management measures.
Detailed drawings including cross-sections and profiles of all
permanent storm water conveyance and treatment practices.
e. A description and installation schedule for the storm water management
practices needed to meet the performance standards in section (h).
f. A maintenance plan developed for the life of each storm water management
practice including the required maintenance activities and maintenance
activity schedule.
g. Cost estimates for the construction, operation, and maintenance of each storm
water management practice.
h. Other information requested in writing by the Zoning Administrator or
designee, to determine compliance of the proposed storm water management
measures with the provisions of this ordinance.
i. All site investigations, plans, designs, computations, and drawings shall be
certified by a [licensed professional engineer] to be prepared in accordance
with accepted engineering practice and requirements of this ordinance.
(2) Alternate Requirements. The Zoning Administrator or designee, may prescribe
alternative submittal requirements for applicants seeking an exemption to on-site
storm water management performance standards under section (h)(5).
(m) Maintenance Agreement.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
(1) Maintenance Agreement Required. The maintenance agreement required under
section (j)(2) for storm water management practices shall be an agreement between
the Village of Hales Corners and the responsible party to provide for maintenance of
storm water practices beyond the duration period of this permit. The maintenance
agreement shall be filed with the County Register of Deeds as a property deed
restriction so that it is binding upon all subsequent owners of the land served by the
storm water management practices.
(2) Agreement Provisions. The maintenance agreement shall contain the following
information and provisions and be consistent with the maintenance plan required by
section (l)(1)f.:
a. Identification of the storm water facilities and designation of the drainage
area served by the facilities.
Section 8-2-12
b. A schedule for regular maintenance of each aspect of the storm water
management system consistent with the storm water management plan
required under section (j)(2).
c. Identification of the responsible party(s), organization or city, county, town
or village responsible for long term maintenance of the storm water
management practices identified in the storm water management plan
required under section (j)(2).
d. Requirement that the responsible party(s), organization, or city, county, town
or village shall maintain storm water management practices in accordance
with the schedule included in par. b.
e. Authorization for the Zoning Administrator or designee, to access the
property to conduct inspections of storm water management practices as
necessary to ascertain that the practices are being maintained and operated in
accordance with the agreement.
f. A requirement on the Zoning Administrator or designee, to maintain public
records of the results of the site inspections, to inform the responsible party
responsible for maintenance of the inspection results, and to specifically
indicate any corrective actions required to bring the storm water management
practice into proper working condition.
g. Agreement that the party designated under par. c., as responsible for long
term maintenance of the storm water management practices, shall be notified
by the Zoning Administrator or designee, of maintenance problems which
require correction. The specified corrective actions shall be undertaken
within a reasonable time frame as set by the Zoning Administrator or
designee.
h. Authorization of the Zoning Administrator or designee, to perform the
corrected actions identified in the inspection report if the responsible party
designated under par. c. does not make the required corrections in the
specified time period. The Zoning Administrator or designee, shall enter the
amount due on the tax rolls and collect the money as a special charge against
the property pursuant to subch. VII of ch. 66, Wis. Stats.
(n) Financial Guarantee.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
(1) Establishment of the Guarantee. The Zoning Administrator or designee, may require
the submittal of a financial guarantee, the form and type of which shall be acceptable
to the Zoning Administrator or designee. The financial guarantee shall be in an
amount determined by the Zoning Administrator or designee, to be the estimated cost
of construction and the estimated cost of maintenance of the storm water
management practices during the period which the designated party in the
maintenance agreement has maintenance responsibility. The financial guarantee
shall give the Village of Hales Corners the authorization to use the funds to complete
the storm water management practices if the responsible party defaults or does not
properly implement the approved storm water management plan, upon written notice
to the responsible party by the Zoning Administrator or designee, that the
Section 8-2-12
requirements of this ordinance have not been met.
(2) Conditions for Release. Conditions for the release of the financial guarantee are as
follows:
a. The Zoning Administrator or designee, shall release the portion of the
financial guarantee established under this section, less any costs incurred by
the Village of Hales Corners to complete installation of practices, upon
submission of "as built plans" by a licensed professional engineer. The
Zoning Administrator or designee, may make provisions for a partial pro-rata
release of the financial guarantee based on the completion of various
development stages.
b. The Zoning Administrator or designee, shall release the portion of the
financial guarantee established under this section to assure maintenance of
storm water practices, less any costs incurred by the Village of Hales
Corners, at such time that the responsibility for practice maintenance is
passed on to another entity via an approved maintenance agreement.
(o) Fee Schedule. The fees referred to in other sections of this ordinance shall be established by
the Village of Hales Corners and may from time to time be modified by resolution of the
Governing Body. A schedule of the fees established by the Village of Hales Corners shall be
available for review in the Office of the Village Clerk.
(p) Inspection. If land disturbing construction activities are being carried out without an
erosion control permit required by this ordinance, the Zoning Administrator or designee,
may enter the land pursuant to the provisions of ss. 66.0119(1), (2), and (3), Wis. Stats.
(q) Enforcement.
(1) Erosion Control Requirements Enforcement.
a. The Zoning Administrator or designee, may post a stop-work order if any of
the following occurs:
i. Any land disturbing construction activity regulated under this
ordinance is being undertaken without a permit.
ii. The erosion and sediment control plan is not being implemented in a
good faith manner.
iii. The conditions of the permit are not being met.
b. If the responsible party does not cease activity as required in a stop-work
order posted under this section or fails to comply with the erosion and
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
sediment control plan or permit conditions, the Zoning Administrator or
designee, may revoke the permit.
c. If the responsible party, where no permit has been issued, does not cease the
activity after being notified by the Zoning Administrator or designee, or
designee, or if a responsible party violates a stop-work order posted under
sub. (1), the Zoning Administrator or designee, may request the village
attorney to obtain a cease and desist order in any court with jurisdiction.
d. The Zoning Administrator or designee, may retract the stop-work order
issued under sub. (1) or the permit revocation under sub. (2).
e. After posting a stop-work order under sub. (1), the Zoning Administrator or
Section 8-2-12
designee, may issue a notice of intent to the responsible party of its intent to
perform work necessary to comply with this ordinance. The Zoning
Administrator or designee, may go on the land and commence the work after
issuing the notice of intent. The costs of the work performed under this
subsection by the Zoning Administrator or designee, or designee, plus
interest at the rate authorized by the Village shall be billed to the responsible
party. In the event a responsible party fails to pay the amount due, the clerk
shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect as a special assessment
against the property pursuant to subch. VII of ch. 66, Wis. Stats.
(2) Storm Water Management Requirements Enforcement.
a. Any land disturbing construction activity or post-construction runoff initiated
after the effective date of this ordinance by any person, firm, association, or
corporation subject to the ordinance provisions shall be deemed a violation
unless conducted in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance.
b. The Zoning Administrator or designee, shall notify the responsible party by
certified mail of any non-complying land disturbing construction activity or
post-construction runoff. The notice shall describe the nature of the
violation, remedial actions needed, a schedule for remedial action, and
additional enforcement action which may be taken.
c. Upon receipt of written notification from the Zoning Administrator or
designee, under sub. (2), the responsible party shall correct work that does
not comply with the storm water management plan or other provisions of this
permit. The responsible party shall make corrections as necessary to meet
the specifications and schedule set forth by the Zoning Administrator or
designee, in the notice.
d. If the violations to a permit issued pursuant to this ordinance are likely to
result in damage to properties, public facilities, or waters of the state, the
Zoning Administrator or designee, may enter the land and take emergency
actions necessary to prevent such damage. The costs incurred by the Zoning
Administrator or designee, plus interest and legal costs shall be billed to the
responsible party.
e. The Zoning Administrator or designee, is authorized to post a stop work
order on all land disturbing construction activity that is in violation of this
ordinance, or to request the Village Attorney to obtain a cease and desist
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
order in any court with jurisdiction.
f. The Zoning Administrator or designee, may revoke a permit issued under this
ordinance for non-compliance with ordinance provisions.
g. Any permit revocation, stop work order, or cease and desist order shall
remain in effect unless retracted by the Zoning Administrator or designee, or
by a court with jurisdiction.
h. The Zoning Administrator or designee, is authorized to refer any violation of
this ordinance, or of a stop work order or cease and desist order issued
pursuant to this ordinance, to the Village Attorney for the commencement of
Section 8-2-12
further legal proceedings in any court with jurisdiction.
(3) Forfeiture. Any person, firm, association, or corporation who does not comply with
the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $50.00
or more than $500.00 per offense, together with the costs of prosecution. Each day
that the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
(4) Injunctive Relief. Compliance with the provisions of this ordinance may also be
enforced by injunction in any court with jurisdiction, as authorized pursuant to
Section 61.365, Stats. It shall not be necessary to prosecute for forfeiture or a cease
and desist order before resorting to injunctional proceedings.
(5) Abatement Relief. When the Zoning Administrator or designee, determines that the
holder of a permit issued pursuant to this ordinance has failed to follow practices set
forth in the storm water management plan, or has failed to comply with schedules set
forth in said storm water management plan, or has failed to follow the practices set
forth in the erosion and sediment control plan, the Zoning Administrator or designee,
or a party designated by the Zoning Administrator or designee, may enter upon the
land and perform the work or other operations necessary to bring the condition of
said lands into conformance with requirements of the approved plan(s). The Zoning
Administrator or designee, shall keep a detailed accounting of the costs and expenses
of performing this work. These costs and expenses shall be deducted from any
financial security posted pursuant to Section (k) of this ordinance. Where such a
security has not been established, or where such a security is insufficient to cover
these costs, the costs and expenses shall be entered on the tax roll as a special charge
against the property and collected with any other taxes levied thereon for the year in
which the work is completed.
(r) Appeals.
(1) Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged that there is error in any order, decision or determination made by the Zoning
Administrator or designee, in administering this ordinance, except for cease and
desist orders obtained under subd.(q)(1)b. of this ordinance. The board shall also use
the rules, procedures, duties, and powers authorized by statute in hearing and
deciding appeals. Upon appeal, the board may authorize variances from the
provisions of this ordinance that are not contrary to the public interest, and where
owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the ordinance will result in
unnecessary hardship.
(2) Who May Appeal. Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any aggrieved
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
person or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the Village of Hales Corners
affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator or designee.
Reference: Ordinance 05-12
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-3-1
CHAPTER 3
Zoning Districts
SEC. 8-3-1 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
(a) Districts. For the purpose of this Chapter, present and future, provision is hereby made for
the division of the Village of Hales Corners into the following ten (10) basic zoning districts:
R-1 Residence District
R-2 Residence District
R-3 Residence District
R-4 Residence District
B-1 Shopping Center District
B-2 General Business District
B-3 Automobile Oriented Business District
B-4 Office and Professional Services District
M-1 Light Manufacturing District
P-1 Park and Institutional District
RCO Redevelopment/Conservation Overlay District
PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay District (Chapter 4)
FW Floodplain-Wetland District (Chapter 5)
SEC. 8-3-2 VACATION OF STREETS; ANNEXATIONS.
(a) Vacation of Streets. Vacation of public streets and alleys shall cause the land vacated to be
automatically placed in the same district as the abutting side to which the vacated land
reverts.
(b) Annexations. Annexations to or consolidations with the Village subsequent to the effective
date of this Chapter shall be placed in the R-1 Residence District, unless the annexation
ordinance places the land in another district.
SEC. 8-3-3 ZONING MAP.
(a) Official Zoning Map. The Village of Hales Corners is hereby divided into Zoning Districts
as shown upon a map designated as the Official Zoning Map of the Village of Hales Corners,
dated May 11, 1957, and made a part of this Chapter. The Official Zoning Map and all the
notations, references, amendments and other information shown thereon are a part of this
Ordinance and shall have the same force and effect as if the matters and information set forth
by said map were fully described herein. The Official Zoning Map shall be properly attested
and kept on file along with the text of the Official Zoning Regulations in the office of the
Village Administrator.
(b) District Boundaries. The District boundaries shall be determined by measurement from and
as shown on the Official Zoning Map, and in case of any question as to the interpretation of
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-3-4
such boundary lines, the Village Board shall interpret the map according to the reasonable
intent of this Chapter. Unless otherwise specifically indicated or dimensioned on the map,
the district boundaries are normally lot lines; section, quarter section or sixteenth section
lines; or the centerlines of streets, highways, railways or alleys.
SEC. 8-3-4 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Zoning Map, the following
rules shall apply:
(a) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or
alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
(b) Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as
following such lot lines.
(c) Where a district boundary line divides a lot in a single ownership on December 10, 1956, the
regulations for either portion of such lot may extend to the entire lot, but not more than
twenty-five (25) feet beyond the boundary line of the district for which such regulations are
established, otherwise the more restrictive district regulations to the property owner will
apply.
(d) In unsubdivided property, unless otherwise indicated, the district boundary lines are the
centerlines of streets, highways, railroads, section lines, quarter section lines or such lines
extended. Whenever a portion of any district is indicated upon the Zoning Map as a strip
paralleling an opened or unopened street or highway, the width of this strip, unless otherwise
indicated, shall be assumed to be one hundred twenty (120) feet, measured at right angles
from the nearest street or right-of-way of the street or highway to which it is parallel and
adjacent.
(e) In unsubdivided property, districts shown as narrow strips adjacent to streets or highways are
intended to stop at lines which would mark an alley or the end of a block when platted. The
normal length of a block, center to center of street, is six hundred sixty (660) feet in a north
and south direction and three hundred thirty (330) feet in an east and west direction. A
district may extend one (1) or more blocks or fraction of a block as indicated by the length of
the district shown on the Zoning Map.
(f) Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts shown on the
Zoning Map, such boundaries shall be determined by use of the scale contained on such
Map.
SEC. 8-3-5 R-1 RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
(a) Definition and Purpose. The intent of the R-1 Residence District is to provide for the blend
of one and two-family dwelling units. The minimum lot size of slightly less than one quarter
acre provides the greatest density of dwelling units in one and/or two family districts.
(b) Permitted Uses.
(1) Two (2) family dwellings.
(2) Single-family dwellings.
(3) Public parks, playgrounds, recreational buildings and grounds; golf courses, country
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-3-6
clubs, tennis courts and similar recreational uses, all of a non-business nature,
provided that any principal building used therefor shall be located not less than forty
(40) feet from any other lot in any Residence District.
(4) Private non-business recreational uses and facilities other than swimming pools may
be permitted if specifically authorized by the Plan Commission based upon a finding
that the intent of residential zoning shall be preserved.
(5) Community living arrangements for eight (8) or fewer persons.
(c) Conditional Uses.
(1) Churches.
(2) Schools, colleges or universities conducted not for profit and not including private
music, dancing, business or vocational schools.
(3) Libraries, museums, community buildings.
(4) Community living arrangements for nine (9) to fifteen (15) persons.
(d) Building Height Limitations. Not to exceed thirty (30) feet.
(e) Building Site Area Required. The minimum lot or building site area shall be ten thousand
(10,000) square feet. The minimum frontage shall be seventy-five (75) feet. No building
shall occupy in excess of thirty-five percent (35%) of the area of an interior lot, nor in excess
of forty percent (40%) of the area of a corner lot. Accessory buildings may not exceed ten
percent (10%) of the area of an interior or a corner lot.
(f) Front Yard Requirements. No building or other structure shall be erected or structurally
altered whose front wall is closer than thirty-five (35) feet to a street line or front lot line. If
the property is unplatted and no street or lot line is of record, then no building shall be
erected or structurally altered whose front wall is nearer than sixty-five (65) feet to the
centerline of the street or highway upon which the building site fronts.
(g) Side Yard Requirements. There shall be a side yard on each side of the building:
(1) For a building with an attached garage, on all sides, a yard of not less than ten (10)
feet.
(2) For a building where there is a detached garage, on the north or west side, a yard of
not less than ten (10) feet and, on the south or east side, a yard of not less than
twenty (20) feet.
(h) Rear Yard Requirements. There shall be a rear yard of not less than forty (40) feet.
(i) Population Density Limitations. No building shall be erected or structurally altered on a
lot which provides less than five thousand (5,000) square feet of land area per family or
housekeeping unit and less than forty (40) feet of lot width per building for each family or
housekeeping unit.
SEC. 8-3-6 R-2 RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
(a) Definition and Purpose. The intent of the R-2 Residence District is to consist mainly of
single family dwelling units on lots slightly large than one third acre. Two family
construction is permitted on main arterials and streets along section lines as a conditional
use.
(b) Permitted Uses.
(1) Single-family dwellings.
(2) Public parks, playgrounds, recreational buildings and grounds; golf courses, country
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-3-6
clubs, tennis courts and similar recreational uses, all of a non-business nature,
provided that any principal building used therefor shall be located not less than forty
(40) feet from any other lot in any Residence District.
(c) Conditional Uses.
(1) Churches.
(2) Schools, colleges or universities conducted not for profit and not including private
music, dancing, business or vocational schools.
(3) Libraries, museums, community buildings.
(4) Private non-business recreational uses and facilities, other than swimming pools,
may be permitted if specifically authorized by the Plan Commission based upon a
finding that the intent of residential zoning shall be preserved.
(5) Two (2) family dwellings.
a. The Plan Commission may permit the construction of new two (2) family
dwellings or the conversion of existing residences or buildings to two (2)
family dwellings on lots abutting federal, state or county trunk highways, and
on lots abutting those traffic arteries running along quarter section and
section lines in either north-south or east-west directions. The height,
building site area and coverage and required yards for single-family dwelling
in this district shall also apply to two (2) family dwellings where sanitary
sewers are available to service the lot. Attached or detached accessory
buildings may be provided on the lot for all new construction to house at
least one (1) car per unit.
b. The following criteria and any other criteria the Plan Commission deems
appropriate shall be evaluated in the determination to grant or deny:
1. The zoning in effect in the area abutting or in the immediate
neighborhood of the proposed construction.
2. Existing uses on the land in the immediate neighborhood of the
proposed construction.
3. The architectural design of the proposed building and its acceptability
with the existing architectural character of the neighborhood
considering building height, exterior architecture and building
elevations.
4. Location of the proposed residence or addition on the lot and its
relationship to adjacent and abutting buildings and properties.
5. Abutting street actually functions as a major traffic artery.
6. Proximity to the other two (2) family residences, multi-family
residences and business or industrial uses.
(6) Community living arrangements for nine (9) to fifteen (15) persons.
(7) Radio stations provided that buildings in which such uses are housed shall be located
on lots not less than twenty (20) acres in size, abut two arterial streets and adjacent to
P-1 Parks and Institutional District.
(d) Building Height Limitations. Not to exceed thirty (30) feet.
(e) Building Site Area Required. The minimum lot or building site area shall be fifteen
thousand (15,000) square feet. The minimum frontage shall be ninety (90) feet. No
building shall occupy in excess of thirty-five percent (35%) of the area of an interior lot, nor
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-3-7
in excess of forty percent (40%) of the area of a corner lot. Accessory buildings may not
exceed ten percent (10%) of the area of an interior or a corner lot.
(f) Front Yard Requirements. No building or other structure shall be erected or structurally
altered whose front wall is closer than forty-five (45) feet to a street or front lot line. If the
property is unplatted and no street or lot line is of record, then no building shall be erected or
structurally altered whose front wall is nearer than ninety (90) feet to the centerline of the
street or highway upon which the building site fronts.
(g) Side Yard Requirements. There shall be a side yard on each side of the building:
(1) For a building with an attached garage, a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet on
the north or west and fifteen (15) feet on the south or east.
(2) For a building where there is a detached garage, on the north or west side, a yard of
not less than ten (10) feet and, on the south or east side, a yard of not less than
twenty-five (25) feet.
(h) Rear Yard Requirements. There shall be a rear yard of not less than forty (40) feet.
SEC. 8-3-7 R-3 RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
(a) Definition and Purpose. The intent of the R-3 Residence District is to be restrictive to
single family dwelling units. The minimum lot size of slightly less than one half acre
provides for a spacious residential neighborhood.
(b) Permitted Uses.
(1) Single-family dwellings.
(2) Public parks, playgrounds, recreational buildings and grounds; golf courses, country
clubs, tennis courts and similar recreational uses, all of a non-business nature,
provided that any principal building used therefor shall be located not less than forty
(40) feet from any other lot in any Residence District.
(c) Conditional Uses.
(1) Churches.
(2) Schools, colleges or universities conducted not for profit and not including private
music, dancing, business or vocational schools.
(3) Libraries, museums, community buildings.
(4) Private non-business recreational uses and facilities, other than swimming pools,
may be permitted if specifically authorized by the Plan Commission based upon a
finding that the spirit of residential zoning shall be preserved.
(5) Community living arrangements for nine (9) to fifteen (15) persons.
(d) Building Height Limitations. Not to exceed thirty (30) feet.
(e) Building Site Area Required. The minimum lot or building site area shall be twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet. The minimum frontage shall be one hundred (100) feet. No
building shall occupy in excess of thirty-five percent (35%) of the rear of an interior lot, nor
in excess of forty percent (40%) of the area of a corner lot. Accessory buildings may not
exceed ten percent (10%) of the area of an interior lot or corner lot.
(f) Front Yard Requirements. No building or other structure shall be erected or structurally
altered whose front wall is closer than sixty (60) feet to a street line or front lot line. If the
property is unplatted and no street or lot line is on record, then no building shall be erected
or structurally altered whose front wall is nearer than ninety (90) feet to the centerline of the
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-3-8
street or highway upon which the building site fronts.
(g) Side Yard Requirements. There shall be a side yard on each side of the building:
(1) For a building with an attached garage, on all sides, a yard of not less than fifteen
(15) feet.
(2) For a building where there is a detached garage, on the north or west side, a yard of
not less than fifteen (15) feet and, on the south or east side, a yard of not less than
thirty (30) feet.
(h) Rear Yard Requirements. There shall be a rear yard of not less than forty (40) feet.
SEC. 8-3-8 R-4 RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
(a) Definition and Purpose. The intent of R-4 Residence District is to provide for multi-family
developments, (three or more dwelling units per building), as a conditional use. Other
private and public recreational uses and residential facilities may be permitted.
(b) Permitted Uses.
(1) Public parks, playgrounds, recreational buildings and grounds; golf courses, country
clubs, tennis courts and similar recreational uses, all of a non-business nature,
provided that any principal building used therefor shall be located not less than forty
(40) feet from any other lot in any Residence District.
(c) Conditional Uses.
(1) Private clubs, fraternities, lodges, excepting those the major activity of which is a
service customarily carried on as a business, provided that buildings in which such
uses are housed shall be located at least forty (40) feet from any other lot in any
Residence District. At least one (1) automobile off-street parking space for every
one hundred (100) square feet of floor area shall be provided with no portion of said
paved parking area closer than twenty (20) feet to any other lot in any Residence
District, and said twenty (20) feet shall be landscaped and maintained in an attractive
manner.
(2) Convalescent homes, homes for the aged and rest homes, subject to licensing by the
State Board of Health and designed for the care and treatment of the ill, the aged or
the infirm, but shall not include institutions for the care and treatment of contagious
or infectious diseases, of drug addition, alcoholism, epilepsy, insanity or feeble
mindedness. Provided, further, that buildings in which such uses are housed shall be
located forty (40) feet from any other lot in any Residence District. At least one (1)
automobile off-street parking space for every two (2) beds planned for patients shall
be provided with no portion of said paved parking area closer than twenty (20) feet
to any other lot in any Residence District, and said twenty (20) feet shall be
landscaped and maintained in an attractive manner.
(3) Multi-family dwellings for more than two (2) families or housekeeping units
constructed of brick, split-rock, stone or other acceptable material so as to minimize
exterior maintenance problems and designed with staggered studding, woven
insulation, acoustical materials, separate plumbing stacks or other acceptable means
of reducing the level of noise transmitted between individual units to a significant
degree.
(4) Planned residential development projects pursuant to Chapter 4.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-3-8
(5) Funeral homes provided that buildings in which such uses are housed shall be located
at least forty (40) feet from any other lot in any Residence District.
(6) Development projects for the elderly may be permitted on tracts of land containing at
least two (2) acres, provided the proposed residential development will not adversely
affect adjacent properties and is reviewed under the procedures outlined in Chapter
4.
(7) Private non-business recreational uses and facilities, other than swimming pools,
may be permitted if specifically authorized by the Plan Commission based upon a
finding that the spirit of residential zoning shall be preserved.
(8) Churches, provided that buildings in which such uses are housed shall be located
at least forty (40) feet from any other lot in any Residence District. At least one
(1) automobile off-street parking space for every one hundred (100) feet of floor
area shall be provided with no portion of said paved parking area closer than
twenty (20) feet from any other lot in any Residence District, and said twenty (20)
feet shall be landscaped and maintained in an attractive manner.
(d) Building Height Limitations. Not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet.
(e) Building Site Area Required. The minimum lot or building site area shall be ten thousand
(10,000) square feet. The minimum lot width shall be eighty (80) feet. No building or
combination of buildings shall occupy in excess of thirty percent (30%) of the area of the lot,
excluding all of the area within street rights-of-way. No building shall be erected or
structurally altered on a lot which provides no less than two thousand five hundred (2,500)
square feet of land for each efficiency or and three thousand five
hundred (3,500) square feet of land area of each unit with two (2) or more bedrooms. If
sanitary sewers are not available to service the site, the applicant shall provide percolation
tests to provide the capabilities of the soil to serve the intended use.
(f) Off-Street Parking and Buffering Areas. Off street parking areas, excluding necessary
access drives, but including maneuvering areas, shall not encroach into the required front
setback for interior and corner lots and not into the required side street setback for corner
lots. Two (2) off-street parking stalls shall be provided for each residential unit with the
stalls for each unit for the sole use of occupants of the buildings or guests thereto. The
Building Board may require that off-street parking areas for multiple-family dwellings or
other conditional uses be screened from abutting properties located in residence districts by a
buffering area or by a solid fence or masonry wall of acceptable design and material. The
off-street parking areas and access drives for all conditional uses shall be surfaced to
conform to
Board of Public Works' specifications so as to provide a durable and dustless
surface satisfactorily drained. Prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit, the above
improvements must have been completed or a surety filed to guarantee to the Village that
these improvements will be installed within one (1) year of occupancy.
(g) Front Yard Requirements. No building or other structure shall be erected or structurally
altered whose front wall is closer than thirty-five (35) feet to a street line or front lot line. If
the property is unplatted and no street or lot line is of record, then no building shall be
erected or structurally altered whose front wall is nearer than seventy (70) feet to the
centerline of the street or highway upon which the building site fronts.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-3-9
(h) Side Yard Requirements. There shall be a side yard of twenty (20) feet on each side of the
building.
(i) Rear Yard Requirements. There shall be a rear yard of not less than forty (40) feet.
Reference: Ordinance 01-14
SEC. 8-3-9 B-1 SHOPPING CENTER DISTRICT.
(a) Definition and Purpose. The intent of the B-1 Shopping Center District is to provide for
groupings of retail and customer service establishments in a shopping center setting. The
district promotes on-site parking for customer automobiles combined with a pedestrianoriented
shopping environment.
(b) Permitted Uses. Subject to the provisions of Sec. 8-2-2(a)(1).
(1) Permitted uses in this district include large general merchandise stores, food stores,
apparel and accessory stores, drug stores, department stores, gift shops, personal
services, banks/savings and loan institutions, restaurants, offices for insurance
agents, accountants, dentists, doctors, lawyers, chiropractors, parking lots, personal
service shops, clinics, studios, tailor shops, clothing cleaning and pressing stores
(provided no cleaning or pressing equipment is kept on the premises), beauty shops,
utility offices, contractors’ offices (no yards), manufacturers’ representatives, real
estate agencies, and other professional and similar offices.
(2) Signs, or other advertising medium complying with this Code of Ordinances.
(3) Any other business enterprise, which is similar in character to those listed in
Subsection (b)(1) above, but the following types of uses shall not be permitted:
a. Amusement, outdoor.
b. Automobile wrecking or automobile dismantling or selling of used
automobile parts, and automobile body shops.
c. Bakeries employing more than seven (7) persons on the premises.
d. Bottling works.
e. Building material storage yards.
f. Carpet, rug or bag cleaning establishment.
g. Coal, coke, lumber or wood yards.
h. Commercial dairies.
i. Commercial dog kennels for propagating or raising or boarding dogs; rabbits,
foxes, minks, goats and other animal propagating or raising or boarding
farms.
j. Commercial production of eggs, or hatching, raising, fattening or butchering
of chickens, turkeys or other poultry or fowl on a commercial scale. Any
poultry house or houses on any building site area having an aggregate floor
area of four hundred fifty (450) square feet or more shall be considered to be
a commercial poultry or fowl house under this Section.
k. Contractor's plant or storage yard.
l. Clothes cleaning stores with more than four (4) persons, including owners
working in the business.
m. Farms for the raising, feed or fattening of hogs for market on a wholesale or
commercial basis.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-3-9
n. Ice plant or storage house of more than twenty-five (25) ton capacity.
o. Laundry employing more than four (4) persons on the premises.
p. Live poultry or fowl market.
q. Machine shops.
r. Sheet metal or tin shops or furnace works.
s. Stone yard or monument works.
t. Stone dressing of paint grinding stones.
u. Storage of iron, bottles, rags or junk.
v. Trucking contractor's garage or storage yard.
w. Any kind of manufacture or treatment other than the manufacture or
treatment of products clearly incidental to the conduct of a retail business
conducted on the premises.
x. All uses excluded from the M-1 Light Manufacturing District.
y. Outdoor theaters.
(c) Conditional Uses.
(1) Private clubs, fraternities and lodges.
(2) Drive-in uses. In determining the application for drive-in use, the Plan Commission
shall consider the width of and the speed limits on the street or streets abutting the
property; the proximity of other drive-in uses; the number of driveways existing and
proposed in the immediate vicinity; the proximity of public and semi-public
buildings, institutions, churches, hospitals, sanitariums, schools and colleges; the
effect and control of certain aspects of the proposed operations such as lighting,
litter, vehicle lights, loitering, etc., on adjacent properties; and any other factor which
the Plan Commission deems pertinent. In addition, the following requirements shall
apply to the proposed driveways and areas to be used by vehicles; no curb cuts or
driveways shall be located within ten (10) feet of an adjoining property line as
extended to the curb; driveways shall be at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from
any other driveway and one hundred fifteen (115) feet from the point of intersection
of the two (2) street lines on a corner lot; a raised curb of at least six (6) inches in
height shall be erected along all the street property lines except for driveway
openings; and the entire area used by vehicles shall be paved with permanent surface
conforming to specifications of the Board of Public Works.
(3) Parking and storage lots. The requirements for curb cuts and driveways under
Subsection (c)(2) above shall be applicable.
(4) Mechanical garages. The requirements for curb cuts and driveways under
Subsection (c)(2) above shall be applicable.
(5) Undertaking establishments with attached living quarters.
(6) Veterinarian offices and/or animal hospitals.
(7) Building supply stores.
(8) Any building or use which is a permitted use or a conditional use in the B-1
Shopping Center District where the size of an enclosed structure used for the
permitted or conditional use is fifty thousand (50,000) square feet or greater
in area. This provision shall apply as an overlay over the entire zoning lot
upon which said use or structure is located. This provision shall also apply
as a requirement for any single use or multiple uses located within one (1)
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-3-10
enclosed structure or two (2) or more attached structures, if that structure or
attached structures exceeds fifty thousand (50,000) square feet in area.] [Any
building or use which is a permitted use or a conditional use in the B-1
Shopping Center District where the size of an enclosed structure used for the
permitted or conditional use(s) for any single use or multiple uses located
within one (1) enclosed structure is fifty thousand (50,000) square feet or
greater in area, and seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet or greater in
area for the permitted or conditional use(s) for any single use or multiple uses
located within two (2) or more attached structures. This provision shall apply
as an overlay over the entire zoning lot upon which said use or structure is
located.] All such uses shall follow the requirements set forth under the
provisions of Section 8-6-14 of the Village of Hales Corners Zoning Code.
(9) Churches.
(d) Building Height Limitations. Not to exceed fifty (50) feet.
(e) Building Site Area Required. The minimum site development area shall be two (2) acres.
Minimum site frontage shall be two hundred (200) feet. Lots shall provide sufficient area for
the principal structure and its accessory structures, off-street parking, loading areas, and all
required yards.
(f) Front Yard Requirements. For public safety and convenience, no building or other
structure shall be erected or structurally altered whose front wall is closer than fifty (50) feet
to the street line or front lot line.
(g) Side Yard Requirements.
(1) On corner lots, no building or other structure shall be erected or structurally altered
whose side wall is closer than fifty (50) feet from the side street line or side lot line.
(2) Ten (10) foot side yards are required for buildings to be used for business purposes
for other than corner lots. In such cases, however, where any portion of the local
business districts abuts a residential district, a side yard requirement adjoining such
residential district of twenty-five (25) feet shall be required, which said twenty-five
(25) feet shall not be used for driveway or parking purposes.
(h) Rear Yard Requirements. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty
five (25) feet. Accessory buildings with an entrance or exit to an alley shall be placed not
nearer than five (5) feet to the alley.
Reference: Ordinance 04-07, Ordinance 05-18
SEC. 8-3-10 B-2 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
(a) Definition and Purpose. The intent of the B-2 General Business District is to provide
orderly development of individual general retail sales and service establishments. the district
encourages the use of shared entrances and parking lots. Drive-in and drive-through uses are
not permitted.
(b) Permitted Uses. Subject to the provisions of Section 8-2-2(a)(1).
(1) Small customer service establishments, retail stores, restaurants (no drive-in
facilities), and shops.
(2) Offices for insurance agents, accountants, dentists, doctors, lawyers, chiropractors,
parking lots, personal service shops, clinics, studios, tailor shops, clothes cleaning
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-3-11
and pressing stores (providing no cleaning or pressing equipment is kept on the
premises), beauty shops, utility offices, contractors' offices (no yards),
manufacturers' representatives, real estate agencies and other professional and similar
offices, financial institutions.
(3) Signs, or other advertising medium complying with this Code of Ordinances.
(c) Conditional Use. Financial Institutions with drive-in facilities, veterinary services, child
day care centers, building supply stores, boat sales and recycling drop off centers are subject
to the provisions of Chapter 6.
(d) Building Height Limitations. Not to exceed thirty five (35) feet.
(e) Building Site Area Required. The minimum business site area shall be seven thousand two
hundred (7,200) square feet. A minimum street frontage of sixty (60) feet shall be provided.
(f) Front Yard Requirements. For public safety and convenience, no building or other
structure shall be erected or structurally altered whose front wall is closer than twenty (20)
feet to the street line or front lot line.
(g) Side Yard Requirements.
(1) On corners lots, no building or other structure shall be erected or structurally altered
whose side wall is closer than twenty (20) feet from the side street line or side street
lot line.
(2) For other than corner lots for buildings to be used for business purposes and for
mixed purposes, on all sides, a yard of not less than ten (10) feet.
(h) Rear Yard Requirements. There shall be a rear yard not less than twenty five (25) feet.
Accessory buildings with an entrance or exit to an alley shall be placed no nearer than five
(5) feet to the alley.
SEC. 8-3-11 B-3 AUTOMOBILE ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
(a) Definition and Purpose. The intent of the B-3 Automobile Oriented Business District is to
provide appropriate locations for drive-in and drive-through uses and those uses which are
directly associated to the automobile and not a pedestrian-oriented shopping environment.
(b) Permitted Uses.
(1) None.
(c) Conditional Uses. Automobile-oriented retail sales and services, including automotive sales
and service, car washes, gasoline stations, drive-in banking and drive-in restaurants subject
to the provisions of Chapter 6.
(d) Building Height Limitations. Not to exceed thirty five (35) feet in height.
(e) Building Site Area. The minimum business site area shall be fifteen thousand (15,000)
square feet. A minimum street frontage of one hundred (100) feet shall be provided.
(f) Front Yard Requirements. For public safety and convenience, no building or other
structure shall be erected or structurally altered whose front wall is closer than forty (40) feet
from the street line or front lot line.
(g) Side Yard Requirements.
(1) On corner lots, no building or other structure shall be erected or structurally altered
whose side wall is closer than forty (40) feet from the side street line or side street lot
line.
(2) For other than corner lots for building to be used for business purposes, on all sides,
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-3-12
a yard of not less than ten (10) feet.
(h) Rear Yard Requirements. There shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty five (25) feet.
Accessory buildings with an entrance or exit to an alley shall be placed no nearer than five
(5) feet to the alley.
SEC. 8-3-12 B-4 OFFICE AND PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.
(a) Definition and Purpose. The intent of the B-4 Office and Professional Service District is to
provide for individual or grouped office and professional business service uses where
compatible with surrounding uses.
(b) Permitted Uses. Subject to the provisions of Section 8-2-2(a)(1).
(1) Offices for insurance agents, accountants, dentists, doctors, lawyers, chiropractors
and chiropodists, personal service shops, clinics, studios, tailor shops, beauty shops,
real estate agencies, travel services, consulting services, funeral homes, and other
professional and similar offices, financial institutions.
(c) Conditional Uses. Veterinary services, contractors offices, laboratories, and child day care
centers.
(d) Building Height Limitations. Not to exceed fifty (50) feet.
(e) Building Site Area Requirement. The minimum business site area shall be seven thousand
two hundred (7,200) square feet. A minimum street frontage of sixty (60) feet shall be
provided.
(f) Front Yard Requirements. For public safety and convenience, no building or other
structure shall be erected or structurally altered whose front wall is closer than twenty (20)
feet to the street line or front property line.
(g) Side Yard Requirements.
(1) On corner lots, no building or other structure shall be erected or structurally altered
whose side wall is closer than twenty (20) feet from the side street line or side street
lot line.
(2) For other than corner lots for buildings to be used for business purposes and for
mixed purposes, on all sides, a yard of not less than ten (10) feet.
(h) Rear Yard Requirements. There shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty five (25) feet.
Accessory buildings with an entrance or exit to an alley shall be placed no nearer than five
(5) feet to the alley.
SEC. 8-3-13 M-1 LIGHT MANUFACTURING
(a) Definition and Purpose. The intent of the M-1 Light Manufacturing District is to provide
for warehousing, light manufacturing, and construction-related industries.
(b) Permitted Uses. Subject to the provisions of Sec. 8-2-2(a)(1).
(1) Light manufacturing, processing, carpenter shops, tool and die, building supply
yards, bakeries, laundries, cleaning and dyeing plants, bottling plants, warehouses
and similar uses.
(2) Any other trade, industry or use that is not obnoxious or offensive by reason of odor,
dust, smoke, gas or noise, but the following types of uses are prohibited:
a. Acid manufacture.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-3-13
b. Auto wrecking or dismantling, commercial junk or scrap iron storage.
c. Blast furnace, foundry.
d. Boiler works.
e. Brewery.
f. Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris manufacture.
g. Coke ovens, lime kiln.
h. Crematory, other than a crematory located in a cemetery.
i. Electric central power stations or bulk substations.
j. Forage plants.
k. Gasoline or oil storage above ground.
l. Glue manufacture, fat, grease, lard or tallow rendering or refining.
m. Gravel pits and stone quarries.
n. Incineration or reduction of garbage, dead animals.
o. Manufacture of acetylene gas, acid, ammonia, rockwool, fiberglass
insulation, asbestos, asphalt or products thereof, bleaching powder, graphite,
celluloid, concrete ready-mix plants, chlorine or products thereof, clay brick,
clay tile, coal tar or products thereof, dextrine, disinfectant, emery cloth or
sandpaper, explosives, fertilizer, gas, gelatine, glucose, lime or products
thereof, linoleum, matches, oil cloth, paint, varnish or shellac, paper or pulp,
perfume, poison, potash, printing ink, pyroglin or products thereof,
sauerkraut, soda compounds, tar or waterproofing products, turpentine,
vinegar, yeast.
p. Outdoor theaters.
q. Outdoor amusement places.
r. Residential dwellings or apartments.
s. Rolling mill.
t. Salt works.
u. Soap works.
v. Stockyards or slaughter of animals, tannery.
w. Storage of explosives.
x. Structural steel or pipe works.
y. Sugar refining.
z. Trailer camp, trailer park or trailer lot.
(c) Conditional Use.
(1) Outside storage and laboratories.
(2) All B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4 permitted and conditional uses.
(d) Building Height Limitations. Not to exceed thirty five (35) feet.
(e) Building Site Area Required. The minimum manufacturing site area shall be ten thousand
(10,000) square feet. A minimum street frontage of seventy five (75) feet shall be provided.
(f) Front Yard Requirements. No building shall be erected or structurally altered whose front
wall is closer than (50) feet to the street line or front lot line.
(g) Side Yard Requirements.
(1) On corner lots, no building or other structure shall be erected or structurally altered
whose side wall is closer than fifty (50) feet to the side street line or side street lot
line.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-3-14
(2) No building or other structures shall be erected or structurally altered whose side
wall is closer than ten (10) feet to the side lot line.
(h) Rear Yard Requirements. No building or other structure shall be erected or structurally
altered whose rear wall is closer than twenty five (25) feet to the rear lot line.
SEC. 8-3-14 P-1 PARKS AND INSTITUTIONAL.
(a) Definition and Purpose. The intent of the P-1 Parks and Institutional District is to provide
for the outdoor recreational needs of the community and to establish areas for facilities and
operations which are of public or public-related ownership.
(b) Permitted Uses. Subject to the provisions of Section 8-2-2(a)(1).
(1) Permitted uses in this district include schools, day care centers, churches, hospitals,
nursing homes, clinics, museums, art galleries, cemeteries, lodges, public buildings,
private and public recreation and forest preserves.
(2) Woodlands, wildlife habitat, nature preserves and related scenic areas.
(c) Conditional Use.
(1) Gift shops, florists, and food service when directly associated with permitted uses.
(2) Funeral homes.
(3) Communication towers, solid waste management, and recycling facilities.
(4) Amphitheaters, amusement parks, aquariums, and other recreational uses requiring
substantial buildings or structures or intense use.
(5) Farmers’ markets, seasonal sales, or other periodic special fundraising events when
directly associated with permitted uses or community events.
(d) Building Height Limitations. Not to exceed sixty (60) feet.
(e) Building Site Area Requirements. The minimum building site area shall be ten thousand
(10,000) square feet.
(f) Front Yard Requirements. For public safety and convenience no building or other
structure shall be erected or structurally altered whose front wall is closer than thirty five
(35) feet to the street line or front property line.
(g) Side Yard Requirements.
(1) On corner lots, no building or other structure shall be erected or structurally altered
whose side wall is closer than fifty (50) feet to the side street line or side street lot
line.
(2) No building or other structures shall be erected or structurally altered whose side
wall
is closer than ten (10) feet to the side lot line.
(h) Rear Yard Requirements. No building or other structure shall be erected or structurally
altered whose rear wall is closer than forty (40) feet to the rear lot line.
Reference: Ordinance 04-03
SEC. 8-3-15 RCO - REDEVELOPMENT/CONSERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT.
(a) Definition and Purpose. The district is superimposed upon basic districts to provide certain
additional permissive uses and regulatory standards applicable thereto without disturbing the
underlying basic district regulations and zoning. The intent of the overlay district is similar
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-3-15
to that upon which conditional use grants are premised.
The RCO district is intended to be used on a limited basis in the Village in existing areas that
have been developed for decades, including structures and areas of historic value; and where
structures and uses are nearing the end of their economic life as a result of age, obsolescence
of use, irregularly shaped or insufficient lot size, the encroachment of other non-compatible
uses, poor or unsafe access for vehicles and pedestrians, and substandard or deteriorating
structures; and where conserving the remaining life of other structures and uses is hampered
by these factors; and where detailed comprehensive planning has shown that only through a
concerted and coordinated effort between local government and private ownership can a new
use and development pattern be evolved which will resolve the incompatibilities and permit
a natural and healthy renewal of the neighborhood; and where the sole use of conventional
basic zoning districts would be insufficient to resolve aforementioned use and development
problems and insufficient to address renewal efforts.
Therefore, this district permits existing uses and structures to continue, but requires all
remodeling or additions to structures, changes of use, and new development or use to be
processed under Section 8-2-2(a)(1). In addition, the Village shall consider the compatibility
with any adopted redevelopment plans and the "Land Use, Urban design, and Transportation
Plan for Selected Arterial Street Corridors" (SEWRPC, May 1993) and amendments.
Section 8-4-1
CHAPTER 4
PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay District
SEC. 8-4-1 PURPOSE OF THE PUD OVERLAY DISTRICT.
The PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay District is established to encourage and promote
improved environmental design in the Village of Hales Corners by allowing for greater freedom,
imagination and flexibility in the development of land while insuring substantial compliance to the
basic intent of the zoning ordinance and the general plan for community development. The District
allows diversification and variation in the relationship of uses, structures, open spaces and heights of
structures in developments conceived and implemented as comprehensive and cohesive, unified
projects. It is further intended to encourage more rational and economic development in regard to
public services and encourage and facilitate preservation of open land.
SEC. 8-4-2 TYPES OF PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.
This Chapter contemplates that there may be a Residential, Business, Industrial, Planned Unit
Developments and Mixed Compatible Use Developments.
SEC. 8-4-3 PHYSICAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.
(a) Minimum Total Area Requirements. Areas designated as planned unit developments shall
contain a minimum total development area as follows:
Principal Uses Minimum Area of PUD
Residential PUD 1 acre
Business PUD 1½ acres
Industrial PUD 3 acres
Mixed Compatible Use PUD 2 acres
Parks & Institutional PUD 1 ½ acres
(b) Lot Area, Lot Width, Heights and Yard Requirements. In the PUD Overlay District,
there shall be no specific lot area, lot width, height, floor area ration, yard and usable open
space requirements, but such requirements as are made a part of an approved recorded
precise development plan shall be construed to be and enforced as a part of this Chapter.
(c) Permitted Uses. Any use permitted in any of the other Districts of this Chapter may be
permitted subject to the criteria as established in Section 8-4-7 following, but such
requirements as are made a part of an approved precise development plan shall be construed
to be and enforced as a part of this Chapter.
(d) Conditional Uses. Any use allowed only as a conditional use in any of the other Districts of
this Chapter may be permitted subject to the criteria as established in Section 8-4-7
following, but such requirements as are made a part of an approved recorded precise
Section 8-4-3
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
development plan shall be, along with the recorded plan itself, construed to be and enforced
as a part of the Chapter.
(e) Single Parcel, Lot or Tract. Each PUD Overlay District shall be considered as one (1)
tract, lot or parcel, and the legal description must define said PUD as a single parcel, lot or
tract and be so recorded with the Milwaukee County Register of Deeds.
SEC. 8-4-4 SIGNS.
In the Planned Unit Development Overlay District, signs shall be permitted in accordance with the
requirements of the sign regulations of the Village, and such requirements as are made a part of an
approved recorded precise development plan shall be, along with the recorded plan itself, construed
to be and enforced as a part of this Chapter.
SEC. 8-4-5 OFF-STREET PARKING.
In the PUD Overlay District, off-street parking facilities shall be provided as set forth in an approved
recorded precise development plan which shall be, along with the recorded plan itself, construed to
be and enforced as a part of this Chapter.
SEC. 8-4-6 SUBSEQUENT LAND DIVISION.
The division of any land or lands within a planned unit development for the purpose of change or
conveyance of ownership may be accomplished pursuant to the land division/subdivision regulations
of the Village when such division is contemplated.
SEC. 8-4-7 CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL.
As a basis for determining the acceptability of a Planned Unit Development Overlay District
application to the Plan Commission and Village Board, the following criteria shall be applied to the
application for such district with specific consideration as to whether or not it is consistent with the
spirit and intent of this Chapter, is consistent with the policies of the Village development plan, has
been prepared with professional advice and guidance and produces significant benefits in terms of
environmental design:
(a) Character and Intensity of Land Use. In a Planned Unit Development Overlay District,
the uses proposed and their intensity and arrangement on the site shall be of a visual and
operation character which:
(1) Are compatible to the physical nature of the site with particular concern for
preservation of natural features, tree growth and open space.
(2) Would produce an attractive environment of sustained aesthetic and ecologic
desirability, economic stability and functional practicality compatible with the
general development plans for the area as established by the community.
(3) Would not adversely affect the anticipated provision for school or other municipal
services.
Section 8-4-7
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
(4) Would not create a traffic or parking demand incompatible with the existing or
proposed facilities to serve it.
(b) Economic Feasibility and Impact. The proponents of a Planned Unit Development
Overlay District application shall provide evidence satisfactory to the Plan Commission and
Village Board of its economic feasibility, of available adequate financing, and that it would
not adversely affect the economic prosperity of the Village or the values of surrounding
properties.
(c) Engineering Design Standards. The width of street rights-of-way, width of paving, width
and location of street or other paving, outdoor lighting, location of sewer and water lines,
provision for storm water drainage or other similar environmental engineering consideration
shall be based on standards necessary to implement the specific function in the specific
situation, provided, however, in no case shall standards be less than those necessary to insure
the public safety and welfare as determined by the Village Engineer.
(d) Preservation and Maintenance of Open Space. In a Planned Unit Development Overlay
District, adequate provisions shall be made for the permanent preservation and maintenance
of "open space" either by private reservation or dedication to the public.
(1) In the case of private reservation, the open area to be reserved shall be protected
against building development by conveying to the Village as part of the conditions
for project approval an open space easement over such open areas restricting the area
against any future building or use except as consistent with that of providing
landscaped open space for the aesthetic and recreational satisfaction of the
surrounding residences. Buildings or uses for non-business, recreational or cultural
purposes compatible with the open space objective may be permitted only where
specifically authorized as part of the development plan or, subsequently, with the
express approval of the Village Board following approval of building, site and
operational plans by the Plan Commission.
(2) The care and maintenance of such open space reservations shall be assured by
establishment of appropriate management organization for the project. The manner
of assuring maintenance and assessing such cost to individual properties shall be
included in any contractual agreement with the Village and shall be included in the
title to each property.
(3) Ownership and tax liability of private open space reservations shall be established in
a manner acceptable to the Village and made a part of the conditions of the plan
approval.
(e) Implementation Schedule. The proponents of a Planned Unit Development Overlay
District shall submit a reasonable schedule for the implementation of the development to the
satisfaction of the Village Board, including suitable provisions for assurance that each phase
could be brought to completion in a manner which would not result in an adverse effect upon
the community as a result of termination at that point.
Section 8-4-8
SEC. 8-4-8 PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS FOR A PLANNED UNIT
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT.
(a) Pre-Petition Conference. Prior to the official submission of the petition for the approval of
a Planned Unit Development Overlay District, the owner or his agent making such petition
should meet with the Plan Commission or its staff to discuss the scope and proposed nature
of the contemplated development.
(b) Petition for Approval. Following the pre-petition conference, the owner or his agent may
file a petition with the Village Administrator for approval of a Planned Unit Development
Overlay District. Such petition shall be accompanied by a review fee of Two Hundred
Dollars ($200.00). The procedure for rezoning to a Planned Unit Development Overlay
District shall be as required for any other zoning district change under this Chapter, except
that, in addition thereto, the following information shall be filed by the applicant with the
Village Administrator with the petition for rezoning:
(1) Informational Statement. A statement which sets forth the relationship of the
proposed PUD to the Village's adopted master (comprehensive land use and
thoroughfare plan) plan, neighborhood plan, or any adopted component thereof, and
the general character of and the uses to be included in the proposed PUD, including
the following information:
a. Total area to be included in the PUD, area of open space, residential density
computations, proposed number of dwelling units, population analysis,
availability of or requirements for municipal services and other similar data
pertinent to a comprehensive evaluation of the proposed development.
b. A general summary of the estimated value of structures and site
improvements costs, including landscaping and special features.
c. A general outline of the organizational structure of a property owner's or
management's association, which may be proposed to be established for the
purpose of providing any necessary private services.
d. Any proposed departures from the standards of development as set forth in
the Village zoning regulations, land subdivision requirements, other Village
regulations or administrative rules, or other universal guidelines.
e. The expected date of commencement of physical development as set forth in
the proposal and also an outline of any development staging which is
planned.
f. Appropriate statistical data on the size of the development, residential density
in the various parts of such development, ratio of land uses, percentages of
multi-family units by number of bedrooms, economic analysis of the
development, expected staging and any other plans or data required by the
Plan Commission or Village Board.
(2) A General Development Plan Including:
a. A legal description of the boundaries of the subject property included in the
proposed PUD and its relationships to surrounding properties.
b. The location of public and private roads, driveways, sidewalks and parking
Section 8-4-8
facilities.
c. The size, arrangement and location of any individual building sites and
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
proposed building groups on each individual site.
d. The location of institutional, recreational and open space areas and areas
reserved or dedicated for public uses, including schools, parks and
drainageways.
e. The type, size and location of all structures.
f. General landscape treatment.
g. The existing and proposed location of public sanitary sewer, water supply
facilities and stormwater drainage facilities.
h. The existing and proposed location of all private utilities, exterior lighting or
easements of any nature.
i. Characteristics of soils related to contemplated specific uses.
j. Existing topography on the site with contours at no greater than two (2) foot
intervals.
k. Anticipated uses of adjoining lands in regard to roads, surface water drainage
and compatibility with existing adjacent land uses.
l. If the development is to be staged, a staging plan.
m. A plan showing how the entire development can be further subdivided in the
future.
SEC. 8-4-9 BASIS FOR APPROVAL OF THE PETITION FOR PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENT
(a) Requirements. The Plan Commission, in making recommendations for approval, and the
Village Board, in making a determination approving a petition for planned unit development,
shall find as follows:
(1) That the applicable physical requirements made and provided in Section 8-4-3 will
be met;
(2) That the requirements as to public services and facilities made and provided in
Section 8-4-7 will be met.
(b) Proposed Construction Schedule. The Plan Commission and Village Board, in making
their respective recommendation and determination, shall consider the reasonableness of the
proposed construction schedule and any staging plan for the physical development of the
proposed PUD, commencement of the physical development within one (1) year of approval
being deemed reasonable.
(c) Residential PUD, Considerations. The Plan Commission and Village Board, in making
their respective recommendation and determination as to a proposed residential planned unit
development, shall further consider whether:
(1) Such development will create an attractive residential environment of sustained
desirability and economic stability, including structures in relation to terrain,
consideration of safe pedestrian flow, ready access to recreation space and
coordination with overall plans for the community.
Section 8-4-9
(2) The total net residential density within the planned unit development will be
compatible with the Village master plan (comprehensive land use and thoroughfare
plan), neighborhood plan, or components thereof, and shall be compatible with the
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
density of the district wherein located.
(3) Structure types will be generally compatible with other structural types permitted in
the underlying basic use district.
(4) Provision has been made for the installation of adequate public facilities and the
continuing maintenance and operation of such facilities if privately owned.
(5) Provision has been made for adequate, continuing fire and police protection.
(6) The population density of the development will or will not have an adverse effect
upon the community's capacity to provide needed school or other municipal service
facilities.
(7) Adequate guarantee is provided for permanent preservation of open space areas as
shown on the general development plan as approved either by private reservation and
maintenance or by dedication to the public.
(d) Business PUD, Parks and Institutional PUD, Considerations. The Plan Commission and
Village Board, in making their respective recommendation and determination as to a
proposed business planned unit development, shall further consider whether:
(1) The economic practicality of the proposed development can be justified.
(2) The proposed development will be served by off-street parking and truck service
facilities in accordance with this Chapter.
(3) The proposed development shall be adequately provided with, and shall not impose
any undue burden on, public services and facilities such as fire and police protection,
street maintenance, water, sanitary sewer and storm water drainage and maintenance
of public areas.
(4) The locations of entrances and exists have been designated to prevent unnecessary
interference with the safe and efficient movement of traffic on surrounding streets
and that the development will not create any adverse effect upon the general traffic
pattern of the surrounding neighborhood.
(5) The architectural design, landscaping, control of lighting and general site
development will result in an attractive and harmonious service area compatible with
and not adversely affecting the property values of the surrounding neighborhood.
(e) Industrial PUD, Considerations. The Plan Commission and Village Board, in making their
respective recommendations and determination as to a proposed industrial planned unit
development, shall further consider whether:
(1) The operational character and physical plan arrangement of buildings will be
compatible with the latest in performance standards and industrial development
design and will not result in an adverse effect upon the property values of the
surrounding neighborhood.
(2) The proposed development shall be adequately provided with and shall not impose
any undue burden on public services and facilities, such as fire and police protection,
street maintenance, water, sanitary sewer and storm water drainage and maintenance
of public areas.
Section 8-4-9
(3) The proposed development will include provision for off-street parking and truck
service areas in accordance with this Chapter and will be adequately served by easyaccess
rail and/or arterial highway facilities.
(4) The proposed development is properly related to the total transportation system of
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
the community and will not result in an adverse effect on the safety and efficiency of
the public streets.
(f) Mixed Use PUD, Considerations. The Plan Commission and Village Board, in making
their respective recommendation and determination as to a proposed mixed use planned unit
development, shall further consider whether:
(1) The proposed mixture of uses produces a unified composite which is compatible with
the zoning district and which, as a total development entity, is compatible with the
surrounding neighborhood.
(2) The various types of uses conform to the general requirements as hereinbefore set
forth, applicable to projects of such use and character.
(3) The proposed development shall be adequately provided with and shall not impose
any undue burden on public services and facilities, such as fire and police protection,
street maintenance, water, sanitary sewer and storm water drainage and maintenance
of public areas.
SEC. 8-4-10 RECORDING AND IMPLEMENTATION PLAN. Before any building permit
shall be issued, the applicant and the owner shall enter into an appropriate contract with the Village
to guarantee the implementation of the development according to the terms and conditions
established as a part of the Specific Implementation Plan. The Village shall have the right, if
deemed appropriate, to require the inclusion of a performance bond satisfactory to the Village
Attorney. Such contract shall be recorded by the developer in the Milwaukee County Register of
Deeds’ office within ten (10) days after its execution. Any subsequent change of use of any lot or
parcel of land shall be subject to the procedure provided in Sections 8-4-8 and 8-4-9 above and, in
this subsection, before the use is changed. Any subsequent change of or addition to or modification
of the plans shall be submitted for approval to the Village Board following review by the Plan
Commission and if the Village Board determines that such change, addition, or modification
constitutes a substantial alteration of the original plans or plans previously approved, the procedure
provided in Sections 8-4-8 and 8-4-9 above and, in this subsection, shall be required before the plans
are so altered. If the Village Board determines that such proposed change, addition, or modification
does not constitute a substantial alternation of the original or previously approved plans, the Village
Board may act upon such proposal forthwith. A determination as to whether any alteration is
substantial shall be made upon the consideration of the proposed change, addition, or modification to
plans in relation to the scope of the General Plan and original Purpose of and applicable
Considerations given to the previously approved Planned Unit Development under this Chapter.
Any such subsequent change of use or addition to or modification of plans may only be made upon
the favorable vote of a majority of all the members of the Village Board.
(a) Recording. Upon final approval of the application and adoption of a zoning change to the
Planned Unit Development Overlay district by the Village Board, the building, site and
operational plans for the development, as approved, as well as all other commitment and
Section 8-4-10
contractual agreements with the Village offered or required with regard to components,
project value, character and other factors pertinent to an assurance that the proposed
development will be carried out basically as presented in the official submittal plans shall be
recorded by the developer within ten (10) days in the Milwaukee County Register of Deeds'
office. Unless and until all of said plans and documents have been recorded, no building
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
permit shall be issued for any construction within said Planned Unit Development Overlay
District. Detailed construction and engineering plans need not necessarily be completed at
the time the zoning is approved, but the approval and recording of the above plans shall be
conditioned upon the subsequent submittal and approval of more specific and detailed plans
as the development progresses.
(b) Specific Implementation Plan After Approval of Zoning. The applicant shall file with the
Plan Commission, through the Zoning Administrator:
(1) A precise plan of development.
(2) Proof of financial capability.
(3) A scale map of the area.
(4) A final plat of the entire development showing detailed lot layout and the intended
use of each lot or parcel of land, public dedications, public and private streets,
driveways, walkways and parking facilities.
(5) The location and treatment of open space areas and recreational or other special
amenities.
(6) The arrangement of building groups, other than single-family residences and all final
landscape plans.
(7) Architectural drawings and sketches illustrating the design and character of proposed
structures.
(8) Location of all utility installations.
(9) A development schedule indicating:
a. The approximate date when construction of the project can be expected to
begin;
b. The stages in which the project will be built and the approximate date when
construction of each stage can be expected to begin;
c. The anticipated rate of development;
d. The approximate date when the development of each of the stages will be
completed; and
e. The area and location of open space that will be provided at each stage.
(10) Agreements, bylaws, provisions or covenants which govern the organizational
structure, use, maintenance and continued protection of the Planned Unit
Development and any of its common services, open areas or other facilities.
(11) Any other plans, documents or schedules required by the Plan Commission or
Village Board.
(c) Development Contract. Before any building permit shall be issued, the applicant and the
owner shall enter into an appropriate contract with the Village to guarantee the
implementation of the development according to the terms and conditions established as a
part of the Specific Implementation Plan. The village shall have the right, if deemed
Section 8-4-10
appropriate, to require the inclusion of a performance bond satisfactory to the Village
Attorney. Such contract shall be recorded by the developer in the Milwaukee County
Register of Deeds' office within ten (10) days after its execution. Any subsequent change of
use of any lot or parcel of land or addition or modification of the plans shall first be
submitted for approval to the Plan Commission and if, in the opinion of the Plan
Commission, such change or modification constitutes a substantial alteration of the original
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
plans, the procedure provided in Sections 8-4-8 and 8-4-9 above and, in this Subsection,
shall be required before the use is changed or the plans modified. If, in the opinion of the
Plan Commission, such change or modification does not constitute a substantial alteration of
the original plans and if such change or modification is recommended by the Plan
Commission, the change or modification may be made without the approval of the Village
Board.
Reference: Ordinance 02-13; 02-17
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-5-1
CHAPTER 5
Floodplain-Wetland Code
SEC. 8-5-1 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, CONCURRENT JURISDICTION,
FINDING OF FACT, STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
(a) Statutory Authorization. This Ordinance for floodplain-wetland protection is adopted
pursuant to the authorization contained in Sections 61.35, 61.351, 62.23 and 87.30 of the
Wis. Stats.
(b) Controlling Maps.
The boundaries of all floodplain districts are designated as floodplains or A-Zones on the
maps listed below and the revisions in the Village of Hales Corners Floodplain Appendix.
Any change to the base flood elevations (BFE) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) or on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) must be reviewed and approved by the DNR and FEMA
before it is effective. No changes to regional flood elevations (RFE’s) on non-FEMA maps
shall be effective until approved by the DNR. These maps and revisions are on file at the
Village Hall in the Village of Hales Corners. If more than one map or revision is referenced,
the most restrictive information shall apply.
(1) United States Geological Survey Quadrangle Maps.
(2) Wisconsin Wetland Inventory Maps stamped "Final" on February 22, 1989.
(3) Milwaukee County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), panel numbers
(55079C0129E, 55079C0133E, 55079C0134E, 55079C0137E, 55079C0141E,
55079C0142E), dated September 26, 2008; with corresponding profiles that are
based on the Milwaukee County Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated (September,
2008), volume numbers (55079CV001A, 55079CV002A, 55079CV003A,
55079CV004A, 55079CV005A) as amended by a certain FEMA Letter of Map
Revision (LOMR) dated December 14, 2009 (and effective on March 22, 2010) from
FEMA Case No. 10-05-1009X (amending Panel No. 55079C0133E).
(c) Finding of Fact. The uncontrolled development or use of the floodplain, rivers, streams or
wetlands of the Village of Hales Corners, Wisconsin, adversely affects the public health,
safety, convenience and general welfare and impairs the tax base of this Village.
(d) Statement of Purpose. The purpose of these rules is to provide a uniform basis for the
preparation, implementation and administration of sound floodplain-wetland regulations for
all Hales Corners floodplain-wetlands to:
(1) Protect the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare.
(2) Minimize expenditures of public monies for costly flood control projects by
maintaining storm and flood water storage capacity.
(3) Minimize rescue and relief efforts, generally undertaken at the expense of the general
public.
(4) Minimize business interruptions.
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain such as water mains, sewer
lines, streets and bridges.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-5-1
(6) Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in floodplains.
(7) Discourage the victimization of unwary land and home buyers.
(8) Prohibit certain uses detrimental to the floodplain-wetland area.
(9) Prevent and control water pollution by preserving wetlands which filter or store
sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that will otherwise drain
into waters of the state.
(10) Protect fish spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life and wildlife by preserving wetlands
and other fish and aquatic habitat.
(11) Prevent increases in regional flood heights which could increase damage during
floods and which may result in conflicts or litigation between property owners.
(12) Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by restricting the removal of natural
shoreland cover and controlling shoreland-wetland excavation, filling and other earth
moving activities.
SEC. 8-5-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(a) Areas to be Regulated. Areas regulated by this Ordinance include all lands within the
corporate limits of the Village of Hales Corners, Wisconsin, that would be inundated by the
"regional flood" or “base flood” defined in the "Definitions" Section 8-5-7 of this Chapter.
Base flood elevations are derived from the flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study.
Regional flood elevations may be derived from other studies. Areas covered by the base
flood are identified as A-Zones on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
(b) District Boundaries. The general floodplain-wetland district shall include: All lands lying
within the A-Zones as shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map which is based on
Flood Insurance Study Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps showing the river(s) and its
tributaries in Hales Corners, Wisconsin, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) dated June 15, 1988, and approved by the Department of Natural
Resources; and "Final" Wisconsin Wetland Inventory Maps for the Village of Hales Corners,
prepared by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR), dated February 22,
1989. These boundaries may be amended following the procedure outlined in this
Ordinance. Within this district, all uses not listed as "permitted uses" shall be prohibited.
(1) The floodplain-wetland boundary lines on the map shall be determined by the use of
the scale appearing on the map. Where there is a conflict between the floodplain
boundary illustrated on the map and actual field conditions, the dispute shall be
settled according to Section 8-5-5(e), "mapping disputes" of this Ordinance.
(2) Compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance shall not be grounds for the
removal of lands from the floodplain-wetland district unless; such lands are filled to
a height of at least two (2) feet above the elevation of the "regional flood" for the
particular area and are contiguous to other lands lying outside the floodplain district,
approval has been granted by the DNR pursuant to this Ordinance, and, where
required, an "official letter of map amendment" has been issued by the FEMA.
Section 8-5-2
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
(c) Effect of Floodplain-Wetland District Regulations. The regulations set forth in this
Ordinance shall apply to all floodplain-wetlands mapped on the "official floodplain-wetland
zoning map".
(d) Compliance. No new use or change in use of any structure, land or water shall be located,
extended, converted or structurally altered and no development as defined in this Ordinance
shall commence without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other
applicable regulations.
(e) Municipalities and State Agencies Regulated.
Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns and counties are required to
comply with this Ordinance and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to
comply if s. 13.48(13), Stats., applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and
repair of state highways and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation is
exempt when s. 30.2022, Stats., applies.
(f) Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.
(1) This Ordinance supersedes provisions of any zoning ordinance relating to floodplainwetlands.
However, any underlying zoning shall remain in full force and effect to
the extent that its provisions are more restrictive.
(2) It is not otherwise intended by this Ordinance to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing deed restrictions; however, where this Ordinance imposes greater
restrictions the provisions of this Ordinance shall prevail.
(g) Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall
be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the
governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted
by Wis. Stats. and NR 116 & 117, Wis. Adm. Codes. If a provision of this Ordinance,
required by Ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code, is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in
light of the standards in effect on the date of the adoption of this Ordinance or in effect on
the date of the most recent text amendment to this Ordinance.
(h) Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of floodplain-wetland protection
intended to be provided by this Ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes
and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on
rare occasions or the flood height may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This Ordinance does not imply that areas
outside floodplain-wetland zoning district boundaries or land uses permitted within each
district will always be totally free from flooding or flood damages, nor shall this Ordinance
create a liability on the part of or a cause of action against the Village of Hales Corners that
may result from reliance on this Ordinance.
(i) General Development Standards.
The Village of Hales Corners shall review all permit applications to determine whether the
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is
in a flood-prone area, all new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed
or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of
the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads; be constructed with
materials resistant to flood damage; be constructed by methods and practices that minimize
flood
Section 8-5-2
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
damages; and be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the above standards. All subdivision
proposals (including manufactured home parks) shall include regional flood elevation and
floodway data for any development that meets the subdivision definition of this Ordinance.
(j) Special Provisions Applicable to the General Floodplain-Wetland District.
(1) No developments in general floodplain-wetland areas shall materially affect the
storage capacity of floodplain, based upon an equal degree of hydrologic
encroachment (volume of the storage area which is lost). For the purpose of this
subsection, "materially" is defined as any increase in discharge of the regional flood
which causes a rise in the water surface profile of 0.01 foot. Such developments may
be permitted only if amendments are made to this Ordinance pursuant to Section 8-5-
6 herein; provided further that the total cumulative allowable increase in height of
the regional flood for any given reach of a stream shall not exceed one (1) foot.
(2) Utility facilities such as dams, flowage areas, transmission lines, pipelines, and water
monitoring devices are permitted subject to regulations pursuant to Chapter 30, Wis.
Stats., and applicable federal regulations.
(3) Navigational and drainage aids such as channels, channel markers, buoys and other
such devices are permitted, provided that prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, the Village shall notify adjacent communities, the DNR and the FEMA,
and require the applicant to secure necessary permits. The flood carrying capacity
within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse shall be maintained.
(4) Other water related uses such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, and river
crossings are permitted subject to any pier or dockline regulations, or any other
regulations that are required pursuant to Chapter 30, Wis. Stats., and applicable
federal regulations.
(k) Hydraulic and Hydrologic Analyses.
(1) Except as allowed in sub. (3) below, no floodplain development shall:
a. Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the conveyance of
floodwaters by itself or with other development, increasing regional flood
height.
b. Increase regional flood height due to floodplain storage area lost, which
equals or exceeds 0.01 foot.
(2) The zoning administrator shall deny permits if it is determined the proposed
development will obstruct flow or increase regional flood heights 0.01 foot or more,
based on the officially adopted FIRM or other adopted map, unless provisions of sub.
(3) are met.
(3) Obstructions or increases equal to or greater than 0.01 foot may be permitted if
amendments are made to this Ordinance, the official floodplain zoning maps,
floodway lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with Section 8-5-6.
(l) Watercourse Alterations. No land use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a
Section 8-5-2
mapped floodplain shall be issued until the local official has notified in writing all adjacent
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
municipalities, the Department and FEMA regional offices and required the applicant to
secure all necessary state and federal permits. The flood carrying capacity of any altered or
relocated watercourse shall be maintained. As soon as is practicable, but not later than six
(6) months after the date of the watercourse alteration or relocation, the zoning administrator
shall notify FEMA of the changes by submitting appropriate technical or scientific data in
accordance with NFIP guidelines that shall be used to revise the FIRM, risk premium rates
and floodplain management regulations as required.
(m) Chapters 30, 31. Wis. Stats., Development
Development which requires a permit from the Department, under Chs. 30 and 31, Wis
Stats., such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, dams and navigational aids, may be
allowed if the necessary permits are obtained and amendments to the floodway lines, water
surface profiles, BFE’s established in the FIS, or other data from the officially adopted
FIRM, or other floodplain zoning maps or the floodplain zoning ordinance are made
according to Section 8-5-6.
SEC. 8-5-3 GENERAL FLOODPLAIN-WETLAND DISTRICT.
(a) Applicability. The provisions for this district shall apply to all identified floodplainwetlands
in the Village of Hales Corners, Wisconsin.
(b) Description of District. The general floodplain-wetland district shall include:
(1) All A-Zones shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map which is based on Flood
Insurance Study Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps showing the river(s) and its
tributaries in Hales Corners, Wisconsin, prepared by the FEMA dated July 1978; and
approved by the DNR.
(2) All wetlands which are five (5) acres or more in area and are shown on the "Final"
Wetland Inventory Maps prepared by the DNR, dated February 22, 1989, that have
been adopted and made a part of this Ordinance and which are:
a. Within 1,000 feet of the ordinary high water mark of Kelly Lake.
b. Within 300 feet of the ordinary high water mark of navigable rivers or
streams or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is
greater. Rivers and streams shall be presumed to be navigable if they are
designated as either continuous or intermittent waterways on the U.S.
Geological Survey Quadrangle Map. FEMA floodplain maps and any other
subsequent floodplain studies shall be used to determine the extent of
floodplain areas.
(c) Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted subject to the provisions of Chapters 30
and 31 of the Wis. Stats., and the provisions of other local, state and federal laws; if
applicable:
(1) Wetlands.
a. Activities and uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning permit,
provided that no wetland alteration occurs:
1. Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting, swimming, snowmobiling and
Section 8-5-3
boating.
2. The harvesting of wild crops such as: marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
rice, berries, tree fruits and tree seeds, in a manner that is not
injurious to the natural reproduction of such crops.
3. The cultivation of agricultural crops.
4. The practice of silviculture including limited temporary water level
stabilization measures which are necessary to alleviate abnormally
wet or dry conditions that would have an adverse impact on the
conduct of silvicultural activities if not corrected.
5. The maintenance and repair of existing drainage systems where
permissible under Chapter 30.20, Wis. Stats., to restore pre-existing
levels of drainage, including the minimum amount of filling
necessary to dispose of dredged spoil, provided that the filling is
permissible under Chapter 30, Wis. Stats., and that dredged spoil is
placed on existing spoil banks where possible.
6. The installation and maintenance of sealed tiles for the purpose of
draining lands outside the floodplain-wetland zoning district provided
that such installation or maintenance is done in a manner designed to
minimize the adverse impact upon the natural functions of the
floodplain-wetlands.
b. Uses which are allowed upon the issuance of a land use permit and any
additional permits as required under federal, state or local laws. All
construction and maintenance must be done in a manner that will minimize
the adverse effect upon the natural function of the wetland.
1. The construction and maintenance of walkways, observation decks
and trail bridges built on pilings, including limited excavating and
filling necessary for such construction or maintenance.
2. The maintenance, repair, replacement and reconstruction of existing
highways and bridges, including limited excavating and filling
necessary for such maintenance, repair, replacement or
reconstruction.
3. The construction and maintenance of roads which are necessary for
the continuity of the municipal street system, the provision of
essential utility and emergency services, or to provide access to
permitted uses.
4. The construction and maintenance of residential buildings provided
that:
a) The building is used solely in conjunction with a use
permitted in the floodplain-wetland district or for the raising
of waterfowl, minnows or other wetland or aquatic animals.
b) The building cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside
the wetland.
c) The building does not exceed 500 square feet in floor area.
Section 8-5-3
d) Only limited filling and excavating necessary to provide
structural support for the building is allowed.
5. The establishment and development of public and private parks and
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
recreational areas, outdoor education areas, historic, natural and
scientific areas, game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife
habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal farms, wildlife
preserves and public boat launching ramps.
6. The construction and maintenance of electric and telephone
transmission lines and water, gas and sewer lines, and related
facilities.
(2) Non-Wetlands Within Floodplain.
a. Agricultural uses, such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant
nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and
wild crop harvesting.
b. Nonstructural, industrial, commercial uses, such as loading areas, parking
areas, airport landing strips.
c. Nonstructural private and public recreational uses, such as golf courses,
tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching
ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms,
fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges,
hunting and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails.
d. Uses or structures accessory to open space uses.
e. Extraction of sand, gravel and/or other materials.
f. Functionally water –dependent uses, such as marinas, boat rentals, docks,
piers, wharves, dams, flowage area, culverts, navigational aids and river
crossings of transmission lines, and pipelines that comply with Chs. 30, 31,
Stats.
g. Public utilities, streets, bridges and railroads that comply with Section 8-5-
3(d)
(3) All Other Lands. Permitted uses for lands lying within the jurisdiction of this
ordinance, but being neither wetlands nor lands within the 100 year floodplain, shall
be governed by the underlying zoning.
(d) Standards for Development in the General Floodplain-Wetland District.
(1) All of the provisions of Section 8-5-2(j) shall apply hereto.
(2) Applicants shall provide the following data to determine the effects of the proposal
according to Section 8-5-2(k):
a. A cross-section elevation view of the proposal, perpendicular to the
watercourse, showing if the proposed development will obstruct flow; or
b. An analysis calculating the effects of this proposal on regional flood height.
(3) The zoning administrator shall deny the permit application if the project will increase
flood elevations upstream or downstream 0.01 foot or more, based on the data
submitted for sub. (2) above.
(4) Structures which are accessory to permitted open space use may be permitted,
Section 8-5-3
providing the structures:
a. Are not designed for human habitation.
b. Have a low flood-wetland damage potential.
c. Are to be constructed and placed on the building site so as to increase flood
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
heights less than 0.01 foot and minimally obstruct the flow of flood- waters.
Whenever possible, structures will be constructed with the longitudinal axis
parallel to the direction of flow of floodwaters, and will be placed with their
longitudinal axis approximately on the same line as those of adjoining
structures.
d. Are firmly anchored to prevent them from floating away and restricting
bridge openings or other restricted sections of the stream or river.
e. Have all service facilities, such as electrical and heating equipment, at or
above the flood protection elevations for the particular area.
(5) Uses permitted by the DNR pursuant to Chapters 30 and 31, Wis. Stats., provided
that the necessary permits are obtained and amendments approved by the Village,
DNR, and FEMA to the official water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and
floodplain-wetlands zoning ordinance, or "Final" Wetlands Inventory Map.
(6) Public utilities, streets and bridges provided that:
a. Adequate flood proofing measures are provided to the flood protection
elevation.
b. Construction shall not cause any increase of 0.01 foot or greater in the height
of the regional flood, except that reasonable increases up to one (1) foot may
be approved if the amendment procedures and all conditions of Section 8-5-
6(b) are met.
c. The Village, DNR and FEMA amend their water surface profiles, floodplain
zoning maps and floodplain zoning ordinance to reflect any changes resulting
for such construction.
d. The construction, as a practical matter, cannot be located outside the wetland
and is designed and constructed to minimize adverse impacts on wetlands.
(7) Fills or depositions of materials which do not adversely affect wetlands may be
permitted provided that;
a. The provisions of Section 8-5-2(j)(1) are met.
b. Fill or disposition of materials does not encroach between the ordinary high
water mark on each bank of the stream unless a permit has been granted by
the DNR pursuant to Chapter 30, Wis. Stats., and a permit pursuant to
Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of
1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334 has been issued, if applicable, and the other
requirements of this section are met.
c. The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by riprap,
vegetative cover, sheet piling and/or bulkheading sufficient to prevent
erosion
and leachate.
(8) All other uses not listed herein as permitted are prohibited, included but not limited to:
Section 8-5-3
a. Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential, or those
not
b. associated with permanent open-spaces uses;
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
c. Storing materials that are buoyant flammable, explosive, injurious to
property, water quality, or human, animal, plat, fish or other aquatic life;
d. Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the adjoining
districts;
e. Any private or public sewage system, except portable latrines that are moved
prior to flooding and systems associated with recreational areas and
Department-approved campgrounds that meet the applicable provisions of
local ordinances and Ch. COMM 83, Wis. Admin. Code.
f. Any public or private wells which are used to obtain potable water, except
those for recreational areas that meet the requirements of local ordinances
and Chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Admin. Code;
g. Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites;
h. Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those permitted under s.
NR 110.15(3)(b), Wis. Admin. Code;
i. Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service existing or
proposed development located outside the floodway which complies with the
regulations for the floodplain area occupied.
SEC. 8-5-4 NONCONFORMING USES.
(a) General. Insofar as the standards in this Section are not inconsistent with the provisions of
Section 62.23(7)(h), Wis. Stats., they shall apply to all nonconforming uses. The existing
lawful use of a structure or building or its accessory use which is not in conformity with the
provisions of this Ordinance may be continued subject to the following conditions:
(1) No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use shall be permitted unless they
are made in conformity with the provisions of this Section. For the purpose of this
Section, the words "modification" and "addition" shall include, but not be limited to,
any alteration, addition, modification, structural repair, rebuilding or replacement of
any such existing structure or accessory use. Ordinary maintenance repairs are not
considered structural repairs, modifications or additions; such ordinary maintenance
repairs include internal and external painting, decorating, paneling, and the
replacement of doors, windows and other nonstructural components and the
maintenance, repair or replacement of existing private sewage or water supply
systems or connections to public utilities. Ordinary maintenance repairs do not
include any costs associated with the repair of a damaged structure. The construction
of a deck that does not exceed 200 square feet and that is adjacent to the exterior wall
of a principal structure is not an extension, modification or addition. The roof of the
structure may extend over a portion of the deck in order to provide safe ingress and
egress to the principal structure.
(2) If a nonconforming use is discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive months, it is no
Section 8-5-4
longer permitted and any future use of the structure or building shall conform with
the appropriate provisions of this Ordinance.
(3) No modifications or additions shall be allowed to any existing structures which are
not in compliance with permitted general floodplain standards or uses, unless such
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
modifications or additions meet all of the following criteria:
a. The modifications or additions to a structure will not increase the amount of
obstruction to flood flows pursuant to Section 8-5-2(j)(1) of this ordinance.
b. Any addition to a structure shall be flood proofed, pursuant to Section 8-5-
5(g) by means other than the use of fill, to the flood protection elevation.
c. No structural repairs, modifications or additions to a structure, which exceed
fifty percent (50%) of its present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed
unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming use. The
costs for elevating a nonconforming building or a building with a
nonconfoming use to the flood protection elevation are excluded from the
50% provisions of this paragraph.
d. If any nonconforming structure is destroyed or is substantially damaged that
it cannot be practically restored, it cannot be replaced, reconstructed or
rebuilt unless permanently changed to a conforming use. For the purpose of
this Subsection, restoration is deemed impractical where the total cost of such
restoration would exceed fifty percent (50%) of the present equalized
assessed value of said structure.
e. Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or
above the regional flood elevation.
f. It must not obstruct the flow of floodwaters or cause any increase in flood
levels during the occurrence of the regional flood.
g. Its use must be limited to parking and/or limited storage.
h. If any nonconforming structure is damaged or destroyed by a nonflood
disaster, the repair or reconstruction of any such nonconforming building
may be permitted in order to restore it after the nonflood disaster, provided
that the nonconforming building will meet all of the requirements under 44
CFR Part 60, or under the regulations promulgated thereunder.
i. A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration will not
preclude the structures continued designation as a historic structure, the
alteration will comply with 8-5-3(d) of this Ordinance, flood resistant
materials are used, and construction practices and floodproofing that comply
with 8-5-5(g) of this Ordinance are used.
k. Has been granted a permit or variance which meets all ordinance
requirements.
(4) No new on-site sewage disposal systems, or additions to existing on-site sewage
disposal systems, except where an addition has been ordered by a government
agency to correct a hazard to public health, shall be allowed in the floodplain area.
Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an on-site sewage disposal system shall
meet the applicable provisions of local ordinances and Wis. Adm. Code.
Section 8-5-4
(5) No new well used to obtain water for ultimate human consumption, or modifications
to an existing well, shall be allowed in the general floodplain area. Any replacement,
repair or maintenance of a well shall meet the applicable provisions of local
ordinances and Chapters NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
(6) The municipality shall keep a record which lists all nonconforming uses and
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
nonconforming structures, their present equalized assessed value, the cost of all
modifications or additions which have been permitted, and the percentage of the
structure’s total current value those modifications represent.
(b) Floodfringe areas.
(1) No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any
structure with a nonconforming use unless such modification or addition has been granted a
permit or variance by the municipality, and the modification or addition shall be placed on
fill or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation in compliance with the standards for
that particular use in s. 8-5-3, except where s. 8-5-4(b)(2) is applicable.
(2) Where compliance with the provisions of par. (1) would result in unnecessary hardship and
only where the structure will not be used for human habitation or be associated with a high
flood damage potential, the Board of Adjustment/Appeals, using the procedures established
in s. 8-5-5, may grant a variance from those provisions of par. (1) for modifications or
additions, using the criteria listed below. Modifications or additions which are protected to
elevations lower than the flood protection elevation may be permitted if:
(a) No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for residential or commercial
structures;
(b) Human lives are not endangered;
(c) Public facilities, such as water or sewer, will not be installed;
(d) Flood depths will not exceed two feet;
(e) Flood velocities will not exceed two feet per second; and
(f) The structure will not be used for storage of materials as described in s. 8-5-3(8).
(3) If neither the provisions of par. (1) or (2) above can be met, one addition to an existing room
in a nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming use may be allowed in the
floodfringe, if the addition:
(a) Meets all other regulations and will be granted by permit or variance;
(b) Does not exceed 60 square feet in area; and
(c) In combination with other previous modifications or additions to the building, does
not equal or exceed 50% of the present equalized assessed value of the building.
Section 8-5-4
(4) All new private sewage disposal systems, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance
of a private sewage disposal system shall meet all the applicable provisions of all local
ordinances and ch. COMM 83, Wis. Adm. Code.
(5) All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a well shall meet the
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
applicable provisions of this ordinance and ch. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
SEC. 8-5-5 ADMINISTRATION.
(a) Zoning Administrator. The Building Inspector shall administer the provisions of this
Ordinance. The building inspector, for the purposes of this Ordinance, shall be designated
the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall exercise the following duties and
powers:
(1) Advise applicants as to the provisions of this Ordinance, assist them in preparing
permit applications and assure that the regional flood elevation for the proposed
development is shown on all permit applications.
(2) Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with this Ordinance and issue a
Certificate of Compliance when appropriate.
(3) Inspect all damaged floodplain structures and perform a substantial damage
assessment to determine if substantial damage to the structures has occurred.
(4) Keep the official records of all water surface profiles, floodplain-wetland zoning
maps, floodplain-wetland zoning ordinances, nonconforming uses and changes
thereto, permit applications, permits, appeals, variances and amendments related to
the floodplain-wetland zoning ordinances.
(5) Submit copies of any required data, variances, appeals, amendments, annual reports,
and any other required information to the DNR. An annual summary showing only
the number and types of zoning actions taken by the Village shall be submitted to
that department by the Zoning Administrator. Copies of substantial damage
assessments performed and all related correspondence concerning the assessments
shall be submitted to he DNR.
(6) Investigate, prepare reports and report violations of the floodplain-wetland zoning
ordinance to the appropriate Village committee and to the municipal attorney, with
copies to the appropriate regional office of the DNR.
(7) Submit copies of map or text amendments and annual reports to the FEMA.
(8) Maintain on file a list of all documentation of certified elevations.
(9) Notify adjacent communities and the DNR prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse or wetland, and submit evidence of such notification to the FEMA.
(10) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said
watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.
(b) Administrative Procedures.
(1) Land Use Permit. A land use permit shall be obtained from the Zoning
Administrator before any new land use, change in use, or development as defined in
Chapter 15 of
this Ordinance, subject to the provisions of this Ordinance, may be initiated. An
Section 8-5-5
application for a land use permit shall be made to the Zoning Administrator upon
forms furnished and shall include, for the purpose of proper enforcement of these
regulations, the following data:
a. Names and addresses of the applicant, property owner and contractor.
b. Legal description of the property, type of proposed use and whether it is new
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
construction or a modification.
c. A site plan drawn to scale containing the dimensions of the lot and locations
of buildings from lot line, center line abutting highways, high-water mark of
any abutting watercourse, location of all mapped wetlands, location and
elevation of existing or future access roads, elevation of the lowest floor of
proposed buildings and any fill using National Geodetic and Vertical Datum
(NGVD), data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in NGVD
at the location of the development, data to determine if the proposed
development will cause obstruction to flow or an increase in regional flood
height or discharge, and extent and elevation of floodplain boundaries.
d. All information concerning any private water or on site sewage disposal
system to be installed, including a sketch showing surveyed location of wells,
streams, lakes, buildings, private and septic tank systems within 100 feet of
proposed sewage disposal site.
e. Specifications and dimensions for areas of proposed wetland alteration.
f. The applicant shall provide all survey data and computations required to
show the effects of the project on flood heights, velocities and floodplain
storage, for all subdivision proposals, as “subdivision” is defined in s. 236,
Stats., and other proposed developments exceeding five (5) acres in area or
where the estimated cost exceeds $125,000. The applicant shall provide:
1. An analysis of the effect of the development on the regional flood
profile, velocity of flow and floodplain storage capacity;
2. A map showing location and details of vehicular access to lands
outside the floodplain; and
3. A surface drainage plan showing how flood damage will be
minimized. The estimated cost of the proposal shall include all
structural development, landscaping, access and road development,
utilities, and other pertinent items, but need not include land costs.
g. All permits issued under the authority of this Ordinance shall expire one (1)
year after issuance.
(2) Certificate of Compliance. No development as defined in this Chapter shall take
place, no vacant land in the floodplain-wetland shall be occupied or used, and no
building hereafter erected, altered or moved, shall be occupied until the applicant
obtains a Certificate of Compliance from the Zoning Administrator. The Certificate
of Compliance shall show that the building or premises or part thereof, and the
proposed use, conform to the provisions of this Ordinance. The application for such
certificate shall be concurrent with the application for a permit. If all Ordinance
provisions are met, the certificate of compliance shall be issued within ten (10) days
Section 8-5-5
after written notification that the permitted work is completed. The Zoning
Administrator shall require that the applicant submit a certification by a registered
professional engineer or architect that all floodplain-wetland regulatory factors were
accomplished in compliance with appropriate floodplain-wetland zoning provisions.
The applicant shall submit such certification for all new construction and substantial
improvements. Upon written request from the owner, the Zoning Administrator shall
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
issue a Certificate of Compliance for any building or premises existing at the time of
the adoption of this Ordinance certifying, after inspection, the extent and type of use
made of the building or premises and whether or not such use conforms to the
provisions for this Ordinance.
(3) Other Permits. It is the responsibility of the applicant to secure all other necessary
permits from all appropriate federal, state and local agencies, including those
required under Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments
of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
(c) Plan Commission. The Plan Commission shall have the duties and powers to:
(1) Oversee the functions of the office of the Zoning Administrator.
(2) Review and make recommendations to the Village Board on all proposed
amendments to the floodplain-wetland zoning ordinances.
(3) Maintain a complete public record of all proceedings.
(d) Board of Appeals. The powers of the Board of Appeals shall be pursuant to Chapter 15 of
the Village Zoning Code and Section 62.23(7), Wis. Stats.
(1) Appeals to the Board. Refer to Chapter 15 of the Village Zoning Code.
(2) Hearing Appeals. In addition to the procedures outlined in Chapter 15, the following
procedures shall be used for appeals within a Floodplain-Wetland district.
a. Written notice shall be given to the Southeast Regional Headquarters of the
DNR at least (10) days prior to hearings on proposed variances, conditional
uses, and appeals for map or text amendments.
b. A copy of all decisions by the Board of Appeals shall be mailed to the
appropriate regional office of the DNR within ten (10) days of the decision.
(e) Mapping Disputes. The following procedure shall be used by the Zoning Board of Appeals
in disputes of a floodplain zoning district boundary:
(1) Floodplain-wetland district boundaries: when the location of the floodplain-wetland
boundary is established by flood maps, wetland maps, or engineering studies
pursuant to Section 8-5-3(b) of this Ordinance, the flood elevations or "flood
profiles" for the point in question so related to actual ground elevations shall be the
governing factor in locating the district boundary. If no elevation or profiles are
available to the Board, any other available evidence may be examined.
(2) In all cases, the person contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given
a reasonable opportunity to present their case to the Zoning Board of Appeals and if
so chooses, submit technical evidence. The Board shall not allow deviations from
the boundary line as mapped unless the evidence clearly and conclusively establishes
that the mapped location of the line is incorrect, approval has been granted by the
DNR, and an official letter of map amendment has been issued by the FEMA.
Section 8-5-5
(f) Variance. Any deviation from the standards of this Ordinance, for which a permit has been
denied by the Zoning Administrator, may be allowed only upon written request for a
variance submitted to the Zoning Administrator, public hearing, and issuance of a variance
by the
Board of Appeals. The Board may authorize in specific cases such variance from the
terms
of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance would result in
unnecessary hardship. A variance:
(1) Shall be consistent with the spirit and intent of this floodplain-wetland zoning
ordinance.
(2) Shall not permit any change in established flood elevations or profiles.
(3) Shall only be granted for lots that are less than one-half acre and are contiguous to
existing structures constructed below the RFE.
(4) Shall only be granted upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, shall be the
minimum relief necessary, shall not cause increased risks to public safety or
nuisances, shall not increase costs for rescue and relief efforts and shall not be
contrary to the purpose of this Ordinance.
(5) Shall not be granted for a use that is common to a group of adjacent lots or premises.
(In such case, the zoning ordinance would have to be amended through proper
procedures.)
(6) Shall not be granted unless it is shown that the variance will not be contrary to the
public interest or damaging to the rights of other persons or property values in the
area.
(7) Shall not be granted for actions which require an amendment to the floodplainwetland
zoning ordinance.
(8) Shall not have the effect of allowing or expanding a use or structure which is
prohibited in that zoning district by the floodplain-wetland zoning ordinance.
(9) Shall not be granted solely on the basis of economic gain or loss.
(10) Shall not be granted for a self-created hardship.
(11) Shall not grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning district.
(12) Shall not allow any alteration of an historic structure, including its use, which would
preclude its continued designation as an historic structure.
(13) When a floodplain variance is granted the Board shall notify the applicant in writing
that it may increase flood insurance premiums and risks to life and property. A copy
shall be maintained with the variance record.
(g) Flood Proofing. Flood proofing measures such as the following shall be designated
consistent with the flood protection elevation for the particular area as described in Section
8-5-8(xx) to withstand the flood velocities, forces and other factors associated with the flood
protection elevation. The applicant shall submit a plan or document certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect that the flood proofing measures are adequately designed
to protect to the flood protection elevation for the particular area. All flood proofing shall
provide anchorage to resist flotation and lateral movement. Flood proofing shall insure that
structural walls and floors are watertight to the flood protection elevation, and the interior
remains completely dry during flooding without human intervention. Other flood proofing
Section 8-5-5
measures may include:
(1) Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads, and shutters.
(2) Reinforcement of walls and floors to resist pressure.
(3) Use of paint, membranes or mortars to reduce seepage of water through walls.
(4) Addition of mass or weight to structures to prevent flotation.
(5) Placement of essential utilities above the flood protection elevation.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
(6) Pump facilities and/or subsurface drainage systems for buildings to relieve external
foundation wall and basement floor pressures and lower water levels in structures.
(7) Construction of water supply and waste treatment systems to prevent the entrance of
floodwaters.
(8) Construction to resist rupture or collapse caused by water pressure or floating debris.
(9) Cutoff valves on sewer lines or the elimination of gravity flow basement drains.
(h) Public Information.
(1) Place marks on structures to show depth of inundation during regional flood.
(2) All maps, engineering data and regulations shall be available and widely distributed.
(3) All real estate transfers shall show what floodplain zoning district any real property
is located in.
SEC. 8-5-6 AMENDMENTS.
(a) General. The Village Board of the Village of Hales Corners, Wisconsin, may from time to
time, alter, supplement or change the boundaries of use districts and the regulations
contained in this Ordinance in the manner provided by law. Official amendments are
required for any changes in water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps or floodplain
zoning ordinance. Actions which require an amendment include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(1) Any change in the boundary of the floodplain-wetland area.
(2) Settlement of conflicts between the water surface profiles and floodplain-wetland
zoning maps, in accordance with Section 8-5-5(e) or this Ordinance.
(3) Any fill or encroachment that will cause a change equal to or greater than 0.01 foot
in the water surface profiles of the regional flood.
(4) Any fill in the floodplain which raises the elevation of the filled area to a height at or
above the flood protection elevation and is contiguous to land lying outside the
floodplain.
(5) Any upgrading of floodplain-wetland zoning ordinances required by law.
(6) Amendments petitioned by any interested party in accordance with the provisions of
Section 62.23 of the Wis. Stats.
(7) All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway lines or to remove
an area from the floodway or the flood fringe that is based on a base flood elevation
from a FIRM requires prior approval by FEMA.
(8) Rezoning Wetlands. Rezoning of a wetland shall require amendment of the "Final"
Wisconsin Wetland Inventory Map. No rezoning shall be permitted when the result
will have a significant adverse impact upon any of the following:
Section 8-5-6
a. Storm and flood water storage capacity.
b. Maintenance of dry season stream flow or the discharge of groundwater to a
wetland, the recharge of groundwater from a wetland to another area or the
flow of groundwater through a wetland.
c. Filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic
compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters.
d. Shoreland protection against soil erosion.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
e. Fish spawning, breeding, nursery or feeding grounds.
f. Wildlife habitat.
g. Areas of special recreational, scenic or scientific interest, including scarce
wetland types and habitat of endangered species.
(b) Duties of Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall:
(1) Require the applicant to submit, at the time of application, two (2) copies of an aerial
photograph, or a plan which accurately locates the floodplain-wetland proposal with
respect to the floodplain-wetland district limits, channel of stream, existing
floodplain developments, together with all pertinent information such as the nature of
the proposal, legal description of the property, fill limits and elevations, wetland
delineation, building flood elevations and flood proofing measures.
(2) Require the applicant to furnish any of the following additional information as is
deemed necessary by the DNR for evaluation of the effects of the proposal upon
flood flows, wetlands and to determine the boundaries of the floodplain-wetland.
a. A typical valley cross-section showing the channel of the stream, the
floodplain adjoining each side of the channel, cross-section area to be
occupied by the proposed development, and high water information.
b. Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground; pertinent
structures, fill or storage elevations; size, location and spatial arrangement of
all proposed and existing structures of the site, location and elevations of
streets, water supply and sanitary facilities; soil types; and other pertinent
information.
c. Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of the
stream.
d. Specifications for building construction and materials, flood proofing, filling,
dredging, channel improvement, storage of materials, water supply, sanitary
facilities, and wetland improvements.
(3) Transmit one (1) copy of the application and additional information required to the
DNR along with a written request to have that agency provide technical assistance to
establish floodplain-wetland boundaries and, where applicable, provide regional
flood elevation. Where the provisions of Section 8-5-2(j)(3) of this Ordinance apply,
the applicant shall provide all required information and computations.
(c) Amendment Procedure.
(1) Copies of any amendment proposed to the Village Board shall be referred to the Plan
Commission which shall be forwarded by the secretary of the Plan Commission,
together with the first notice of the public hearing thereon, to the main office and
Section 8-5-6
appropriate regional office of the DNR within five (5) days of the submission to the
Village, and to the FEMA. The amendment procedure shall comply with the
provisions of Section 62.23, Wis. Stats. No amendment to the text or maps shall
become effective until approved by the DNR, the FEMA, and, in the case of map
amendments, until an official letter of map amendment has been issued by the
FEMA.
(2) Wetland Rezonings.
a. If the regional office of the DNR determines that a proposed rezoning may
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
have a significant adverse effect on the wetlands, the DNR shall so notify the
Village of its determination either prior to or during the public hearing on the
proposed amendment.
b. A copy of the Village Plan Commission recommendation on a rezoning shall
be mailed to the regional office of the DNR within ten (10) days of its
submission to the Village Board. A copy of the Village Board decision shall
be mailed within ten (10) days of the decision.
c. If the DNR notifies the Village Plan Commission in writing that a proposed
amendment may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the wetland
criteria, that proposed amendment, if approved by the Village, shall not
become effective until more than thirty (30) days have elapsed since written
notice of the Village Board approval was mailed to the DNR. If, within the
thirty (30) day period, the DNR notifies the Village Board that the DNR
intends to adopt a superseding shoreland-wetland zoning ordinance for the
Village under Chapter 62.231(6) or 61.351(6), Wis. Stats., the proposed
amendment shall not become effective until that ordinance adoption
procedure is completed or otherwise terminated. The record of the Village
Board decision on the proposed amendment shall advise the petitioner of the
provisions of this Section.
SEC. 8-5-7 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
Any violation of the provisions of this Ordinance by any person shall be unlawful and shall be
referred to the municipal attorney who shall expeditiously prosecute all such violators. A violator
shall, upon conviction, forfeit to the municipality a penalty of not less than $10.00 and not more than
$400.00, together with the costs of prosecution. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a
separate offense. Every violation of this Ordinance is a public nuisance and the creation may be
enjoined and the maintenance may be abated by action at suit of the municipality, the state, or any
citizen thereof pursuant to s. 87.30, Stats.
SEC. 8-5-8 DEFINITIONS.
Unless specifically defined below, or in Chapter 16 of the Village Zoning Code, words or phrases
used in this Chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in
common law and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.
Section 8-5-8
(a) A-Zones. A-zones are those areas shown on a community's "Official Floodplain Zoning
Map" which could be inundated by the "base flood" or "regional flood" as defined herein.
These areas may be numbered as A0, A1 to A30, A99, or be unnumbered A-Zones. The AZones
may or may not be reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data
for a given area.
(b) Accessory Structure or Use. A facility, structure, building or use which is accessory or
incidental to the principal use of a property, structure or building.
(c) Base Flood. A flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
given year, as published by FEMA as part of a FIS and depicted on a FIRM.
(d) Base Flood Elevation. An elevation equal to that which reflects the height of the base
flood.
(e) Basement. Any enclosed area of a building having its floor sub-grade, i.e., below ground
level, on all sides.
(f) Building. See Structure.
(g) Bulkhead Line. A geographic line along a reach of a navigable body of water that has been
adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the DNR pursuant to Chapter 30.11, Wis.
Stats., and which allows complete filling between the bulkhead line and the original ordinary
highwater mark, except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this
Ordinance.
(h) Certificate of Compliance. Certification by the Zoning Administrator that a structure
and/or use of development are in compliance with all provisions of this Ordinance.
(i) Channels. A natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks to confine and
conduct normal flow of water.
(j) Crawlways or Crawl Space. An enclosed area below the first usable floor of a building,
generally less than five feet in height, used for access to plumbing and electrical utilities.
(k) Deck. An unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides, but has permeable floor
which allows the infiltration of precipitation.
(l) Department or DNR. Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(m) Development. Any artificial change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but
not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures; the
construction of additions or alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the
repair of any damaged structure or the improvement or renovation of any structure,
regardless of percentage of damage or improvement; the placement of buildings or
structures; subdivision layout and site preparation; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation or drilling operations; the storage, deposition or extraction of materials or
equipment; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal
systems or water supply facilities.
(n) Dryland Access. A vehicular access route which is above the regional flood elevation and
which connects land located in the floodplain to land outside the floodplain, such as a road
with its surface above regional flood elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and
relief vehicles.
(o) Encroachment. Any fill, structure, equipment, building, use or development in the
floodway.
Section 8-5-8
(p) Existing Mobile Home Park or Mobile Home Subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more mobile home lots for rent or sale for which
construction of facilities for serving the lot on which the mobile home is to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring
of concrete pads, and the construction of streets) is completed before the effective date of
floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
(q) Expansion to Existing Mobile/Manufactured Home Park. The preparation of additional
sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes
are to be affixed. This includes installation of utilities, construction of streets and either final
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
site grading, or the pouring of concrete pads.
(r) FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(s) Filled Wetlands. Any wetlands which were filled prior to the date on which the Village
receives final wetland inventory maps from the DNR in a manner which offsets their
characteristics as wetlands and not subject to this Ordinance.
(t) Flood or Flooding. A general or temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland waters; or the unusual and rapid
accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or the inundation caused by waves
or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels along the shore of Lake Michigan
or Lake Superior; or the sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a natural
body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such
as a seiche, or by some similarly unusual event.
(u) Flood Frequency. The probability of a flood occurrence which is determined from statistical
analyses. The frequency of a particular flood event is usually expressed as occurring, on the
average, once in a specified number of years or as a percent (%) chance of occurring in any
given year.
(v) Flood Fringe. That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway which is covered by
floodwaters during the regional flood and associated with standing water rather than flowing
water.
(w) Flood Hazard Boundary Map. A map prepared by the FEMA, designating areas of special
flood hazard within a given community. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered
A-Zones and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations. Said map forms the
basis for both the regulatory and/or the insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP) until superseded by a Flood Insurance Study and a Flood Insurance Rate
Map.
(x) Flood Insurance Rate Map. A map of a community on which the Federal Insurance
Administration has delineated both special flood hazard areas (the floodplain) and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community. This map can only be amended by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
(y) Flood Insurance Study. A technical engineering examination, evaluation, and
determination of the local flood hazard areas. It provides maps designating those areas
affected by the regional flood and provides both flood insurance rate zones and base flood
elevations and may provide floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated as
numbered and unnumbered A-Zones. Flood Insurance Rate Maps, that accompany the Flood
Section 8-5-8
Insurance Program, form both the regulatory and the insurance aspects of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
(z) Flood Profile. A graph or longitudinal profile showing the relationship of the water surface
elevation of a flood event to locations of land surface elevations along a stream or river.
(aa) Flood Proofing. Any combination of structural provisions, changes, or adjustments to
properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the purpose of reducing or
eliminating flood damage to properties, water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents
of buildings in flood hazard areas.
(bb) Flood Protection Elevation. An elevation of two (2) feet of freeboard above the water
surface profile designated for the regional flood.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
(cc) Flood Storage. Those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters has been taken into
account during analysis in reducing the regional flood discharge.
(dd) Floodplain, General. The land which has been or may be hereafter covered by flood water
during the regional flood. It includes the floodway and the flood fringe, and may include
other designated floodplain areas for regulatory purposes.
(ee) Floodplain Island. A natural geologic land formation within the floodplain that is
surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the regional flood.
(ff) Floodplain Management. Policy and procedures to insure wise use of floodplains, including
mapping and engineering, mitigation, education, and administration and enforcement of
floodplain regulations.
(gg) Floodway. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining
the channel required to carry the regional flood discharge.
(hh) Freeboard. A factor of safety usually expressed in terms of a certain amount of feet above
calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for many unknown factors that contribute to
flood heights greater than the height calculated. These unknown factors include, but are not
limited to, ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and
floodways, the effects of urbanization on the hydrology of the watershed, loss of flood
storage areas due to development and aggradation of the river or stream bed.
(ii) Habitable Structure. Any structure or portion thereof used or designed for human
habitation.
(jj) Hearing Notice. Publication or posting meeting the requirements of Ch. 985, Stats. For
appeals, a Class 1 notice, published once at least one week (7 days) before the hearing, is
required. For all zoning ordinances and amendments, a Class 2 notice, published twice, once
each week consecutively, the last at least a week (7 days) before the hearing. Local
ordinances or bylaws may require additional notice, exceeding these minimums.
(kk) High Flood Damage Potential. Damage that could result from flooding that includes any
danger to life or health or any significant economic loss to a structure or building and its
contents.
(ll) Historic Structure. Any structure that is either listed individually in the National Register of
Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register; certified or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as
Section 8-5-8
a registered historic district; individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an
approved state program, as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or by the Secretary of
the Interior in states without approved programs.
(mm) Increase in Regional Flood Height. A calculate upward rise in the regional flood elevation,
equal to or greater than 0.01 foot, based on a comparison of existing conditions and proposed
conditions which is directly attributable to development in the floodplain but not attributable
to manipulation of mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and
contraction coefficients and discharge.
(nn) Land Use. Any use of land and water or development as defined in Section 8-16-1(a)(28) of
the Village Zoning Code.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
(oo) Mobile/Manufactured Home. A structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities. For the purpose of this Ordinance, it
does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers.
(pp) Mobile Recreational Vehicle. A vehicle which is built on a single chassis, 400 square feet
or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled,
carried or permanently towable by a licensed, light-duty vehicle, is licensed for highway use
if registration is required and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but
as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
Manufactured homes that are towed or carried onto a parcel of land, but do not remain
capable of being towed or carried, including park model homes, do not fall within the
definition of “mobile recreational vehicles.”
(qq) Municipality or Municipal. The county, city or village governmental units enacting,
administering and enforcing this zoning ordinance.
(rr) National Geodetic Vertical Datum or NGVD. Elevations referenced to mean sea level
datum, 1929 adjustment.
(ss) Navigable Waters. Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, all natural inland lakes within
Wisconsin and all streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages and other waters within the territorial
limits of this state, including the Wisconsin portion of boundary waters, which are navigable
under the laws of this state. Under section 144.26(2)(d), Wis. Stats., not withstanding any
other provision of law or administrative rule promulgated thereunder, shoreland ordinances
required under Sections 61.351 or 62.221, Wis. Stats., and Chapter NR 117, Wis. Adm.
Code, do not apply to lands adjacent to farm drainage ditches if:
(1) Such lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable stream or river.
(2) Those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were not navigable
streams before ditching.
(3) Such lands are maintained in nonstructural agricultural use.
(tt) New Construction. For floodplain management purposes, new construction means
structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of
floodplain zoning regulations adopted by this community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. For the purpose of determining flood insurance rates, it
includes any structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
Section 8-5-8
effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
(uu) Nonconforming Structure. An existing lawful structure or building which is not in
conformity with the dimensional or structural requirements of this ordinance for the area of
the floodplain which it occupies.
(vv) Nonconforming Use. An existing lawful use of a structure, building or accessory use which
is not in conformity with the provisions of the floodplain zoning ordinance for the area of the
floodplain which it occupies.
(ww) Obstruction to Flow. Any development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters such
that this development alone or together with any future development will cause an increase
in regional flood height.
(xx) Official Floodplain Zoning Map. That map, adopted and made part of this Ordinance,
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
which has been approved by the DNR and the FEMA, and which delineates those areas
which would be inundated by the base or regional flood, including but not limited to:
numbered and unnumbered A Zones. This map may be a "Flood Hazard Boundary Map",
"Flood Insurance Study Map" or approved community floodplain map.
(yy) Official Letter of Map Amendment. Official notification from the FEMA that a Flood
Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Study Map has been amended.
(zz) Open Space Use. Those uses having a relatively low flood damage potential and not
involving structures.
(aaa) Ordinary High Water Mark. The point on the bank or shore up to which the present and
action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion,
destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or
other easily recognized characteristic.
(bbb) Person. An individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association,
municipality or state agency.
(ccc) Private Sewage System. A sewage treatment and disposal system serving one structure
with a septic tank and soil absorption field located on the same parcel as the structure. It
also means an alternative sewage system approved by the Department of Commerce,
including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption field, a holding tank, a system
serving more than one structure or a system located on a different parcel than structure.
(ddd) Public Utilities. Those utilities using underground or overhead transmission lines such as
electric, telephone and telegraph, and distribution and collection systems such ad water,
sanitary sewer and storm sewer.
(eee) Reasonably Safe from Flooding. Means base floodwaters will not inundate the land or
damage structures to be removed from the special flood hazard area and that any subsurface
waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings.
(fff) Regional Flood. A flood determined to be representative of large floods shown to have
generally occurred in Wisconsin and which may be expected to occur on a particular stream
because of like physical characteristics. The flood frequency of the regional flood
is once in every 100 years; this means that in any given year there is a one percent (1%)
chance that the regional flood may occur or be exceeded, and if depicted on the FIRM, the
RFE is equivalent to the BFE.
Section 8-5-8
(ggg) Shorelands. Lands lying within 1,000 feet from the ordinary high water mark of a lake,
pond or flowage, and 300 feet from the ordinary high water mark of a river or stream or to
the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater.
(hhh) Start of Construction. The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start date means either the
first placement of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond initial excavation,
or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor dies it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
dwelling units or nt part of the main structure. For an alteration, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
(iii) Storage Capacity of a Floodplain. The volume of space above an area of floodplain land
that can be occupied by flood water or a given storage at a given time, regardless of whether
the water is moving.
(jjj) Structure. Any manmade object with form, shape and utility, either permanently or
temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground, stream bed or lake bed,
including, but not limited to, roofed and walled buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks,
bridges, dams and culverts.
(kkk) Subdivision. Has the meaning given in s. 236.02(12). Wis. Stats.
(lll) Substantial Damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the
equalized assessed value of the structure before the damage occurred.
(mmm)Unnecessary Hardship. Where special conditions affecting a particular property, which
were not self-created, have made strict conformity with restrictions governing areas,
setbacks, frontage, height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of
the purposes of the ordinance.
(nnn) Variance. An authorization by the Board of Appeals for the construction or maintenance of
a building or structure in a manner which is inconsistent with dimensional standards (not
uses) contained in the floodplain zoning ordinance.
(ooo) Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the
floodplain zoning ordinance. A structure or other development without required permits,
lowest floor elevation documentation, floodproofing certificates or required floodway
encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
(ppp) Watershed. The entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a watercourse or body
of water.
(qqq) Water Surface Profile. A graphical representation showing the elevation of the water
surface of a watercourse for each position along a reach of river or stream at a certain flood
Section 8-5-8
flow. A water surface profile of the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas.
(rrr) Well. An excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring, drilling, driving or
other methods, to obtain groundwater regardless of its intended use.
(sss) Wetland Alteration. Any filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching, tilling, excavation,
temporary water level stabilization measures or dike and dam construction in a wetland area.
(ttt) Wetland Maps. That map, adopted and made a part of this Ordinance, which has been
approved by the DNR and stamped "Final" on February 22, 1989. Only those wetlands lying
within the 100 year floodplain are controlled by this Ordinance.
(uuu) Wetlands. Those areas where water is at, near or above the land surface long enough to
support aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which have soils indicative of wet conditions.
Section 8-6-1
CHAPTER 6
Conditional Uses
SEC. 8-6-1 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE – CONDITIONAL USES.
The development and execution of this Chapter is based upon the division of the Village into
districts, within which districts the use of land and buildings, and bulk and location of buildings and
structures in relation to the land, are mutually compatible and substantially uniform. However, there
are certain uses which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as
unrestricted permitted uses in any particular district or districts, without consideration, in each case,
of the impact of those uses upon neighboring land or public facilities, and of the public need for the
particular use of a particular location. Such uses, nevertheless, may be necessary or desirable to be
allowed in a particular district provided that due consideration is given to location, development and
operation of such uses. Such uses are classified as conditional uses.
SEC. 8-6-2 AUTHORITY OF THE PLAN COMMISSION; REQUIREMENTS.
(a) The Plan Commission may authorize the Zoning Administrator to issue a conditional use
permit for either regular or limited conditional use after review and public hearing, provided
that such conditional use and involved structure(s) are found to be in accordance with the
purpose and intent of this Zoning Code and are further found to be not hazardous, harmful,
offensive or otherwise adverse to the environment or the value of the neighborhood or the
community. In the instance of the granting of a limited conditional use, the Plan
Commission in its findings shall further specify the delimiting reason(s) or factors which
resulted in issuing limited rather than regular conditional use. Such Plan Commission
resolution, and the resulting conditional use permit, when, for limited conditional use, shall
specify the period of time for which effective, if specified, the name of the permittee, the
location and legal description of the affected premises. Prior to the granting of a conditional
use, the Commission shall make findings based upon the evidence presented that the
standards herein prescribed are being complied with.
(b) Any development within five hundred (500) feet of the existing or proposed rights-of-way of
freeways, expressways and within one-half (1/2) mile of their existing or proposed
interchange or turning lane rights-of-way may be specifically reviewed by the highway
agency that has jurisdiction over the traffic way. The Plan Commission may request such
review and await the highway agency's recommendation for a period not to exceed twenty
(20) days before taking final action.
(c) Conditions such as landscaping, architectural design, type of construction, construction
commencement and completion dates, sureties, lighting, fencing, planting screens, operation
control, hours of operation, improved traffic circulation, deed restrictions, highway access
restrictions, increased yards or parking requirements may be required by the Plan
Commission upon its finding that these are necessary to fulfill the purpose and intent of this
Chapter.
Section 8-6-2
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
(d) Compliance with all other provisions of this Chapter, such as lot width and area, yards,
height, parking, loading, traffic, highway access and performance standards shall be required
of all conditional uses.
SEC. 8-6-3 INITIATION OF CONDITIONAL USE.
Any person, firm, corporation or organization having a freehold interest or a possessory interest
entitled to exclusive possession, or a contractual interest which may become a freehold interest, or
an exclusive possessory interest, and which is specifically enforceable in the land for which a
conditional use is sought may file an application to use such land for one (1) or more of the
conditional uses in the zoning district in which such land is located.
SEC. 8-6-4 APPLICATION FOR CONDITIONAL USE.
(a) Required Application Materials. An application for conditional use shall be filed in
duplicate on a form prescribed by the Village. Such applications shall be forwarded to the
Plan Commission on receipt by the Village Administrator. Such applications shall include
where applicable:
(1) A statement, in writing, by applicant and adequate evidence showing that the
proposed conditional use shall conform to the standards set forth in Section 8-6-7
hereinafter.
(2) Names and addresses of the applicant, owner of the site, architect, professional
engineer, contractor and all property owners of record within one hundred (100) feet.
(3) Description of the subject site by lot, block and recorded subdivision or by metes and
bounds; address of the subject site; type of structure; proposed operation or use of the
structure or site; number of employees and the zoning district within which the
subject site lies.
(4) Plat of survey prepared by a registered land surveyor showing all of the information
required for a building permit and existing and proposed landscaping.
(5) Additional information as may be required by the Plan Commission or other boards,
commissions or officers of the Village. The Plan Commission may require such
other information as may be necessary to determine and provide for an enforcement
of this Chapter, including a plan showing contours and soil types; high water mark
and ground water conditions; bedrock, vegetative cover, specifications for areas of
proposed filling, grading, and lagooning; location of buildings, parking areas, traffic
access, driveways, walkways, open spaces and landscaping; plans of buildings,
sewage disposal facilities, water supply systems and arrangements of operations.
(6) Fee receipt in the amount of Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00).
(b) Plans. In order to secure information upon which to base its determination, the Plan
Commission may require the applicant to furnish, in addition to the information required for
a building permit, the following information:
(1) A plan of the area showing contours, soil types, high water mark, ground water
conditions, bedrock, slope and vegetation cover;
Section 8-6-4
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
(2) Location of buildings, parking areas, traffic access, driveways, walkways, open
spaces, landscaping, lighting;
(3) Plan for buildings, sewage disposal facilities, water supply systems and arrangements
of operations;
(4) Specifications for areas of proposed filling, grading, lagooning or dredging;
(5) Other pertinent information necessary to determine if the proposed use meets the
requirements of this Chapter.
SEC. 8-6-5 HEARING ON APPLICATION.
All requests for conditional uses shall be made to the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission can,
on its own motion, apply conditional uses when applications for rezoning come before it. Nothing in
this Chapter shall prohibit the Village Board, on its own motion, from referring the request for
conditional use to the Plan Commission. Upon receipt of the application and statement referred to in
Section 8-6-4 above, the Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing on each application for a
conditional use at such time and place as shall be established by such Commission. The hearing
shall be conducted and a record of the proceedings shall be preserved in such a manner and
according to such procedures as the Plan Commission shall, by rule, prescribe from time to time.
SEC. 8-6-6 NOTICE OF HEARING ON APPLICATION.
Notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be given by publication of a Class 2
Notice under the Wis. Stats. in the official Village newspaper. Notice of the time, place and purpose
of such public hearing shall also be sent to the applicant, the Zoning Administrator, members of the
Village Board and Plan Commission, and the owners of record as listed in the office of the Village
Assessor who are owners of property in whole or in part situated within one hundred (100) feet of
the boundaries of the properties affected, said notice to be sent at least five (5) days prior to the date
of such public hearing. Failure to comply with this provision shall not, however, invalidate any
previous or subsequent action on the application.
SEC. 8-6-7 STANDARDS – CONDITIONAL USES.
No application for a conditional use shall be approved by the Plan Commission unless such
Commission shall find that the following conditions are present:
(a) That the establishment, maintenance or operation of the conditional use will not be
detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort or general welfare.
(b) That the uses, values and enjoyment of other property in the neighborhood for purposes
already permitted shall be in no foreseeable manner substantially impaired or diminished by
the establishment, maintenance or operation of the conditional use and the proposed use is
compatible with the use of adjacent land.
(c) That the establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal and orderly
development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the district.
(d) That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary site improvements have
Section 8-6-7
been or are being provided.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
(e) That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed
as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
(f) That the conditional use shall, except for yard requirements, conform to all applicable
regulations of the district in which it is located.
(g) That the proposed use does not violate floodplain regulations governing the site.
(h) That, when applying the above standards to any new construction of a building or an
addition to an existing building, the Plan Commission and Board shall bear in mind the
statement of purpose for the zoning district such that the proposed building or addition at its
location does not defeat the purposes and objective of the zoning district.
(i) That, in addition to passing upon a Conditional Use Permit, the Plan Commission shall also
evaluate the effect of the proposed use upon:
(1) The maintenance of safe and healthful conditions.
(2) The prevention and control of water pollution including sedimentation.
(3) Existing topography, drainage features and vegetative cover on the site.
(4) The location of the site with respect to floodplains and floodways of rivers and
streams.
(5) The erosion potential of the site based upon degree and direction of slope, soil type
and vegetative cover.
(6) The location of the site with respect to existing or future access roads.
(7) The need of the proposed use for a shoreland location.
(8) Its compatibility with uses on adjacent land.
(9) The amount of liquid wastes to be generated and the adequacy of the proposed
disposal systems.
SEC. 8-6-8 DENIAL OF APPLICATION FOR CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.
When a decision of denial of a conditional use application is made, the Plan Commission shall
furnish the applicant, in writing when so requested, those standards that are not met and enumerate
reasons the Commission has used in determining that each standards was not met.
SEC. 8-6-9 APPEALS.
Any action of the Plan Commission in granting or denying a conditional use permit may be appealed
to the Board of Appeals, if a written request for an appeal is filed within ten (10) days after the date
of the Plan Commission's action in granting or denying the permit. Such request for an appeal shall
be signed by the applicant or by the owners of at least twenty percent (20%) of the land area
immediately adjacent extending one hundred (100) feet therefrom or by the owners of twenty
percent (20%) or more of the land directly opposite thereto extending one hundred (100) feet from
the street frontage of such opposite land. The request shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator
who shall submit it to the Board of Appeals at its next meeting, together with any documents and
other data used by the Plan Commission in reaching its decision. The Board of Appeals may
consider the matter forthwith, refer the matter to a subsequent meeting or set a date for a public
hearing thereon.
Section 8-6-9
In the event the Board of Appeals elects to hold a public hearing, notice thereof shall be given by
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
mail to the known owners of the lands immediately adjacent thereto and directly opposite any street
frontage of the lot or parcel in question and by publication of a Class 1 notice in the official
newspaper at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing. The Board of Appeals may either
affirm or reverse in whole or in part the action of the Plan Commission and may finally grant or
deny the application for a conditional use permit.
SEC. 8-6-10 CONDITIONS AND GUARANTEES.
The following provisions shall apply to all conditional uses:
(a) Conditions. Prior to the granting of any conditional use, the Plan Commission, or the Board
of Appeals on appeal, may stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment,
location, construction, maintenance and operation of the conditional use as deemed
necessary to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the community, and to
secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified in Section 8-6-7 above. In
all cases in which conditional uses are granted, the Board shall require such evidence and
guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection
therewith are being and will be complied with. Such conditions may include specifications
for, without limitation because of specific enumeration:
(1) Landscaping;
(2) Type of construction;
(3) Construction commencement and completion dates;
(4) Sureties;
(5) Lighting;
(6) Fencing;
(7) Operational control;
(8) Hours of operation;
(9) Traffic circulation;
(10) Deed restrictions;
(11) Access restrictions;
(12) Setbacks and yards;
(13) Type of shore cover;
(14) Specified sewage disposal and water supply systems;
(15) Planting screens;
(16) Piers and docks;
(17) Increased parking; or
(18) Any other requirements necessary to fulfill the purpose and intent of this Chapter.
(b) Site Review. In making its decision, the Plan Commission shall evaluate each application
and may request assistance from any source which can provide technical assistance. The
Commission may review the site, existing and proposed structures, architectural plans,
neighboring uses, parking areas, driveway locations, highway access, traffic generation and
circulation, drainage, sewerage and water systems and the proposed operation/use.
(c) Alteration of Conditional Use. No alteration of a conditional use shall be permitted unless
Section 8-6-10
approved by the Plan Commission.
(d) Architectural Treatment. Proposed architectural treatment will be in general harmony
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
with surrounding uses and the landscape. To this end, the Plan Commission may require the
use of certain general types of exterior construction materials and/or architectural treatment.
(e) Sloped Sites; Unsuitable Soils. Where slopes exceed six percent (6%) and/or where a use is
proposed to be located on areas indicated as having soils which are unsuitable or marginal
for development, on-site soil tests and/or construction plans shall be provided which clearly
indicate that the soil conditions are adequate to accommodate the development contemplated
and/or that any inherent soil condition or slope problems will be overcome by special
construction techniques. Such special construction might include, among other techniques,
terracing, retaining walls, oversized foundations and footings, drain tile, etc.
(f) Conditional Uses to Comply with Other Requirements. Conditional uses shall comply
with all other provisions of this Chapter such as lot width and area, yards, height, parking
and loading. No conditional use permit shall be granted where the proposed use is deemed
to be inconsistent or conflicting with neighboring uses for reasons of smoke, dust, odors,
noise, vibration, lighting, health hazards or possibility of accident.
SEC. 8-6-11 VALIDITY OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.
Where the Plan Commission has approved or conditionally approved an application for a conditional
use, such approval shall become null and void within twelve (12) months of the date of the
Commission's action unless the use is commenced, construction is underway or the current owner
possesses a valid building permit under which construction is commenced within six (6) months of
the date of issuance and which shall not be renewed unless construction has commenced and is being
diligently prosecuted. Approximately forty-five (45) days prior to the automatic revocation of such
permit, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the holder by certified mail of such revocation. The
Plan Commission may extend such permit for a period of ninety (90) days for justifiable cause, if
application is made to the Village at least thirty (30) days before the expiration of said permit.
SEC. 8-6-12 COMPLAINTS REGARDING CONDITIONAL USES.
The Plan Commission shall retain continuing jurisdiction over all conditional uses for the purpose of
resolving complaints against all previously approved conditional uses. Such authority shall be in
addition to the enforcement authority of the Zoning Administrator to order the removal or
discontinuance of any unauthorized alterations of an approved conditional use, and the elimination,
removal or discontinuance of any violation of a condition imposed prior to or after approval or
violation of any other provision of this Code. Upon written complaint by any citizen or official, the
Plan Commission shall initially determine whether said complaint indicates a reasonable probability
that the subject conditional use is in violation of either one (1) or more of the standards set forth in
Section 8-6-7 above, a condition of approval or other requirement imposed hereunder. Upon
reaching a positive initial determination, a hearing shall be held upon notice as provided in Section
8-6-6 above. Any person may appear at such hearing and testify in person or represented by an
agent or attorney. The Plan Commission may, in order to bring the subject conditional use into
compliance
Section 8-6-12
with the standards set forth in Section 8-6-7 or conditions previously imposed by the Plan
Commission, modify existing conditions upon such use and impose additional reasonable conditions
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
upon the subject conditional use. Additionally, the offending party may be subjected to a forfeiture
as set forth in this Chapter and Chapter 19. In the event that no reasonable modification of such
conditional use can be made in order to assure that Standards (a) and (b) in Section 8-6-7 will be
met, the Plan Commission may revoke the subject conditional approval and direct the Village
Administrator and the Village Attorney to seek elimination of the subject use. Following any such
hearing, the decision of the Plan Commission shall be furnished to the current owner of the
conditional use in writing stating the reasons therefor. An appeal from a decision of the Plan
Commission under this Section may be taken to the Board of Appeals.
SEC. 8-6-13 BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS.
(a) Conditional Use. Bed and breakfast establishments shall be considered conditional uses and
may be permitted in Residence Districts pursuant to the requirements of this Chapter.
(b) Definitions.
(1) "Bed and Breakfast Establishment" means any place of lodging that provides six (6)
or fewer rooms for rent for more than ten (10) nights in a twelve month period, is the
owner's personal residence, is occupied by the owner at the time of rental and in
which the only meal served to guests is breakfast.
(2) "Agent" shall mean the person designated by the owner as the person in charge of
such establishment and whose identity shall be filed in writing with the Zoning
Administrator upon issuance of the permit and updated five (5) days prior to a
designated agent taking charge.
(c) Regulations.
(1) Compliance with State Standards. All bed and breakfast establishments and
licensees shall be subject to and comply with Chapter HSS 197, Wis. Adm. Code,
relating to bed and breakfast establishments or Wis. Adm. Code HSS 195 relating to
hotels, motels and tourist rooming houses.
(2) Registry. Each bed and breakfast establishment shall provide a register and require
all guests to register their true names and addresses before assigned quarters. The
register shall be kept intact and available for inspection by a Village representative
for a period of not less than one (1) year.
(d) Permit Required.
(1) Village Permit Required. In addition to the permit required by Chapters HSS 195 or
HSS 197, Wis. Adm. Code, before opening for business, every bed and breakfast
establishment shall obtain a permit from the Zoning Administrator by application
made upon a form furnished by said officer and shall obtain a conditional use permit.
(2) Application Requirements. The following is required to be furnished at the time an
application is filed for a conditional use permit in addition to the other application
requirements of this Chapter:
a. Site plan showing location and size of buildings, parking areas and signs.
b. Number, surfacing and size of parking stalls.
Section 8-6-13
c. Number, size and lighting of signs.
d. A fee of Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00).
(3) Display of Permit. The permit issued by the Zoning Administrator shall be
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
conspicuously displayed in the bed and breakfast establishment.
(e) Off-Street Parking Required. Permits shall be issued only to those establishments that
provide a minimum of one (1) improved off-street parking space for each room offered for
occupancy. Establishments otherwise qualifying under this Section regulating bed and
breakfast establishments shall not be subject to the other requirements of the Zoning Code
with respect to traffic, parking and access.
(f) On-Site Signs. Total signage shall be limited to a total of twelve (12) square feet and may
be lighted in such manner and nature as to not alter or deteriorate the nature of the
surrounding neighborhood. Establishments otherwise qualifying under this Section
regulating bed and breakfast establishments shall not be subject to the requirements of this
Zoning Code with respect to signs.
(g) Termination of Permit. A bed and breakfast permit shall be void upon the sale or transfer
of the property ownership. The Plan Commission shall review and conditionally approve or
disapprove an application submitted by a person anticipating the purchase of premises for
such use. A permit issued in accordance with Subsection (c) above shall be valid until
terminated by action of the Zoning Administrator for violation of the provisions of this
Section, or of State of Wisconsin regulations as set forth in Chapter HSS 195 or Chapter
HSS 197, Wis. Adm. Code, or as above provided.
SEC. 8-6-14 REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDINGS OR USES WHICH ARE FIFTY
THOUSAND (50,000) SQUARE FEET OR GREATER IN AREA AND WHICH ARE USED
FOR THE PERMITTED OR CONDITIONAL USE IN THE B-1 SHOPPING CENTER
DISTRICT.
(a) Applicability and Standards.
(1) Any building or use which is a permitted or conditional use in the B-1 Shopping
Center District where the size of an enclosed structure used for the permitted or
conditional use is fifty thousand (50,000) square feet or greater in area [and seventyfive
thousand (75,000) square feet or greater in area for the permitted or conditional
use(s) for any single use or multiple uses located within two (2) or more attached
structures,] shall also meet the requirements of this Section in order to obtain a
Conditional Use Permit. This provision shall apply as an overlay over the entire
zoning lot upon which said use or structure is located and as a requirement for any
single use or multiple uses located within one (1) enclosed structure or two (2) or
more attached structures, if that structure or attached structures exceeds fifty
thousand (50,000) square feet in area or seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet
in area, respectively.
(2) The Conditional Use Permit set forth herein shall be required for all new
construction; for any existing building exceeding fifty-thousand (50,000) [(seventyfive
thousand (75,000 square feet for the permitted or conditional use(s) for any
Section 8-6-14
single use or multiple uses located within two (2) or more attached structures)]
square feet in area if that building is expanded or if the present use of the building
ceases for more than one (1) year; and for any building which is expanded to over
fifty (50,000) [(seventy-five thousand (75,000 square feet for the permitted or
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
conditional use(s) for any single use or multiple uses located within two (2) or more
attached structures)] square feet in area. A Conditional Use Permit as set forth herein
shall be required for any building, the footprint of which exceeds [fifty-thousand
(50,000)] [(seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet for the permitted or
conditional use(s) for any single use or multiple uses located within two (2) or more
attached structures)] square feet in area, even when such building contains separate
enclosed uses. Realignment of any interior use of the building without changes to
the exterior walls of the building shall not be considered an expansion of the
building.
(3) The standards of development set forth in this Section shall apply to the review of
requests for Conditional Use Permits for uses specified in this Section. These
standards are intended to ensure that large retail and commercial sales and service
buildings, and the sites they occupy, are properly located and compatible with the
surrounding neighboring area and the Village of Hales Corners.
(4) These standards are in addition to those standards set forth under the provisions of
Section 8-2-3 titled "Site Regulations" of the Village Zoning Code.
(b) Compatibility with Adopted Village of Hales Corners Master Plan Elements Required.
The proposed development shall be compatible with the adopted Village of Hales Corners
Master Plan and/or elements of the Village of Hales Corners Master Plan. The applicant
shall provide, through a written report submitted with the petition for a Conditional Use
Permit, adequate evidence that the proposed building and overall development project shall
not hinder or undermine the Village's community character, existing retail and commercial
sales and service development, or community facility objectives as set forth in adopted
elements of the Village of Hales Corners Master Plan. Building and site design shall be
compatible with the Village of Hales Corners’ urban design objectives for the area in which
the site is located, as expressed through adopted elements of the Village of Hales Corners
Master Plan.
(c) Dimensional, Bulk, and Landscape Surface Ratio Standards.
(1) The following dimensional, bulk, and landscape surface ratio standards shall be
followed:
Section 8-6-14
Type of Standard Standard
Landscape Surface Ratio
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Type of Standard Standard
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) 0.25 (a)
Lot Dimensional Requirements
Minimum Lot Area (s.f.) 40,000
Minimum Lot Width at Public Street Right-of-Way
Line (feet) 200
Minimum Building Setback (Front Yard and Side
Yard on a Corner Lot) from Public Street Right-of-
Way (feet)
50
Minimum Off-Street Parking Setback from a
Public Street Right-of-Way (feet) 25
Minimum Side Yard (feet) 10 (b)
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 25 (b)
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structure (stories/ft.):
Retail
Office
2.0/35
3.0/45
Accessory Structure (stories/ft.) 1.0/25
a. The minimum required landscape surface ratio (LSR) may be reduced by
0.05 if primary access to the property is afforded by a single access drive
shared with an abutting property which is not part of the same zoning lot.
Proof of the grant of such access easement from the abutting property owner
shall be required by the Village.
b. Where any portion of the lot abuts a residential zoning district, the minimum
required side yard or rear yard adjoining such residential zoning district shall
be a minimum of 25 feet in width and which minimum required side yard
and/or rear yard shall not be used for driveway, parking, or accessory
building purposes.
(2) Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) Requirements. The minimum required landscape
surface ratio (LSR) shall be twenty-five (25) percent, subject to the following:
a. Developed Parcels of Land, Lots, or Zoning Lots Less than Forty Thousand
(40,000) Square Feet in Area. The landscape surface ratio (LSR) of
developed parcels of land, lots, or zoning lot land area which are less than
forty thousand (40,000) square feet in area shall not be reduced below the
existing landscape surface ratio (LSR) at the time of the adoption of this
Ordinance or reduced below a landscape surface ratio (LSR) of twenty-five
Section 8-6-14
(25) percent, whichever is less.
b. Developed Parcels of Land, Lot, or Zoning Lots Forty Thousand (40,000)
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Square Feet in Area or Greater.
1. Increases in Floor Area of Ten (10) Percent or Less. Additions and
cumulative additions to existing buildings and/or existing uses
located on parcels of land, lots, or zoning lot land area that are forty
thousand (40,000) square feet or greater in area and where the total
gross floor area existing at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance
is not increased more than ten (10) percent of the existing total floor
area shall be exempt from the twenty-five (25) percent minimum
required landscape surface ratio (LSR) but shall not result in a loss of
any existing LSR.
2. Increases in Floor Area of Greater than Ten (10) Percent. Additions
and cumulative additions to existing buildings and/or existing uses
located on parcels of land or lots that are forty thousand (40,000)
square feet or greater in area and where the total floor area existing at
the time of the adoption of this Ordinance is increased greater than
ten (10) percent of the existing total floor area shall:
(a) Not result in a loss of existing LSR and shall comply with the
landscape surface ratio (LSR) specified in this Ordinance to
the maximum extent possible for the total parcel, lot, or
zoning lot land area; and
(b) Comply with the minimum required landscape surface ratio
(LSR) of twenty-five (25) percent for that portion of the
parcel, lot, or zoning lot land area upon which the new
development is proposed to occur. When determining the
land area of that portion of the parcel, lot, or zoning lot upon
which the new development or redevelopment is proposed to
occur, all existing building coverage, existing off-street
parking areas, existing drives and loading areas, and existing
setback areas which are not proposed to be disturbed by the
proposed new development shall be excluded.
(d) Concrete Curb and Gutter Required for Off-Street Parking Areas. Concrete curb and
gutter meeting Village of Hales Corners specifications shall be required for off-street parking
areas serving more than five (5) vehicles. This requirement shall also apply to the expansion
of any existing off-street parking lot where the number of off-street parking spaces is
increased by twenty (20) spaces or more.
(e) Cart Corrals and Outdoor Cart Storage Areas.
(1) Cart corrals and outdoor cart storage areas shall not occupy any required off-street
parking spaces.
(2) A minimum of one (1) one hundred and eighty (180) square foot cart corral/cart
storage area shall be provided for every fifty (50) off-street parking spaces. Cart
corrals shall be of a durable, all season construction, and shall be designed and
Section 8-6-14
colored so as to be compatible with the building and parking lot luminaires and pole
standards. There shall be no exterior cart corral or cart storage areas located within
forty (40) feet of the building.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
(f) Provision of Adequate On-Site Automobile Queuing Area. The following standards shall
apply:
(1) Queuing Space Entering from Public Collector or Arterial Street. There shall be
sufficient on-site space to accommodate at least three (3) queued vehicles waiting to
park or exit the parking lot without utilizing any portion of the collector or arterial
street right-of-way or in any other way interfere with collector or arterial street traffic
and safety.
(2) Drive-in and Drive-Through Establishments. The following standards shall apply:
a. Drive-in and drive-through establishments for banks, savings and loans, and
financial institutions shall provide a minimum of six (6) automobile stacking
or queuing spaces on-site per teller or customer service area.
b. Drive-in and drive-through establishments for restaurants shall provide a
minimum of ten (10) automobile stacking or queuing spaces on-site per
service area.
(g) Pedestrian and Bicycle Access.
(1) The development shall provide for safe pedestrian and bicycle access to all uses
within the development, connections to existing and planned public pedestrian and
bicycle facilities, and connections to adjacent properties.
(2) Sidewalks shall be provided along the entire length of any building facade elevation
containing a public entrance.
(3) Internal pedestrian walkways shall be distinguished from vehicular driving surfaces
through the use of brick pavers, stone pavers, or concrete.
(4) The development shall provide secure, integrated bicycle parking and pedestrian
furniture in appropriate quantities and location as determined by the Plan
Commission.
(h) Minimum Required Off-Street Parking Separation From On-Site Buildings. All offstreet
parking areas shall be separated from buildings with pedestrian walkways and planting
areas not less than fifteen (15) feet in total width. The foundation landscape planting area
along the building shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width and the walkway shall be a
minimum of five (5) feet in width.
(i) Loading Docks, On-Site Loading Spaces, and/or Building Service Areas.
(1) No loading dock, on-site loading space, and/or building service area shall be located
so as to face or front upon an abutting public street right-of-way (except as may be
the case for a lot for which both the front and rear lot lines abut such public rights-ofway)
or so as to be visible from said abutting public street rights-of-way (in the case
of a lot for which both the front and rear lot lines abut such rights-of-way). All
loading spaces shall be located in either the side or rear yard but not within required
side or rear yard setbacks.
(2) Loading docks, on-site loading spaces, and/or building service areas shall be
screened from view from abutting residential properties and/or public street rightsof-
way with
Section 8-6-14
either a wall or sight-proof fence and associated landscaping approved by the Village
Plan Commission. All loading and unloading service area walls shall be constructed
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
of masonry materials of a type and color which match the building to which they are
accessory to and are compatible with the building architecture to which they are
accessory to. All outdoor loading/unloading service area screening walls shall not be
less than fifteen (15) feet in height.
(3) No truck shall be allowed to have its engine or other motorized equipment running
(such as a refrigeration unit) which exceeds the maximum permitted exterior sound
level of fifty (50) dBA (A-weighting scale of sound measurement as expressed in
decibels and not to be exceeded more than 30 minutes out of 24 hours) as measured
at the property line.
(j) Maximum Area of Outdoor Storage, Location, and Screening Requirements.
(1) No outdoor storage area shall exceed an area which is five (5) percent of the gross
floor area of the principal structure to which said outdoor storage is accessory to, or
five thousand (5,000) square feet, whichever is less.
(2) An outdoor storage area shall not be allowed within any areas required to meet the
minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR) and cannot occupy any off-street parking
area or driveway area.
(3) No portion of any lot shall be used for open or unscreened storage of any kind.
Outdoor storage areas shall be screened from view of any public street right-of-way,
public park or public open space area, and from the view from all residential zoning
districts. The screening and design requirements of all such areas shall consist of the
following:
a. Solid walls or solid fences a minimum of eight (8) feet in height and in no
case lower in height than the enclosed storage area when a height exceeding
eight (8) feet is approved by the Plan Commission. In no case, however,
shall a solid wall exceed a height of fourteen (14) feet or solid fence exceed a
height of eight (8) feet.
b. Access to such storage areas shall be through solid gates that shall be closed
except when said outdoor storage area is in use for the transport of stored
materials.
c. All such outdoor storage areas shall provide a contiguous landscape
bufferyard with a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet. The following
minimum number, types, and sizes of plant materials shall be provided per
one-hundred (100) linear feet of landscape bufferyard length and fraction
thereof. Fractional plants resulting from this computation of required plant
materials shall be rounded to the next whole number. Preserved existing
plants shall be credited towards these requirements on a one-for-one basis
based upon plant type.
Section 8-6-14
Type of Plants and
Landscape Structures
Required
Minimum Quantity
Required Per 100 Feet
of Bufferyard Length
Minimum Size
Required at Time of
Installation
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Canopy/Shade Trees 2 3 inch caliper
Understory Trees 3 2 inch caliper
Evergreen Trees 3 6 feet tall
Shrubs 14 2 feet tall
d. Walls, fencing, and landscaping for outdoor storage areas shall be maintained
in good condition and kept litter-free.
(4) Outdoor storage areas are not outdoor sales and display areas that are regulated
separately by this Ordinance.
(k) Outdoor Display of Merchandise. Outdoor display of merchandise includes the outdoor
display of merchandise (except bulk inventory), materials, and equipment including items for
customer pick-up on that day, or the site of, and operated by a legally established business.
The Plan Commission shall consider as part of any Site Plan review those requests for
outdoor display areas as authorized by this Ordinance subject to the following:
(1) No outdoor display shall be permitted that is not accessory to an enclosed principal
building.
(2) No outdoor display area shall exceed an area greater than five (5) percent of the
gross floor area of the principal structure to which said outdoor sales and display area
is accessory to.
(3) No outdoor display area shall encroach into areas set aside for compliance with other
criteria, such as but not limited to, required yard setbacks, sidewalks, building
entrances and exits, vision setbacks, landscaping, green space and landscape surface
ratio areas, stormwater detention or retention areas, pedestrian areas, emergency
vehicle lanes, and motor vehicle and bicycle parking areas and access.
(4) Outdoor sales and display areas shall not impede the growth or maintenance of
required landscaping.
(5) Outdoor sales and display areas shall not include bulk merchandise (either packaged
or unpackaged), such as topsoil, fertilizer, ornamental stone, mulch, firewood and
other similar items unless the area is screened pursuant to the following screening
requirements:
a. Solid walls or solid fences a minimum of eight (8) feet in height and in no
case lower in height than the enclosed outdoor display area when a height
exceeding eight (8) feet is approved by the Plan Commission. In no case,
however, shall a solid wall exceed a height of fourteen (14) feet or solid
fence exceed a height of eight (8) feet.
b. All such outdoor sales and display areas shall provide contiguous landscape
bufferyards with a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet. The following
minimum number, types, and sizes of plant materials shall be provided per
one-hundred (100) linear feet of landscape bufferyard length and fraction
Section 8-6-14
thereof. Fractional plants resulting from this computation of required plant
materials shall be rounded to the next whole number. Preserved existing
plants shall be credited towards these requirements on a one-for-one basis
based upon plant type.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Type of Plants Required Minimum Quantity
Required Per 100 Feet
of Bufferyard Length
Minimum Size
Required at Time of
Installation
Canopy/Shade Trees 2 3 inch caliper
Understory Trees 3 2 inch caliper
Evergreen Trees 3 6 feet tall
Shrubs 14 2 feet tall
c. Walls, fencing, and landscaping for outdoor sales and display areas shall be
maintained in good condition and kept litter-free.
(6) Decorative fencing shall not include the use of chain-link or wire-mesh fencing. The
use of barbed or razor-wire fencing is prohibited.
(7) Access to such outdoor sales and display areas shall be through gates that shall be
closed and secured except when said outdoor area is in use.
(8) No products or materials shall be stored or displayed between a wall or fence located
adjacent to a lot line and the lot line.
(9) All outdoors sales and display areas shall be required to be improved with pavement
of either asphalt or concrete.
(10) Outdoor storage of equipment or vehicle parts, parts salvage or supplies unless
specifically allowed herein is prohibited.
(11) Permitted repair, installation, manufacturing, and assembly uses shall be conducted
within a completely enclosed building.
(12) Signage is subject to approval by the Zoning Administrator subject to the
requirements of Chapter 9 "Signs and Billboards" of the Village of Hales Corners
Zoning Code.
(13) Outdoor sales and display areas are not storage areas that are regulated separately by
this Ordinance.
(14) Exceptions. The other provisions of this Section notwithstanding, outdoor sales and
display shall be allowed to provide for the temporary outdoor display of seasonal
merchandise pursuant to the following requirements.
a. Seasonal merchandise defined as "merchandise that is sold only part of the
year during one of the four seasons: winter, spring, summer or fall." Seasonal
merchandise shall include firewood, Christmas trees, fruits and vegetables,
outdoor plants, packaged mulch, packaged garden fertilizer, packaged
ornamental stone, packaged charcoal, lawnmowers, roto-tillers, bicycles,
wading pools, lawn furniture, and other similar items.
b. Temporary outdoor display of seasonal merchandise.
Section 8-6-14
(l) Minimum Required Public Areas and Pedestrian Features. Each development shall
provide a central area(s) or feature(s) such as public seating area, pedestrian plaza with
benches, water feature, and/or other such designated pedestrian area(s) or focal point(s). All
such areas shall be openly accessible to the public, connected to the public and private
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
sidewalk system, designed with materials compatible with the building and site landscaping,
and maintained over the life of the building and project. Such area(s) shall not be less than
two and one-half (2.5) percent of the total site area and shall be counted towards the
minimum required landscape surface ratio (LSR) regardless of impervious surface area.
(m) Minimum Required Landscaping.
(1) Required Landscape Bufferyards Required Between the B-1 Shopping Center
District and Any Abutting Residential Zoning Districts. Landscape bufferyards with
a minimum width of twenty-five (25) feet are required between the B-1 Shopping
Center District and any abutting residential zoning districts. The following minimum
number, types, and sizes of plant materials and fencing shall be provided per onehundred
(100) linear feet of landscape bufferyard length and fraction thereof.
Fractional plants resulting from this computation of required plant materials shall be
rounded to the next whole number. Preserved existing plants shall be credited
towards these requirements on a one-for-one basis based upon plant type.
Type of Plants and
Landscape Structures
Required
Minimum Quantity
Required Per 100 Feet
of Bufferyard Length
Minimum Size
Required at Time of
Installation
Canopy/Shade Trees 3 3 inch caliper
Evergreen Trees 6 6 feet tall
Shrubs 16 2 feet tall
Board-on-Board Solid
Wood Fence
1 6 feet tall
(2) Required Landscape Bufferyards Between Off-Street Parking Areas and Public
Street Rights-of-Way. Landscape bufferyards with a minimum width of thirty (30)
feet are required between all off-street parking areas and public street rights-of-way.
The following minimum number, types, and sizes of plant materials shall be provided
per one-hundred (100) linear feet of landscape bufferyard length and fraction thereof.
Fractional plants resulting from this computation of required plant materials shall be
rounded to the next whole number. Preserved existing plants shall be credited
towards these requirements on a one-for-one basis based upon plant type.
Section 8-6-14
Type of Plants Required Minimum Quantity
Required Per 100 Feet
of Bufferyard Length
Minimum Size
Required at Time of
Installation
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Canopy/Shade Trees 2 3 inch caliper
Evergreen Trees 4 6 feet tall
Shrubs 10 2 feet tall
(3) Required Landscape Areas and Landscape Plant Materials for Off-Street Parking
Spaces.
a. The minimum required landscape area required within an off-street parking
area per twenty (20) off-street parking spaces, or fraction thereof, shall be
seven hundred (700) square feet.
b. The following minimum number, types, and sizes of plant materials shall be
provided per twenty (20) off-street parking spaces. Fractional plants
resulting from this computation of required plant materials shall be rounded
to the next whole number. Preserved existing plants shall be credited
towards these requirements on a one-for-one basis based upon plant type.
Type of Plants Required Minimum Quantity
Required Per Twenty
(20) Off-Street Parking
Spaces
Minimum Size
Required at Time of
Installation
Canopy/Shade Trees 2 3 inch caliper
Understory Trees 4 2 inch caliper
Shrubs 16 18 inches tall
(4) Other On-Site Landscape Plant Materials. The following minimum number, types,
and sizes of plant materials shall be provided per one (1) acre of site area, or fraction
thereof, (excluding site area occupied by all impervious surface areas, stormwater
detention/retention areas, required landscape bufferyard areas, and required offstreet
parking landscape areas). Fractional plants resulting from this computation of
required plant materials shall be rounded to the next whole number. Preserved
existing plants shall be credited towards these requirements on a one-for-one basis
based upon plant type.
Section 8-6-14
Type of Plants Required Minimum Quantity Minimum Size Require
Required Per One (1)
Acre of Land or Fraction
Thereof
d
at Time of Installation
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Canopy/Shade Trees 4 3 inch caliper
Understory Trees 4 2 inch caliper
Evergreen Trees 4 6 feet tall
Shrubs 24 18 inches tall
(5) Building Foundation Landscaping Required. Building foundation landscaping for all
building frontages facing public streets, off-street parking lots, or residential zoning
districts is required. Building foundation landscaping shall be placed in a landscape
bed no less than ten (10) feet in width along the facade of the building.
(6) Plant Material Substitution. Required landscape plant material types may be
substituted for other types based upon the following:
Required Plant Material
Type
Acceptable Substitutions
1 Canopy Tree:
Single Stem or
Multi-stem Clump:
2 Understory Trees
2 inch caliper each
or
2 Coniferous Trees
6 feet in height each
or
1 Understory Tree
2 inch caliper each
Plus
1 Coniferous Tree
6 feet in height each
1 Coniferous Tree 1 Understory Tree
1.5 inch caliper each
1 Understory Tree 1 Coniferous Tree
6 feet in height each
1 Shrub 1 Understory Tree
1.5 inch caliper each
or
1 Coniferous Tree
4 feet in height each
(n) Building Design Requirements. The following standards and requirements for
Section 8-6-14
architectural review are used by the Plan Commission in its review of the architecture for
proposed new buildings and building expansions. These standards are also intended to be a
design aid for builders and owners to use in the preparation of architectural plans. A
Building Permit shall not be issued for any building which does not meet the requirements of
this Section. To implement this Ordinance, the following architectural review standards and
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
requirements are hereby established and shell be met:
(1) Building Compatibility. All buildings on lots and parcels shall be designed to be
compatible with one another.
(2) Aesthetic Design of All Building Elevations Required. All buildings on all lots shall
be aesthetically designed on all sides of the building and on all building facade
elevations which are visible by the general public either on-site or from the public
street right-of-way or which are visible from abutting residential properties. All
buildings facing public streets and public areas shall continue the major front
elevation design elements to those other elevations facing the public streets or public
areas. Building facades and elevations which appear as a "blank wall" with no
architectural delineation, articulation, and architectural detail shall be avoided.
(3) Building Scale, Mass, and Facade Articulation.
a. The relative proportion of a building to its neighboring existing buildings, to
pedestrians or observers, or to other existing buildings shall be maintained or
enhanced when new buildings are built or when existing buildings are
remodeled or altered.
b. A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the length of each building facade
elevation which is visible by the general public either on-site or from a public
street right-of-way or which is visible from abutting residential properties
shall have facade protrusions or recesses which shall be a minimum of three
(3) feet in depth.
(4) Building Entrances for the Public.
a. Public entryways to the building shall be clearly defined and highly visible.
b. Two (2) or more of the following design features shall be incorporated into
all public entryways to the building: canopies or porticos, roof or canopy
overhangs, projections, peaked roof forms, arches, outdoor patios, display
windows, distinct architectural details.
c. In order to encourage pedestrian use of the building and to maximize
building access, all sides of the building that directly face or abut a public
street or on-site off-street parking area shall have at least one (1) public
entrance to the building, except that the Village shall not require public
entryways to the building on more than two (2) elevations of any building.
(5) Building Rooflines and Roof Shapes.
a. Building rooflines may be required by the Plan Commission to complement
existing building rooflines in the surrounding area.
b. The visual continuity of roofs and their contributing elements (parapet walls,
coping, cornices, etc.) shall be maintained in building development,
redevelopment, and building additions. However, no building facade
Section 8-6-14
elevations which are visible by the general public either on-site or from the
public street right-of-way or which are visible from abutting residential
properties shall have not less than three (3) independent major rooflines. A
minimum of twenty (20) percent of all of the total length of any building
facade elevation which is visible by the general public either on-site or from
the public street right-of-way or which is visible from abutting residential
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
properties shall employ differences in roofline height with such differences
being a minimum of six (6) feet of height as measured from eave to eave or
parapet to parapet. The following types of differences in the roof lines of a
building may be deemed sufficient by the Plan Commission to meet these
requirements:
1. Providing intersecting roof(s) with the main roof.
2. A building which has three (3) independent major roof areas with the
changing of two (2) out of the three (3) roof lines. Acknowledging
certain design elements may prevent the changing of all three (3) roof
lines, it is desired that the roofs with the greatest impact visual
exposure to the public be changed.
The following changes shall not be deemed sufficient to be a major roofline
change:
3. Small gable or hip projections above windows or parapet walls.
4. Window dormers or window awnings.
5. Change in soffit or canopy overhangs, minor variations in eave
heights, or minor variations in top of parapet wall.
6. Skylights and cupolas.
(6) Ground Floor Building Facade Elevations Facing Public Streets. Ground floor
building facade elevations that face and are within one hundred twenty-five (125)
feet of public streets shall have display windows, pedestrian walkways and covered
pedestrian walkways, public entry areas to the building, canopies, awnings, or other
such features along no less than forty (40) percent of the total length of the building
facade elevation facing said public street.
(7) Building Plans to Be Prepared by a Wisconsin Registered Architect. All buildings
shall be designed by a registered architect of the State of Wisconsin.
(o) Developer’s Agreement Required. The developer and the owner of the property upon
which the establishment will be located shall enter a Developer's Agreement with the Village
of Hales Corners which shall be binding upon the developer, the owner, and their
mortgagees, land contract vendors, lessees, contractors, agents, officers, employees, personal
representatives, guardians, heirs, successors (whether individual, firm, partnership, or
corporation) and assigns. The Developer's Agreement shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
(1) A provision that, if the building stands unused for the use for which the original
Conditional Use Permit was issued, the developer shall restore the property to a
developable condition by either razing the building and restoring the land or
remodeling the building for a use permitted or conditionally permitted in the B-1
Section 8-6-14
Shopping Center District, obtaining the appropriate permits, and actually using the
property for the new use. No new use for warehousing shall be allowed pursuant to
this section unless it is incidental and accessory to a retail use at the same site.
a. This provision shall also provide that, if the developer has not razed the
building or put the structure to use pursuant to this subsection within three
(3) years from the time of cessation of the original use, the Village Board of
the Village of Hales Corners may demand that the developer raze the
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
building and restore the land at the developer's expense, and if the developer
fails to do so after such notice by the Village of Hales Corners, the Village
Board of the Village of Hales Corners may cause the building to be razed and
the land to be restored and shall assess the cost against the real estate as a
special charge. The Village may, as a condition of the Conditional Use
Permit, demand a performance bond to ensure fulfillment of this requirement.
b. The intermittent use of the building for less than fifty (50) percent of days in
the calculation of the three (3) year period shall constitute an unused
condition for purposes of this Section, and the burden of establishing periods
of use shall be upon the developer.
(2) A provision that, if the property is within five hundred (500) feet of a residential
property, the Plan Commission may consider limiting the hours of operation of the
business, which limits shall be strictly enforced.
(3) A provision setting forth a requirement for a noise buffer over and above provisions
set forth elsewhere in the Village Code.
(4) A provision reciting traffic flow patterns of delivery trucks which shall be strictly
enforced.
(5) A requirement that no outside container storage shall be permitted unless it is
screened from neighboring properties, which screening shall be based upon a Site
Plan submitted, reviewed and approved by the Plan Commission prior to issuance of
the Conditional Use Permit.
(6) A requirement for a cash bond or letter of credit, at the developer's discretion, to be
maintained permanently or until revision of the terms of the conditional use permit
by the Plan Commission, and established initially in the amount of ten (10) percent
of the costs of the landscaping and stormwater drainage facility installation, as
determined by the Village Engineer, to maintain landscaping and stormwater
drainage facilities, with a provision that the cash bond balance be replenished by the
property owner upon notice by the Village of Hales Corner if the Village of Hales
Corners draws the bond down due to the property owner's failure to perform such
maintenance. (The developer's agreement specific provision shall provide for 150%
of costs to Village of Hales Corners per draw, to compensate for overhead).
(7) A provision for limitation of the type and configuration of signage to be allowed and
which limitation may allow lesser signage than would otherwise be allowed under
the provisions of the Village of Hales Corners Zoning Code.
(8) A provision that the Plan Commission and Village Board approval of the developer's
agreement shall constitute the incorporation of the Developer's Agreement into the
Section 8-6-14
Conditional Use Permit as a condition of such Conditional Use Permit and that any
violation of the provisions of the Developer's Agreement shall be a violation of the
Conditional Use Permit and shall be enforced by the Zoning Administrator in
addition to all other remedies set forth in the Developer's Agreement or allowed by
law.
(p) Impact on Existing Village of Hales Corners Business Locations. Where such a building
is proposed as a replacement location for a business already located within the Village of
Hales Corners, the Village shall prohibit any privately imposed limits on the type of reuse of
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
the previously occupied building through conditions of sale or lease. If the applicant
requires such limits, the applicant may seek Village approval to demolish the previously
occupied structure and prepare the site for future redevelopment.
(q) Existing Nonconforming and Substandard Lots. Existing nonconforming and
substandard lots which comprise the site area for the proposed development shall be
combined by "land consolidation" as a condition of the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit.
No Building Permit shall be issued for the conditional use until said land consolidation has
occurred.
(r) Waiver of Standards. The Plan Commission may waive any of the above standards by a
three-quarters (3/4) vote of Plan Commission members in attendance, but only if
supplemental design elements or improvements are incorporated into the project which
compensate for the waiver of the particular standard.
Reference: Ordinance 05-18
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-7-1
CHAPTER 7
Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Lots
SEC. 8-7-1 EXISTING USE PERMITTED.
The existing lawful use of a structure or land at the time of the enactment of this Ordinance or any
amendment applicable thereto which is not in conformity with the provisions established by this
Ordinance may be continued in the manner and for the purposes then existent subject to the
conditions hereinafter stated.
SEC. 8-7-2 CLASSIFICATION AND REGULATION.
For the purpose of administration, such non-conformity shall be classified and regulated as follows:
(a) Non-Conforming Structures.
(1) No such structure shall be expanded, enlarged, reconstructed, substituted, moved or
structurally altered, except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which
it is located.
(2) When such structure is damaged to the extent of more than 50% of its current full
market value, it shall not be restored except in conformity with the regulations of the
district in which it is located.
(b) Non-Conforming Use of Structure.
(1) No such use shall be expanded or enlarged.
(2) Upon petition to and approval of the Board of Appeals, such use may be changed to
another use provided the Board determines that the new use would result in an equal
or lesser degree of non-conformity and provided further that such new use shall
thereafter determine the degree of legal non-conformity.
(3) Where any such use is discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive or for 18
accumulative months during any three-year period, any future use of the structure
shall conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.
(4) Where the structure in which such use is carried on is damaged to the extent of more
than 50% of its current full market value, it shall not be restored for use except in
conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
(5) Structural repairs and alterations to a structure housing such use shall not, as long as
such use continues, exceed 50% of the full market value of the structure at the time
the use became non-conforming.
(c) Non-Conforming Lots.
(1) No such lot shall be conveyed to a new owner except in conformity with the
applicable provisions of the Land Division and Subdivision Ordinance of the Village.
(2) No building or occupancy permit shall be issued except in conformity with the
"General Provision" of this Ordinance and the standards of the individual zoning
district.
(3) The size and shape of such lot shall not be altered in any way so as to increase the
Section 8-7-2
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
degree of non-conformity except with the approval of the Board of Appeals.
(d) Non-Conforming Use of Land.
(1) No such use shall be expanded or enlarged.
(2) Upon petition to and approval of the Board of Appeals, such use may be changed to
another use provided the Board determines that the new use would result in an equal
or lesser degree of non-conformity and provided further that such new use shall
thereafter determine the degree of legal non-conformity.
(3) Where any such use is discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive or for 18
accumulative months during any three year period, any future use of the land shall
conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.
SEC. 8-7-3 REMOVAL OF HAZARDS.
Where, upon complaint of the Building Inspector, any non-conforming structure or use shall be
found by the Board of Appeals as a matter of fact to be a detriment to the public health, safety or
general welfare, such structure shall be ordered to be removed or such use to be discontinued within
such time as the Board may deem reasonable. Upon failure to carry out such order, the Village may
take such steps as are necessary to remove such structure or discontinue such use and assess the cost
thereof against the property owner.
SEC. 8-7-4 FRONT SETBACK DEVIATIONS.
Where the front setback requirements of this Chapter deviate more than ten percent (10%) from
established front setbacks of buildings within the immediate area and facing on the same side of a
street, the Zoning Administrator shall establish front setbacks within ten percent (10%) in line with
existing buildings.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-8-1
CHAPTER 8
Traffic Visibility, Loading, Parking and Access
SEC. 8-8-1 TRAFFIC VISIBILITY.
(a) On a corner lot in all zoning districts, no fence, wall, parking, vegetation, hedge, planting or
structure shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to obstruct
vision between a height of two and one-half (2-1/2) feet and ten (10) feet above the
centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the edge of right-of-way
street lines of such corner lots and a line joining the points along said street lines fifteen (15)
feet from the joint of intersection.
(b) In the case of arterial streets intersecting with other arterial streets or railways, the corner
cutoff distances establishing the triangular vision clearance space shall be increased to thirty
(30) feet.
(c) This regulation shall not apply to the trunks of trees and posts not over six (6) inches square
or in diameter.
SEC. 8-8-2 LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
(a) Loading Space Requirements. On every lot on which a business or industrial use is
hereafter established, space with access to a public street or alley shall be provided as
indicated below for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the public right-of-way:
Gross Floor Areas No. Minimum Size Min. Vert. Clearance
3,000 - 10,000 sq. ft. 1 10 ft. x 35 ft. 13 ft.
10,001 - 25,000 sq. ft. 2 10 ft. x 35 ft. ea. 15 ft.
25,001 - 40,000 sq. ft. 2 12 ft. x 65 ft. ea. 15 ft.
40,001 - 99,000 sq. ft. 3 12 ft. x 65 ft ea. 15 ft.
For each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area or
fraction thereof over one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet, one (1) additional loading
space shall be provided.
(b) Multiple or Mixed Uses. Where a building is devoted to more than one (1) use or for
different uses and where the floor area for each use is below the minimum required for a
loading space but the aggregate floor area of such uses is above such a minimum, then offstreet
loading space shall be provided as if the entire building were devoted to that use in the
building for which the most loading spaces are required.
(c) Location. Required off-street loading spaces shall be located on the same lot with the
principal use requiring such space. No loading space shall be located within thirty (30) feet
of the nearest point of intersection of two (2) streets or require any vehicle to back into a
public street.
(d) Surfacing. All open off-street loading berths shall be improved with a compacted gravel
Section 8-8-2
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
base, not less than seven (7) inches thick, surfaced with not less than two (2) inches of
asphalt or treated with some comparable all-weather dustless material.
(e) Repair and Service. No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted
in conjunction with loading facilities provided in any Residential District.
(f) Utilization. Space allocated to any off-street loading berth shall not, while so allocated, be
used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking facilities or portions thereof.
(g) Central Loading. Central loading facilities may be substituted for loading berths on the
individual zoning lots provided the following conditions are fulfilled:
(1) Each zoning lot served shall have direct access to the Central Loading Area without
crossing streets or alleys at grade.
(2) Total berths provided shall meet the requirements based on the sum of the several
types of uses served. (Areas of types of uses may be totaled before computing
number of loading berths.)
(3) No zoning lot served shall be more than three hundred (300) feet removed from the
Central Loading Area.
(4) The tunnel or ramp connecting the Central Loading Area with the zoning lot served
shall be not less than seven (7) feet in width and have a clearance of not less than
seven (7) feet.
SEC. 8-8-3 PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
(a) General Requirements.
(1) No building permit shall be issued for a new building or for substantial alternations
or enlargements for any existing building unless there is included with the
application and plans for such structure, alteration or enlargement a plot plan
showing the off-street parking spaces and loading areas in accordance with this
Section. Such plan shall address landscaping, drainage provisions and driveway
locations. No occupancy or building permit shall be issued unless the required
parking areas shall comply with the requirements of this Section.
(2) When the intensity of use of any building, structure or premises shall be increased
through the addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity or other
units of measurement, such additional parking and loading facilities as required
herein shall be provided.
(3) Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall be changed to a new use,
parking or loading facilities shall be provided as required for such new use.
However, if the said building or structure was erected prior to the effective date of
this Chapter, additional parking or loading facilities are mandatory only in the
amount by which the requirements for the new use exceed those for the existing use.
(4) The Plan Commission, upon review, may require any additional number of parking
stalls than those listed in 8-8-3(h) for the purpose of ensuring that adequate facilities
are provided to serve the intended use of the site.
(b) Access. Each required off-street parking stall shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway
of a width and design in accordance with Village of Hales Corners standards of design. All
Section 8-8-3
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
off-street parking facilities shall be provided with appropriate means of vehicular access to a
street or alley.
(c) Design Standards. The size of each parking stall shall be not less than one hundred eighty
(180) square feet exclusive of the space required for ingress and egress. Minimum width of
aisles providing access to stalls for one-way traffic shall be as follows: Eleven (11) feet for
thirty degree (30°) parking; and twenty (20) feet for ninety degree (90°) parking. Minimum
width of aisles providing access to stalls for two-way traffic shall be twenty-four (24) feet.
No parking area of more than two (2) stalls shall be designed as to require any vehicle to
back into a public street. Large expanses of unchanneled parking areas shall be avoided by
interior landscaping and safety islands.
(d) Location.
(1) Location to be on the same lot as the principal use or not over four hundred (400)
feet from the principal use.
(2) Off-street parking is permitted in all yards of all districts except in the front yards of
single-family and two-family residence district but shall not be closer than five (5)
feet to a nonresidential side lot line, right-of-way, or rear lot line. No parking stall or
driveway, except in residential districts, shall be closer than twenty-five (25) feet to a
residential district lot line. A reduced setback of no less than ten (10) feet upon
nonresidential district property and from a residential district lot line may be
permitted by the Plan Commission, if there is a finding that an adequate provision
can be made for effective screening, snow storage, preservation of existing
vegetation, topography, drainage, vision triangles, vehicular training radii, the effect
of street salting, utility location, and exterior lighting. Screening must be consistent
with the character and scale of the properties in the adjacent residential district by
incorporating natural vegetative screens, non-metal fences, or combinations thereof.
(3) Off-street parking in the single-family and two-family residence districts is permitted
in the front yard driveway, even though closer than five (5) feet to a side lot line.
(e) Surfacing. All off-street parking areas, except a single parking stall accessory to a singlefamily
dwelling, shall be surfaced with a compacted macadam base, or equal, not less than
four (4) inches thick and surfaced with at least a two (2) inch thick asphaltic concrete or
comparable hard-surfaced, all-weather, dustless materials as approved by the Village
Engineer. A parking area serving four (4) or more vehicles shall have the aisles and spaces
clearly marked. Compacted stone or gravel may be used only with the approval of the Plan
Commission. Completion of surfacing is required prior to the issuance of an occupancy
permit. However, for required surfacing during the period between November 1st and April
1st, the owner shall enter into an agreement with the Village agreeing to complete all
required surfacing by no later than the following June 1st.
(f) Landscaping.
(1) General Screening Requirements.
a. The Plan Commission shall determine whether the paved parking and loading
areas are to be screened from abutting residential districts by a buffering area
of at least ten (10) feet in width and landscaped and maintained in a manner
as specified in this Section or screened by a solid fence or masonry wall or
Section 8-8-3
acceptable material and design to be maintained in a manner as determined
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
by the Plan Commission.
b. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall submit a
landscape plan for planting preparing by a registered landscape architect or a
fence design with detailed specifications, whichever is applicable, together
with a firm bid for installation of the required improvement buffering the
business site from the abutting residence site, and shall post a bond
guaranteeing performance of such installation within one (1) year of the
issuance of the building permit. Prior to the issuance of an occupancy
permit, the parking area improvements must be completed or a surety filed to
guarantee to the Village that these improvements will be installed within one
(1) year of occupancy.
c. Buffering areas shall be designed to neutralize the transition from a business
use site to a residential use site. Planting in this area shall be, among others,
for the purpose of shielding of lights of the business area from the residential
area and the business operations. Such area shall be landscaped and
maintained in an attractive manner and shall be planted with trees, bushes
and shrubs forming an effective screen. Plantings shall not be made of
seedlings but from stock that is capable of attaining a good growth within a
period of five (5) years. Such plantings to be made from varieties that will, at
maturity, reach a height of ten (10) to fifteen (15) feet and form a dense
growth. Planting shall occur during the first planting season after
construction is completed. Where a solidly constructed decorative fence is
provided along the interior lot line, the minimum setback for the parking area
shall be five (5) feet from said lot line. Said fence shall be located a
minimum of one (1) foot from the said lot line. No accessory buildings or
vehicular parking shall be permitted therein. After the initial planting, the
owner and occupant, jointly and severally, shall be required to maintain such
buffer strip by preserving it in the manner contemplated by the Plan
Commission and, by way of illustration but not of limitation, maintenance
shall include cutting, trimming and fertilizing, if necessary. Replacement
shall be required for any subsequent destroyed, eroded or dead plantings in
order to preserve the protective shield between properties. In the event such
screening is provided by a solid fence or masonry wall, the owner must
maintain an attractive buffer.
(2) Location. The location of landscape areas, plant materials and protection afforded
the plantings, including curbing and provision for maintenance by the property
owner, shall be subject to approval by the Village Engineer.
(3) Plans. All plans for such proposed parking areas, at the discretion of the Village
Engineer, shall include a topographic survey or grading plan which shows existing
and proposed grades and location of improvements. The preservation of existing
trees, shrubs and other natural vegetation in the parking area may be included in the
calculation of the required minimum landscape area.
Section 8-8-3
(4) Repair and Service. No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be
permitted in association with parking facilities provided in Residence Districts.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
(5) Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be directed
away from residential properties and public streets in such a way as not to create a
nuisance. However, in no case shall such lighting exceed three (3) footcandles
measured at the lot line.
(6) Street Setback Area. No parking shall be permitted between the street right-of-way
line and the building setback line prevailing in the zone in which the proposed
parking area is to be located. The resulting open area shall be planted in grass or
otherwise landscaped to create a permanent green area.
(g) Curbs. Curbs or barriers shall be installed a minimum of four (4) feet from a property line
so as to prevent the parked vehicles from extending over any lot lines.
(h) Number of Stalls. Number of parking stalls required are shown in the following table:
Use
Dwellings: Single-family and twofamily
Dwellings: Multi-family
Housing for the elderly
Hotels, motels
Sororities, dormitories, rooming and
boarding houses
Retirement homes, orphanages,
covenants and monasteries
Hospitals, sanitariums, institutions,
rest and nursing homes
Medical and dental clinics
2 stalls for each dwelling unit
2 stalls for each dwelling unit
0.75 stall for each dwelling with onehalf
of these stalls to be built before
occupancy and the balance shall be
reserved until such time as the Village
Board may order them installed
1 stall for each guest room plus 1 stall
for each 2 employees
1 stall for each 2 sleeping rooms plus
1 stall for each 2 employees
1 stall per 2,000 square feet of
principal floor area
1 stall for each 3 beds plus 1 stall for
each employee
5 stalls for reach doctor or dentist
Theaters, auditoriums, community
centers, sports arenas, and other places
of public assembly
Colleges, secondary, and elementary
schools
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Restaurants, bars, clubs and lodges,
places of entertainment
Office buildings, professional offices,
banks, and savings institutions
Drive-in establishments
Manufacturing and processing plants
(including meat and food processing),
laboratories, and warehouses
Libraries, museums, art galleries, etc.
Washing and cleaning establishments
Funeral homes, mortuaries, and
similar-type uses
Retail stores
Section 8-8-3
1 stall for each 4 seats or spaces equal
to 20% of capacity in persons,
whichever is greater
1 stall for every faculty member and
employee, plus 1 stall for every 4 seats
in an auditorium, plus 1 stall for every
5 students in high school or college
1 stall for every 4 seats, plus 1 stall for
every employee
At least 1 parking stall per 300 square
feet of floor area
At least 1 stall for each 15 square feet
of floor area in the building
1.5 stalls for every employee; number
of employees shall be construed to
mean the maximum number on the
premises at one time
1 stall for each 3 employees, plus 1
stall for each 4 seats, plus 1 stall for
each 500 square feet of floor area not
having seats
1 stall for each 2 employees, plus 1
stall for every wash machine or 1 for
each 150 square feet of floor area,
whichever is greater
1 stall for each 100 square feet of floor
area in parlors or assembly rooms
1 stall per 300 square feet if under
1,000 square feet total area, or 1 stall
per 200 square feet if over 1,000
square feet total area, plus 1 stall for
every employee
Other business uses
Churches and other places of religious
assembly
Cartage, express, and parcel delivery,
freight terminals
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Business, technical, and trade schools
Financial institutions, business,
government and professional offices
Motor vehicle sales (new and used)
Repair shops, retail and service stores
Automobile repair garages and service
stations
Recreational uses – business
Bowling alleys
Section 8-8-3
1 stall for each 300 square feet of floor
area
1 stall for each 5 seats or 1 for each 90
lineal inches of pew space
1 stall for each 2 employees (on the
largest shift for which the building is
designed) plus 1 stall for each motor
vehicle maintained on the premises
1 stall for each 5 students plus 1 stall
for each 2 employees
1 stall for each 300 square feet of floor
area and 1 stall for each 2 employees
1 stall for each 500 square feet of floor
area used plus 1 stall for each 300
square feet of outdoor display area for
each motor vehicle to be displayed
(This requirement does not include
service garages.)
1 stall for each 200 square feet of net
floor space
1 stall for each 2 employees plus 3
stalls for each service bay
1 stall for every 3 persons based on
maximum capacity, plus 2 stalls for
every 2 employees
4 stalls for each alley, plus additional
stalls for affiliate uses
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-8-3
(i) Uses Not Listed. In the case of structures or uses not mentioned, the provision for a use
which is similar shall apply. Floor space or area shall mean the gross floor area inside the
exterior walls, where floor space is indicated above as a basis for determining the amount of
off-street parking required.
(j) Combined Uses. Combinations of any of the above uses shall provide the total of the
number of stalls required for each individual use. Two (2) or more uses may provide
required off-street parking stalls in a common parking facility less than the sum of the stalls
required for each use individually, provided such uses are not operated during the same
hours. The following conditions must be met for any joint use:
(1) The proposed joint parking stall is within five hundred (500) feet of the use it will
serve.
(2) The applicant shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the principal
operating hours of the two (2) buildings or uses for which joint use of off-street
parking facilities is proposed.
(3) A properly drawn legal instrument approved by the Village Board, executed by the
parties concerned, for joint use of off-street parking facilities shall be filed with the
Village Clerk. Said instrument may be a three (3) party agreement, including the
Village and all private parties involved. Such instrument shall first be approved by
the Village Attorney.
(k) Handicapped Parking Requirements. In addition to any other requirements relating to
parking spaces contained in these Ordinances, the provisions contained in Sections 101.13,
346.503 and 346.56, Wis. Stats., and any Wis. Adm. Code sections adopted pursuant thereto
are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to all parking facilities whenever
constructed.
(l) Changes in Buildings or Use. Whenever a building or use is changed, structurally altered
or enlarged to create a need for an increase of twenty-five percent (25%) or more in the
number of existing parking stalls, such stalls shall be provided on the basis of the
enlargement or change. Whenever a building or use is enlarged to the extent of fifty percent
(50%) or more in the floor area, said building or use shall then comply with the parking
requirements set forth in the district in which it is located.
(m) Off-Lot Parking.
(1) Required off-street parking stalls shall be located on the same lot with the principal
use, or when this requirement cannot be met, such stalls may be located off-lot
provided the stalls are located in the same district and not over five hundred (500)
feet from the principal use. In cases where off-street parking facilities are permitted
on land other than the same lot as the principal use, such facilities shall be in the
same possession as the lot occupied by the use to which the parking facilities are
necessary or in the possession of the controller of the principal use to which the
parking facilities are accessory. Such possession shall be by deed whereby the
owner of the land on which the parking facilities are to be located shall be bound by
a covenant filed and recorded in the Office of the Milwaukee County Register of
Deeds requiring such owner, his heirs or assigns to maintain the required facilities
for the duration of the use served.
Section 8-8-3
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
(2) Off-lot parking stalls for residential uses shall be within two hundred fifty (250) feet
of the principal entrance or the entrance for the individual occupants for whom the
stalls are reserved while the farthest portions of a parking lot for all other uses shall
be within four hundred (400) feet of the entrance of the establishment.
(3) Accessory parking may be located in residential districts provided that said lots or
property are immediately adjacent to a business or industrial zoning district.
(4) All off-street parking lots adjoining lots zoned for residential use shall have a
minimum setback of ten (10) feet from any interior lot line, except if the adjoining
lot is used for legally conforming parking purposes.
(n) Signs. Signs located in parking areas necessary for orderly operation of traffic movement
shall be permitted in addition to others permitted in this Chapter.
(o) Lighting. Lighting used to illuminate off-street parking shall have no direct source of light
visible from a street or adjacent land.
(p) Reduction of Parking Areas. Off-street parking stalls shall not be reduced in number
unless said number exceeds the requirements set forth herein.
Reference: Ordinance 03-10
SEC. 8-8-4 HIGHWAY ACCESS.
(a) Highway Access. No direct private access shall be permitted to the existing or proposed
rights-of-way of expressways, nor to any controlled access arterial street without permission
of the highway agency that has access control jurisdiction. No direct public or private access
shall be permitted to the existing or proposed rights-of-way of freeways, interstate highways
and their interchanges or turning lanes nor to intersecting or interchanging streets within
1,500 feet of the most remote end of the taper of the turning lanes (such as exit and entrance
ramps). No driveway openings shall be permitted within one hundred (100) feet of the
intersection of an arterial street right-of-way line.
(b) Access barriers, such as curbing, fencing, ditching, landscaping or other topographic barriers
shall be erected to prevent unauthorized vehicular ingress or egress to the above specified
streets or highways.
(c) Temporary access to the above rights-of-way may be granted by the Zoning Administrator
after review and recommendation by the highway agencies having jurisdiction. Such access
permit shall be temporary, revocable and subject to any conditions required and shall be
issued for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months.
SEC. 8-8-5 STORAGE AND PARKING OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
(a) Definitions – Recreational Vehicles. For purposes of this section, a “recreational vehicle”
means all types of trailers, all types of mobile homes and motor homes, all types of campers,
boats, snowmobiles, personal water crafts, all-terrain vehicles, motorbikes and motorcycles,
and the like, not exceeding 32 feet in length, eight (8) feet in width, and 13 feet six (6) inches
in height, provided that each such recreational vehicle to qualify as such shall be operable
and kept in a good state of maintenance and repair, and be owned by the resident or occupant
Section 8-8-5
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
of the property. An empty or unloaded trailer is one recreational vehicle; a trailer designed
to carry personal water craft(s), snowmobile(s), all-terrain vehicle(s), or the like, is one
recreational vehicle when such other recreational vehicle(s) are mounted thereon; no more
than four (4) such other recreational vehicles may be mounted or loaded on a single trailer.
(b) Permitted Parking or Storage of Recreational Vehicles. In all residential and business
districts provided for in this Zoning Code, it is permissible to park or store a recreational
vehicle on private property in the following manner:
(1) No recreational vehicle shall be parked or stored on the public right-of-way. Any
recreational vehicle, when parked or stored within the front or side setback, must be
placed on a properly improved driveway and be at least fifteen (15) feet away from
any adjacent dwelling. Recreational vehicles parked in the rear setback area must be
at least five (5) feet from any property line.
(2) The body of the recreational vehicle must be at least fifteen (15) feet from the face of
any curb or pavement edge.
(3) No part of the unit may extend over the public sidewalk or public right-of-way.
(4) Parking is permitted only for storage purposes. Recreational vehicles shall not be:
a. Used for dwelling purposes, except for overnight sleeping for a maximum of
fourteen (14) days in any one (1) calendar year. Cooking is not permitted at
any time.
b. Permanently connected to sewer lines, water lines or electricity. The
recreational vehicle may be connected to electricity temporarily for charging
batteries and other purposes.
c. Used for storage of goods, materials or equipment other than those items
considered to be part of the unit or essential for its immediate use.
(5) Notwithstanding the above, a unit may be parked anywhere on the premises during
active loading or unloading, and the use of electricity or propane fuel is permitted
when necessary to prepare a recreational vehicle for use.
(6) The recreational vehicle shall be owned by the resident on whose property the unit is
parked for storage and shall be kept in good repair.
(c) Limitation of Parking and Storage of Recreational Vehicles in Residential Districts. No
more than two recreational vehicles may be parked or stored on a residential lot at any time,
provided that only one of the recreational vehicles may exceed 16 feet in length. In addition
to the foregoing two recreational vehicle limitation, one utility trailer recreational vehicle
with a bed not exceeding eight (8) feet by six and a half (6½) feet in area may be parked on a
residential zoned lot.
State Law Reference: Sec. 30.50, Wis. Stats., and HSS 177 and 178, Wis. Adm. Code.
SEC. 8-8-6 STORAGE OF TRUCKS, TRACTORS AND ROAD MACHINERY.
(a) Truck Parking in Residential Areas. Passenger automobiles and panel, enclosed or pickup
trucks for personal use. One (1) panel, enclosed, or pickup truck when used by the occupant
in his business or occupation, in operable condition, shall be permitted in any residence
Section 8-8-6
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
district. Trucks shall be limited to those with a wheel base of one hundred twenty-nine (139)
inches or less and a gross vehicle weight of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or less. No
commercially licensed trailer, including semi-trailers, shall be parked or stored in a
residential district, except when loading, unloading or rendering a service [Ref. Sec. 8-2-
9(e)(2)].
(b) Tractors and Road Machinery. No person, firm or corporation shall park, keep or
maintain, on properties zoned as residential or multiple residential dwellings, the following
types of vehicles: tractors, tractor trailers, semi-trailers, dump trucks, auto wreckers and
road machinery. Said vehicles may not be kept or parked on said premises whether or not
they are in enclosed buildings, except for the purposes of unloading or servicing the
premises.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-9-1
CHAPTER 9
Signs and Billboards
SEC. 8-9-1 PURPOSE OF SIGN AND BILLBOARD REGULATIONS.
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish standards to promote public safety, the aesthetic
appearance of the Village, high quality area development, preservation of property values, and the
general welfare of the Village. It is intended to: aid in traffic control and traffic safety; preserve and
protect property values; lessen congestion of land and air space; provide against undue
concentrations of signs which distract and endanger traffic safety and traffic flow; establish
reasonable standards for commercial and other advertising through the use of signs in order to
maintain and encourage business activity and area development; avoid uncontrolled proliferation of
signs; preserve the wholesome and attractive character of the Village; and to recognize that the
general welfare of the Village of Hales Corners includes the desire to be beautiful as well as healthy,
spacious as well as clean, and to be well-balanced in its growth and development. This Chapter,
therefore, establishes minimum standards by regulating the design, size, area, number, location,
construction, and maintenance of signs in the Village.
SEC. 8-9-2 SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS - DEFINITIONS.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall be used in the interpretation
and construction of this Chapter:
(a) Advertising or Advertisement. Any public notice which informs, notifies, or announces to
the public or attracts public attention.
(b) Awning. A hood or cover which projects from the wall of the building, which can be
retracted, folded, or collapsed against the face of the supporting structure. The lowest part of
any awning shall be at least seven (7) feet above the sidewalk or adjacent grade. Signs are
allowed directly on the awning or hanging on the frame, but not less than seven (7) feet
above the sidewalk or adjacent grade.
(c) Billboard. A board on which notices or advertising are posted, including, but not limited to,
a sign which advertises goods, products or facilities, or services not necessarily available on
the premises where the sign is located or directs persons to a different location from where
the sign is located.
(d) Blanketing. The unreasonable obstruction of view of a sign caused by the placement of
another sign. Blanketing of signs shall not be allowed
(e) Building Elements. Graphics, architectural details, or illumination affixed to a building and
visible from the exterior of the building including, but not limited to, lighted panels, neon or
other lighting product and all attaching fixtures, arranged in a pattern that promotes, calls
attention, or is in the nature of an announcement, direction, or advertisement. These
elements shall be considered an integral part of a building façade and are subject to review
requirements under 8-2-2(a)(1).
(f) Business Sign. A sign which directs attention to a business or profession conducted upon
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-9-2
the premises.
(g) Business Site. A property in single ownership or control on which one (1) or more business
establishments are located.
(h) Canopy Sign. A sign mounted on a canopy which is a permanent part of a building or
structure.
(i) Directional Sign. A sign not exceeding three (3) square feet in area intended solely for
directing patrons, members or customers to an establishment off the main traveled road and
not including promotional advertising unnecessary to such directional purpose.
(j) Directly Illuminated Sign. Any sign designed to show any artificial light directly through
any transparent or translucent material from a source of light originating within or on such
sign.
(k) Directory Sign. Any sign on which the names or locations of occupants or the use of a
building are stated. This shall include office and church directories.
(l) Electronic Message Unit Sign. Any sign whose message may be changed by electronic
process.
(m) Flashing Sign. Any directly or indirectly illuminated sign on which artificial light is not
maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when in use.
(n) Free Standing Sign. Any sign which is, wholly or partially, supported by structures or
supports in or upon the ground and which is independent of support from any building.
(o) Identification Sign. Any sign which carries only the name of the business, brand,
institution, and/or principal products or services offered on the premises.
(p) Indirectly Illuminated Sign. Any sign that is illuminated from an artificial light source
outside of the actual sign.
(q) Major Highway. A county trunk highway, a state highway or a federal highway.
(r) Marquee Sign. Any sign attached to and made part of a marquee. A marquee is defined as
a permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building wall at an entrance to a building
or extending along and projecting beyond the building's wall and generally designed and
constructed to provide protection against weather.
(s) Monument Sign. A free standing sign less than eight (8) feet in height which is placed
directly on a foundation base.
(t) Non-accessory Sign. A sign is non-accessory when it directs attention to a business,
commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere than on the
premises or only incidentally on the premises, if at all.
(u) Nonconforming Sign. Any sign which does not conform to the regulations of this Chapter.
(v) Portable Sign. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground which is designed to be
easily moved from one location to another. Portable signs are defined as being on wheels, or
a trailer, or motor vehicle and parked on a street or property for the purpose of advertising
any object, product, place, activity, person, institution or business. Signs mounted on trucks,
taxicabs or other motor vehicles as a secondary or incidental use of said vehicle shall not be
considered as a portable sign for purposes of this Chapter. Any motor vehicle or trailer
having a nonpermanent or detachable sign and parked for a period in excess of seventy-two
hours in the same site within a ninety-six (96) hour period is be presumed to be a portable
sign; such presumption may be rebutted by clear and convincing evidence that such parking
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-9-2
was not for advertising purposes.
(w) Projecting Sign. Any sign extending more than twelve (12) inches, but less than five (5)
feet from the face of a wall or building.
(x) Pylon Sign. A sign which is erected on a pole or structure and is more than eight (8) feet in
height.
(y) Real Estate Sign. Any sign which is used to offer for sale, lease or rent the property upon
which the sign is placed.
(z) Roof Sign. Any sign erected upon or over the roof or parapet of any building.
(aa) Rummage Sale Signs. Any sign used to advertise or direct a private sale of household
goods and items on a residential property. Signs may only be placed on private property with
the owner’s consent.
(bb) Sign. A sign shall include anything that supports advertising, including, but not limited to,
that which promotes, calls attention, or invites patronage (or anything similar to the
aforementioned) to a business, message, location, or product. This includes any structure or
natural object such as a tree, brush, rock, or the ground itself or part hereof or device attached
thereon or painted or represented thereon, used to advertise any object, product, place,
activity, message, person, institution, organization, or business, or used to display or include
any letter, word, model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device, or representation which is in
the name of announcement, direction, or advertisement.
(cc) Sign Area. The exposed face area, including any background or backing constructed or
installed as an integral part of such sign, but not any structural elements lying outside the
display area of the sign. The sign area of a double-faced sign shall be the area of the larger
single face. For signs composed of individually mounted letters, the sign area shall be
computed as the sum of the areas of the individual letters with the area for the individual
letters computed as the area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme
limits of the words or symbols.
(dd) Sign Height. The vertical distance measured from the ground level adjacent to the sign to
the highest part of the sign, including all illuminators and embellishments.
(ee) Temporary Sign. Any sign intended to be displayed for a short period of time, including,
but not limited to, real estate, political, or construction site signs, and manners, decorativetype
displays, or anything similar to the aforementioned.
(ff) Wall Sign. Any sign attached to, erected on or painted on the wall of a building or structure
and projecting not more than eighteen (18) inches from such wall. No wall sign shall be
located so as to project above the parapet line, unless approved by the Plan Commission,
considering the purposes and intent of this Chapter.
(gg) Window Sign. Any sign, including, but not limited to, a painted scene, paper advertising,
neon elements, or graphics placed inside or upon an interior or exterior window surface,
which is or is intended to be seen from the exterior of the building.
(hh) Changeable Copy Sign. A sign or portion thereof which has a readerboard for the display
of text information in which each alphanumeric character, graphic, or symbol is defined by
objects, not consisting of an illumination device and may be changed or rearranged manually
or mechanically with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged
without altering the face or the surface of the sign.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-9-3
(ii) Changeable Copy Sign, Electronic. A sign or portion thereof that displays electronic,
nonpictorial, text information in which each alphanumeric character, graphic, or symbol is
defined by a small number of matrix elements using different combinations of light emitting
diodes (LED’s), fiber optics, light bulbs, or other illumination devices within the display
area. Electronic changeable copy signs include computer programmable, microprocessor
controlled electronic displays. Electronic changeable copy signs do not include official
governmental, time, or temperature signs. Electronic changeable copy signs include
projected images or messages with these characteristics onto buildings or other objects.
(jj) Electronic Graphic Display Sign. A sign or portion thereof that displays electronic, static
images, static graphics, or static pictures, with or without information, defined by a small
number of matrix elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes (LED’s),
fiber optics, light bulbs, or other illumination devices within the display area where the
message change sequence is accomplished immediately or by means of fade, repixalization,
or dissolve modes. Electronic graphic display signs include computer programmable,
microprocessor controlled electronic or digital displays. Electronic graphic display signs
include projected images or messages with these characteristics onto buildings or other signs.
(kk) Video Display Sign. A sign that changes its message or background in a manner or method
of display characterized by motion or pictorial imagery, which may or may not include text
and depicts action or a special effort to imitate movement, the presentation of pictorials or
graphics displayed in a progression of frames which give the illusion or motion, including,
but not limited to, the illusion of moving objects, moving patterns or bands of light, or
expanding or contracting shapes, not including electronic changeable copy signs. Video
display signs include projected images or messages with these characteristics onto buildings
or other objects.
SEC. 8-9-3 SIGN PERMIT REQUIRED.
Except those specified in Section 8-9-4, no signs shall hereafter be located, maintained or allowed to
exist, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or structurally altered without a
sign permit and without being in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter. The sign shall also
meet all other structural requirements of other applicable codes and ordinances of the Village of
Hales Corners. Signs of a type defined in this chapter with characteristics other than as specifically
described in this Chapter, i.e., a directional sign greater than 3 feet in area or a monument sign
greater than 8 feet in height, are prohibited.
SEC. 8-9-4 SIGNS EXCEPTED FROM PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
All signs must have a sign permit, except the following, provided that the following exempt signs
may not be located on or over a public road right-of-way or in, on or over public water:
(a) Memorial Signs. Memorial signs, tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when cut
into any masonry surface of a building or when constructed of metal and affixed flat against
the structure of a building.
(b) Professional or Business Signs. A sign not exceeding one and one-half (1-1/2) square feet
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-9-4
in area stating only the name and business or profession of the occupant or the character of
the use of the premises on which the sign is maintained. These signs shall be set back at least
three (3) feet from any lot line.
(c) Municipal, Religious, Schools, Etc. Signs used for directional purposes not in excess of
two (2) square feet when located off the premises. In all cases, these signs shall not be
subject to the approval of the Building Inspector in regard to design and location. Signs
located off the premises shall be set back at least five (5) feet from any lot line.
(d) Utility Signs. Utility signs, if necessary for the safety or convenience of premises invitees,
frequenters, or the public, as approved by the Building Inspector, the approval including
design and location, considering the purpose and intent of this Chapter.
(e) Building Construction Signs. A sign not exceeding forty (40) square feet in area pertaining
to the construction of a building on the premises, placed entirely on the premises with a
minimum of at least five (5) feet from the lot lines and maintained only during the
construction of the building, but not to exceed eighteen (18) months in any instance.
(f) Contractor’s Signs. A sign not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in the area pertaining to
contractual work being performed on a property. Allowed only during the duration of the
work activity.
(g) Interior Signs. Signs completely within the interior of a mercantile establishment except as
otherwise specifically set forth, shall not be subject to a permit requirement or the other
provisions of this Chapter.
(h) Real Estate/Lease Signs. One (1) sign advertising only the premises upon which the sign is
located for sale or for rent, constructed in a neat and workmanlike manner. In all residential
districts, not more than six (6) square feet and in business districts, not more than sixteen
(16) square feet in area and set back at least five (5) feet from any lot line.
(i) Official Signs. Signs required by federal, state, county, Administrative Code or local
ordinance which include, but are not limited to, traffic signs, street signs, Civil Defense signs
and notices required by law.
(j) Election and Political Campaign Signs. Except as provided in Section 8-9-11 herein.
(k) Rummage Sale Signs. As defined in Section 8-9-2(aa)
(l) Window Signs. Signs located behind the window areas for the purpose of being viewed
from the outside of the building provided it does not exceed 25% of the total window area,
including all windows and doors on each side of the building. Neon signage not to exceed
10% of the total window area, with the exception of “open” and “closed” signage.
(m) Other Special Use Signs.
(1) Signs not exceeding one (1) square foot in area and bearing only property numbers,
post box numbers, or names of occupants or premises.
(2) Flags and insignia of any government, except when displayed in connection with
business promotion not exceeding 60 square feet in area.
(3) Legal notices, identification information, or directional signs erected by
governmental bodies.
(4) Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except letters, trademarks,
moving parts, or moving lights.
(5) Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private property, but bearing no
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-9-4
product or message advertising matter.
(6) The temporary use of searchlight for advertising purposes may be permitted by the
Building Inspector in commercially zoned districts, provided that the searchlight will
not be located in any public right-of-way, will not be located closer than ten (10) feet
to an adjacent property and will not cause a hazard to traffic or adjoining properties.
Searchlights shall not be permitted for a period of more than five (5) days in any six
(6) month period.
SEC. 8-9-5 SIGN SETBACKS REQUIRED.
(a) Side and Rear Yard Setbacks. All signs, except when specified otherwise in this Chapter,
shall conform to the district requirements of this Zoning Code for side yards and rear yards,
except in the case of unaltered signs on or near structures existing on October 28, 1963, that
themselves do not conform to such requirements.
(b) Front Yard Setbacks. All monument signs shall be located at least ten (10) feet from the
front property line. All pylon signs shall be located at least twenty-five (25) feet from the
front property line. All other signs, except when specified otherwise in this Chapter, shall
not project beyond the front lot line. When the building line on a structure existing on
October 28,1963 is within eight (8) inches of the lot line, a wall sign may project no more
than eight (8) inches beyond the building line. Note: All ground mount sign locations are
subject to review regarding vehicular hazard and obstruction.
SEC. 8-9-6 GENERAL PROHIBITIONS.
(a) Compliance. No person shall erect, maintain, or allow to exist on premises owned by the
person, any sign within the Village which is defective or dangerous or otherwise not in
conformity with this Chapter.
(b) Access Hindrance. No sign, or any part of such sign, or any anchor, brace or guy rod shall
be attached, fastened or anchored to any fire escape, fire ladder or standpipe. No sign or any
part of a sign or any anchor, brace, or guy rod shall be erected or maintained so as to cover or
obstruct any door, doorway or window of any building so as to hinder or prevent ingress or
egress through such door, doorway, or window or so as to hinder or prevent the raising or
placing of ladders against such buildings by the fire department as necessity may require.
(c) Illumination Limitation. Directly illuminated signs, including, but not limited to, exposed
or bare neon, fluorescent, incandescent, and mercury sodium halogen bulbs are prohibited
unless specifically approved by the Plan Commission in business and manufacturing districts
to ensure architectural compatibility with building and surrounding area. Indirectly
illuminated signs that illuminate only the immediate areas of the sign, concentrating light
within or upon the sign, without radiating light upon adjacent public or private property, or
public rights-of-way, are permitted in business and manufacturing districts. Illuminated
signs located within residential districts are prohibited. Floodlighting of residences offered
for sale shall not be permitted between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(d) Traffic Hazard and Nuisance Signs. No signs shall be allowed which create a hazard or
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-9-6
dangerous distraction to vehicular traffic or which creates a nuisance. Such signs are
prohibited and subject to immediate removal by the Police Department and shall include, but
not be limited to, signs that are intermittent, flashing, rotating, mobile or moving, except
signs that give information on time and temperature.
(e) Intoxicating Beverage Signs. No sign advertising intoxicating beverages or an
establishment for the sale thereof shall be permitted within three hundred (300) feet of the
property line of a school or church. However, where there is an intoxicating beverage
licensed premises within three hundred (300) feet of the property line of a school or church
by reason of a nonconforming use, signs shall be permitted with size, illuminations,
locations, etc., subject to other provisions of this Chapter.
(f) Non-accessory Signs. Non-accessory signs are prohibited, except on immediately abutting
the premises supporting the principal use to which the sign directs attention, if both premises
are identically zoned.
(g) Roof signs. Roof signs are prohibited except as would be approved by appeal under Section
8-9-13.
(h) Painted Wall Signs. Signs painted on any wall of a building are prohibited, except where
permitted under Section 8-9-14.
(i) Residential Districts. Only nonilluminated signs permitted by Sections 8-2-9(e)(4), 8-9-
6(c), 8-9-9(g), 8-9-10 and 8-9-11 are permitted.
(j) Balloons, Flags, and Streamers. No advertising display of balloons, flags, and streamers
are permitted unless approved under Section 8-9-10.
(k) Signs placed in Right-of-Way. No banners, flags, streamers, balloons, or signs of any type
shall be placed on the right-of-way of any street or attached to any pole, tree, lamppost, street
sign, or railing within said right-of-way unless specifically approved by the Building
Inspector or Plan Commission, considering the safety of the public and the purposes and
intent of this Chapter.
(l) Neon Displays. The use of neon to outline, enclose, or draw attention to a window is
prohibited.
SEC. 8-9-7 PERMIT PROCEDURES AND FEES.
(a) Permit Procedure.
(1) Application. Any person desiring to erect, alter or relocate a sign shall make
application to the Building Inspector stating full information relating to the
construction, size and dimension and the kind of materials to be used in such sign
and the number(s) of the building or premises upon which such sign is to be erected.
A detailed sketch, in true color and to scale, shall accompany the application and
shall indicate the appearance of the sign and its location on the premises and its
relationship to other structures and property lines. The application shall further
include the number of existing signs on the premises on which the new sign is to be
located, including the location and size of each such existing sign.
(2) Review and Approval. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector, upon filing of
an application for a sign permit, to examine such plans, specifications, and other
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-9-7
pertinent data. He shall determine whether the proposed structure is in compliance
with the requirements of this ordinance and all other regulations of the Village of
Hales Corners. Following the review of the sign permit application, the Building
Inspector shall take one of the following actions:
a. If the proposed sign does not conform to the requirements of the sign
ordinance or other regulations of the Village, the Building Inspector shall
deny such permit stating the specific items of noncompliance.
b. If the proposed sign complies with all dimensional and structural
requirements, the Building Inspector shall consider the purpose, appearance,
location, lighting, height, size, and impact of the sign relative to the purposes
and intent of this ordinance. If the Building Inspector determines there is a
question as to whether or not the proposed sign is in accordance with the
purposes or intent of this ordinance, he shall refer the sign permit application
to the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission shall approve, approve with
modifications, or deny the sign application, considering the purposes and
intent of this ordinance.
c. If the Building Inspector determines that the sign is in compliance with the
purposes and intent of this ordinance and all other regulations of the Village
of Hales Corners, he shall issue the permit.
d. If the proposed sign is directly illuminated with exposed or bare lights, the
Plan Commission must approve as to whether or not the design is compatible
with the building’s architectural character and the colors have been selected
to the complement of the building’s exterior.
(3) Permits. Upon approval of the application and upon payment of the fee hereunder
prescribed, the Building Inspector shall issue a sign permit which shall authorize the
erection, alteration or relocation of the exact sign for which application was made.
Any alteration, modification or improvement, including any change in wording or
design but not including the repainting of existing display matter, shall require a new
permit, except for signs so constructed or designed as to accommodate a preprinted
message. An electrical permit shall be obtained for an illuminated sign prior to the
installation of such sign.
(b) Permit Fee. Permit fees for signage shall be assessed at $1.50 per square foot with a $50.00
minimum fee. Temporary signs shall be assessed a fee one-half (1/2) of the regular fee. An
additional fee, as specified in the Electrical Code, shall be paid for all illuminated signs.
SEC. 8-9-8 DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION, AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
(a) Design. All signs erected in the Village of Hales Corners shall be well maintained and
aesthetically attractive. Every sign shall have satisfactory scale and proportion in its design
and visual relationship to buildings and surroundings. Every sign must be designed as an
integral architectural element of the buildings and the site to which it principally relates. The
colors, materials, and the lighting of every sign shall be constrained and in conformance with
the building and site to which it principally relates. The number of graphic elements on a sign
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-9-8
shall be held to the minimum needed to convey the sign’s major message and shall be
composed in proportion to the area of the sign face. Each sign must be compatible with signs
on or adjoining premises and shall not compete for attention. Identification signs of
prototype design or corporation logos must conform to the criteria for all other signs. Site
identification signs shall utilize through design, colors, or materials, the architectural identity
of the buildings on the site and adjacent areas.
(b) Materials. All projecting and wall signs shall be constructed of steel, galvanized iron,
copper, brass or any non-corrosive incombustible material and shall be maintained free of
defects. Ground signs may be constructed of combustible materials provided they are erected
upon posts, poles and standards sunk in concrete at least four (4) feet below the natural
surface of the ground. All posts, anchors and bracing of wood shall be treated to protect
them from moisture by approved methods when they rest upon or enter the ground.
Temporary, directional and utility signs shall conform to the same standards to the extent
deemed practical by the Building Inspector.
(c) Stability. Signs shall be so constructed that they will withstand a wind pressure of at least
thirty (30) pounds per square foot of surface and will be otherwise structurally safe and shall
be securely anchored or otherwise fastened, suspended or supported so that they will not be a
menace to persons or property.
(d) Illumination. All illuminated signs and the materials and fitting therefor shall be
constructed and maintained in accordance with the Wisconsin State Electrical Code and the
Electrical Code of the Village of Hales Corners.
(e) Grounding. Adequate provision shall be made for grounding signs.
(f) Sign Maintenance. All signs shall be properly secured, supported, and braced and shall be
kept in a reasonable structural condition and shall be kept clean and well painted at all times.
All electrical components shall be in a safe and operable condition. Bolts or screws shall not
be fastened to window frames. Every sign and its framework, braces, anchors, and other
supports shall be constructed of such material and with such workmanship as to be safe and
satisfactory to the Building Inspector.
SEC. 8-9-9 SPECIFIC SIGN RESTRICTIONS.
(a) Single Business Sites.
(1) Gasoline/Service Stations/Convenience Stores.
Allowed: One (1) monument sign not exceeding thirty-five (35) square feet in area,
no greater than eight (8) feet in height. Two (2) canopy signs not exceeding five (5)
square feet in area per sign. Two (2) building signs not exceeding forty (40) square
feet in area per sign.
(2) Restaurants with drive-thru use.
Allowed: One (1) monument sign not exceeding thirty-five (35) square feet in area,
no greater than eight (8) feet in height. Two building signs not exceeding forty (40)
square feet in area per sign.
(3) Restaurants/Night Clubs/Hotel.
Allowed: One (1) monument sign not exceeding forty (40) square feet in area, no
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-9-9
greater than eight (8) feet in height. Two building signs not exceeding forty (40)
square feet in area per sign or One (1) building sign not exceeding seventy-five (75)
square feet in area. Note: One (1) pylon sign not exceeding sixty (60) square feet in
area, no greater than twenty (20) feet in height may be permitted after determination
by the Plan Commission that site considerations warrant pylon signs.
(4) Office/Professional.
Allowed: One (1) monument sign not exceeding thirty-five (35) square feet in area,
no greater than eight (8) feet in height. One (1) building sign not exceeding sixty
(60) square feet in area.
(5) Retail Stores.
Allowed: One (1) monument sign not exceeding thirty-five (35) square feet in area,
no greater than eight (8) feet in height. One (1) building sign not exceeding sixty
(60) square feet in area. Note: One (1) pylon sign not exceeding forty (40) square feet
in area, no greater than twenty (20) feet in height may be permitted after
determination by the Plan Commission that site considerations warrant a pylon sign.
(b) Multiple Tenant Business Sites. (Four (4) units or less with common entrance.)
(1) Office/Professional/Retail Stores/Mixed Use.
Allowed: One (1) monument sign not exceeding forty (40) square feet in area, no
greater than eight (8) feet in height. Four (4) building signs, one (1) per tenant, not
exceeding sixteen (16) square feet per sign. Note: One (1) pylon sign not exceeding
sixty (60) square feet in area, no greater than twenty (20) feet in height may be
permitted after determination by the Plan Commission that site considerations
warrant a pylon sign.
(c) Multiple Tenant Business Sites. (Four (4) units or less with individual entrances.)
(1) Office/Professional/Retail Stores/Mixed Use.
Allowed: One (1) monument sign not exceeding forth (40) square feet in area, no
greater than eight (8) feet in height. Four (4) building signs, one (1) per tenant, not
exceeding forty (40) square feet per sign.
(d) Multiple Tenant Business Sites. (More than four (4) units with common entrance.)
(1) Office/Professional/Retail Stores/Mixed Use.
Allowed: One (1) monument sign, for site identification only, not exceeding sixty
(60) square feet in area, no greater than eight (8) feet in height. Two (2) building
signs, for identification only, not exceeding sixty (60) square feet per sign.
(e) Multiple Tenant Business Sites. (More than four (4) units with individual entrances.)
(1) Office/Professional/Retail Stores/Mixed Use.
Allowed: One (1) monument sign, for site identification only, not exceeding sixty
(60) square feet in area, no greater than eight (8) feet in height. One (1) building sign
per tenant. Allowable square footage is determined by the length of façade. Sign
areas for individual tenants shall be determined in accordance with the following
table:
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-9-9
Length of Allowable Sq. Ft. Length of Allowable Sq. Ft.
Façade of Signing Area Façade of Signing Area
25 ft. or less 40 sq. ft. 45 ft. 60 sq. ft.
30 45 50 65
35 50 55 70
40 55 60 ft. or more 75
Where an individual tenant has business entrances on more than one (1) side of the
building or structure, his signing area shall be limited to one (1) side upon which he
elects to erect his sign.
(f) Multi-Family Sites.
(1) Apartment Complexes containing twenty-four (24) units or less.
Allowed: One (1) monument sign not exceeding twenty-four (24) square feet in area,
no greater than eight (8) feet in height.
(2) Apartment Complexes containing more than twenty-four units.
Allowed: One (1) monument sign, per street exposure, not exceeding thirty-five (35)
square feet in area per sign, no greater than eight (8) feet in height.
(g) Institutional and Governmental.
(1) Churches/Schools.
Allowed: One (1) monument sign not exceeding fifty (50) square feet in area, no
greater than eight (8) feet in height. One (1) building sign not exceeding forty (40)
square feet in area.
(2) Lodges/Clubs/Fraternal Organizations/Other Government Uses.
Allowed: One (1) monument sign not exceeding thirty-five (35) square feet in area,
no greater than eight (8) feet in height. One (1) building sign not exceeding forty
(40) square feet in area.
(h) Area Exceptions. Business and Institutional/Governmental sites located on two (2) acres or
more may increase the area of the monument or pylon signs, when specifically reviewed and
approved by the Plan Commission, in accordance with the following formula:
More than two (2) acres. Permitted Sign Area X 1.25
More than three (3) acres. Permitted Sign Area X 1.50
Over four (4) acres. Permitted Sign Area X 1.75
(i) Subdivision Identification Signs. Individual signs for subdivisions within the Village may
be permitted in accordance with this section.
(1) Registered Office and Registered Agent. Each subdivision desiring any subdivision
identification sign shall have and continuously maintain in the Village office, a
registered individual resident in this state upon whom any process, notice, or demand
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-9-9
required to be served by this Code may be served. Service shall be made on such
registered agent by mail. Sub-dividers for new plats shall file such information with
the data required under Subsection (3) hereof. For an existing subdivision, any six
(6) owners of lots therein may act on behalf of the subdivision and designate the
registered office and agent for the purpose of these sign regulations, but only the first
person so designated shall be such agent unless a majority of the owners in such
subdivision designates a successor office and agent. A registered agent may resign
by filing such resignation with the Village Administrator.
(2) Existing Subdivision Signs. Any subdivision sign presently in place which was in
existence before September 9, 1963 which has not been moved from its original site
or which was placed at a new site within one (1) year from the date of removal shall
be deemed to conform to this requirement of this Chapter.
(3) New Subdivision Signs. Subdivision signs shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet
in area and shall conform with the construction standards under Section 8-9-8 hereof.
Any registered agent desiring to erect or maintain a subdivision identification sign
shall make application to the Plan Commission stating full information relating to the
construction, size, or dimension and the kind of materials to be used in such signs. A
sketch to scale shall accompany the application and shall indicate the appearance of
the sign and the location within the subdivision; the application shall further include
the number, location, and size of each existing subdivision identification sign within
such subdivision.
(4) Approval Authority. The Plan Commission may approve an application upon
expressed findings that such sign meets all of the following requirements: it conforms
to the construction standards under Section 8-9-8 hereof; it has aesthetic appeal; it
will not constitute a traffic hazard; it will not create a nuisance to any owner of
abutting lands. The Plan Commission shall notify by mail at least five (5) days prior
to its hearing the owners of all lands within three hundred (300) foot radius of the
proposed site of the sign, the time, and place of such hearing.
(5) Maintenance Requirements. Each subdivision shall be responsible for the
maintenance of all subdivision identification signs. No relocation shall be permitted
without complying with all requirements for a new subdivision identification sign.
The governing body or the Building Inspector or other designated officer who, in his
judgment, finds any such sign so old, dilapidated, unpainted, out of repair, or a traffic
hazard or nuisance by reason of change of conditions may order the designated agent
to make the necessary repairs or remove such sign; the order shall specify a time
within which the agent shall comply therewith and specify repairs, if any; it shall be
served on the registered agent by registered mail; if the agent fails or refuses to
comply within the time prescribed, the Building Inspector or other designated officer
shall cause such sign to be removed. In the event a subdivision fails to designate a
registered office and agent, the Building Inspector or other designated officer shall
serve such order by registered mail on the four (4) owners of subdivision lands
nearest such subdivision identification sign.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-9-10
SEC. 8-9-10 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
Temporary signs may be placed on a property, but shall not be located on or over a public right-ofway
and shall not interfere with public or private street or driveway vision clearance. Temporary
signs may be authorized by the Building Inspector and shall conform to the intent of the Zoning
Code and specifically the purposes and intent of this Chapter. Permits are required for temporary
signs and are assessed at one-half (1/2) the regular permit fee. Temporary signs are permitted for the
duration of fourteen (14) days, except signs erected due to highway construction, which may be
placed for the term of the construction project. Temporary signs shall not exceed 35 square feet in
area.
(a) Temporary Grand Opening banners or flags shall be allowed for new businesses or new
multi-family occupancies provided that no such advertising shall cause a traffic or other
hazard. Such Grand Opening displays shall be limited to a time period not to exceed
fourteen (14) days for businesses and four (4) months for multi-family occupancies. Said
Grand Opening signage shall require the procurement of a permit and approval of the
Building Inspector. "Grand Opening" means an event for the purpose of advertising a new
business, a new occupant or a new owner of new construction, or when major renovation or
alterations have taken place in an existing structure.
(b) Transient merchants, farmers markets, and peddlers are permitted two (2) single sided signs
of sixteen (16) square feet in area per sign or one (1) double faced or sandwich board of
sixteen (16) square feet per side. All signs must be located at least five (5) feet from the
street or curb and be removed when unattended. Signs must have a clean and professional
appearance.
SEC. 8-9-11 CAMPAIGN SIGNS.
Notwithstanding the other provision of this Chapter, any person who shall place election campaign
signs within the Village shall comply with the requirements of this Section:
(a) Definition. An "election campaign sign" is a sign advocating the selection of a person or
persons for public office or the advocacy of a referendum issue.
(b) Permitted Placements. An election campaign sign may be placed upon any private
property in any zoned district within the Village, subject to electioneering laws. An
election campaign sign shall not exceed 11 square feet in area, excepting a sign which is
affixed to a permanent structure and does not extend beyond the perimeter of the
structure, if the sign does not obstruct a window, door, fire escape, ventilation shaft or
other area which is required by the Building Code(s) to remain unobstructed. The
property owner upon whose property an election campaign sign is placed, must consent
to such installation.
(c) Permit Exemptions. No permit shall be required for an election campaign sign.
(d) Prohibitions. Campaign/election signs shall:
(1) Not be placed within any public right-of-way.
(2) Be placed more than fifteen (15) feet from the edge of the pavement or the curb, or
more than two (2) feet from the inside edge of a sidewalk.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-9-11
(3) Not be of a flashing or rotating type.
(4) Be limited to two (2) single signs or one (1) double-faced sign for any one (1)
candidate or referendum issue on any individual property site.
(e) Time Limitations. An election campaign sign shall not be placed within the Village more
than two (2) weeks preceding the primary election date and shall be removed within five (5)
days after the succeeding general election date.
(f) Enforcement. The Building Inspector shall cause an election campaign sign violating the
provisions of this Chapter to be removed without the necessity of giving any notice. In the
event the owner of the property fails voluntarily to remove such sign violating the provisions
of this Chapter or in the event the sign has been placed within a prohibited area, the Building
Inspector shall cause the immediate removal of any such sign violating the provisions of this
Chapter. The Building Inspector shall store such sign and return it to the candidate on
demand until ten (10) days after the general election, when the Building Inspector shall no
longer have any duty to store such sign and may dispose of same without any liability
therefore to any person.
SEC. 8-9-12 DANGEROUS AND ABANDONED SIGNS.
(a) Removal. All signs shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the
sign is located when a business which it advertises has not been conducted for a period of six
(6) months or when, in the judgement of the Building Inspector, such sign is so old,
dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous or unsafe, whichever occurs
first. If the owner or lessee fails to remove it, the Building Inspector may remove the sign at
the cost of the owner, following fourteen (14) days written notice. The owner may appeal the
Building Inspector's decision to the Board of Appeals.
SEC. 8-9-13 VARIANCES OR EXCEPTIONS.
The Plan Commission may, in its judgment, waive or modify the provisions of this chapter where it
would further the public interest and uphold the purposes of this ordinance as put forth in Section 8-
9-1. Such waiver or modification may be based on, among other things, site specific hardships such
as topographic aberrations, visual encumbrances, and design complications.
SEC. 8-9-14 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
(a) Signs Eligible for Characterization as Legal Nonconforming. Any sign located within the
limits of the Village of Hales Corners prior to the date of adoption of his Chapter or located
in an area annexed to the Village of Hales Corners hereafter which does not conform with the
provisions of this Chapter shall be characterized as a legal nonconforming sign provided it
meets the following requirements:
(1) The sign was permitted by a legally required and issued sign permit prior to the date
of adoption of this Chapter.
(2) If no permit was required under the applicable law for the sign in questions and the
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-9-14
sign was, in all respects, in compliance with applicable law on the date of adoption of this
Chapter.
(b) Legal Nonconforming Status. A sign loses its nonconforming status if one (1) or more of
the following occurs:
(1) The sign is structurally altered in any way, except for normal maintenance or repair,
which tends to or makes the sign less in compliance with requirements of this
Chapter than it was before alteration or the cost or value of such alternation exceeds
50% of the value of such sign before alteration as determined by the Village
Assessor;
(2) The sign is relocated;
(3) The sign fails to conform to the Village requirements regarding maintenance and
repair, abandonment, or dangerous or defective signs;
(4) The sign is destroyed or damaged, by any cause, to the extent that the cost of repair or
replacement would exceed 50% of the value of such sign before such damage or
destruction as determined by the Village Assessor.
(c) Compliance. On the date of occurrence of any of the above, the sign shall be immediately
brought in compliance with this Chapter with a new permit secured therefore or shall be
removed.
SEC. 8-9-15 CHANGEABLE COPY, ELECTRONIC GRAPHIC, AND VIDEO DISPLAY
SIGNS. All electronic changeable copy and electronic graphic display signs require Plan
Commission review and approval.
(a) Video display signs are not permitted.
(b) Location and Placement.
(1) Electronic changeable copy and electronic graphic display signs shall not be
permitted within 300 feet of an illuminated traffic control.
(2) Electronic changeable copy and electronic graphic display signs shall not be
permitted within 150 feet of a residential district.
(3) Electronic changeable copy and electronic graphic display signs must be separated
from other such electronic message signs by a minimum of 35 feet.
(4) Electronic changeable copy and electronic graphic display signs are prohibited in R-
1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 residential districts.
(5) Electronic changeable copy and electronic graphic display signs are not permitted as
part of building signage.
(6) Signs shall be located 10 feet from the property line.
(c) Size/Percentage of Sign Allocated for Electronic Changeable Copy or Electronic
Graphic Display Signs.
(1) The following table shows the allowable square footage for single business sites,
multi-tenant sites, and institutional and governmental sites:
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-9-15
MONUMENT SIGNS
Site Categories
Total Allowable
Square Feet
30% of Sign Allocated
for LED/Digital
Message
Single Business Sites
Retail 35 10.5
Gasoline/Convenience 35 10.5
Restaurant 40 12
Restaurant with Drive-thru 35 10.5
Office 35 10.5
Churches/Schools 50 15
Government 35 10.5
Multi-tenant Sites
4 or less with Common Entrance 40 12
4 or less with Individual Entrances 40 12
4 or more with Common Entrance 60 18
4 or more with Individual Entrances 60 18
Institutional and Governmental
Churches/Schools 50 15
Lodges/Clubs/Fraternal
Organizations/Other Governmental
Uses
35 10.5
PYLON SIGNS
Site Categories
Total Allowable
Square Feet
30% of Sign Allocated
for LED/Digital
Message
Retail 40 12
Gasoline/Convenience 0
Restaurant 60 18
Restaurant with Drive-thru 0
Office 0
Churches/Schools 0
Government 0
* Requires determination by Plan Commission that site considerations warrant a
pylon sign.
(2) The electronic changeable copy and electronic graphic display signs shall be
secondary to the tenant identification.
Village of Hales Corners, WI Zoning Code
Section 8-9-15
(3) Fuel pricing shall not be included in the percentage requirement subject to fuel prices
not exceeding nine (9) inches.
(d) Number of Messages.
(1) Electronic changeable copy and electronic graphic display signs shall not display offpremise
commercial advertising.
(e) Frequency of Messages.
(1) The electronic changeable copy and electronic graphic display signs may be changed
no more than once every five (5) seconds.
(2) The electronic changeable copy and electronic graphic display signs shall not flash,
scroll, twirl, or otherwise move during the change in messages.
(f) Illumination/Brightness.
(1) The electronic changeable copy and electronic graphic display signs shall be
equipped with photosensitive equipment which automatically adjusts the brightness
and contrast of the sign in direct relation to ambient outdoor illumination.
(2) Periodic inspections of the software settings may be required by the Village of Hales
Corners.
(g) Text and Graphic Images.
(1) The text of the sign must be limited to 10 words.
(h) Electronic changeable copy and electronic graphic display signs shall be integral to and part
of the original approved monument sign.
SEC. 8-9-16 ENFORCEMENT.
(a) Enforcement Officer. The Building Inspector may remove or cause to be removed any sign
not in compliance with this Chapter or any defective or dangerous sign if not repaired or
brought into compliance by the owner, operator or licensee within five (5) days after deposit
in the public mail of a letter addressed to the licensee, operator or owner of record of the
premises upon which such sign is located. The Building Inspector may refuse a permit for
any sign which may imperil life or property. The Building Inspector shall enforce the
provisions of this Chapter.
(b) Enforcement. Any violation of any term or provision of this Chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provisions under section 19.04 of the Municipal Code. Any substantial or repeated
violation of this chapter as it pertains to a single sign, sign structure or premises is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance, subject to an action for abatement and damages. In addition
to such actions, the Village may obtain compliance with this Chapter by way of all other
available legal and equitable actions.
CHAPTER 9
Subdivisions and Platting
9.01 Purpose and General Provisions
9.02 Definitions
9.03 Plat Approval Procedures
9.04 Requirements for Plats, Certified Survey Maps, and Assessor’s Maps
9.05 Design Standards
9.06 Required Improvements and Reservations
9.07 Replats, Vacating and Altering Plats Correction Instruments
9.08 Appeals
9.09 Modifications and Exceptions
9.10 Enforcement and Penalties
9.01 PURPOSE AND GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter prepared under the authority granted by §236.45,
Wis. Stats., is to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the Village of
Hales Corners, and the regulations are designed to lessen congestion in the streets and
highways; to further the orderly layout and use of land; to secure safety from fire, panic,
and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of lad;
to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate adequate provisions for
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds, and other public
requirements; to facilitate the further re-subdivision of larger tracts into smaller parcels of
land. The regulations of this Chapter are made with reasonable consideration of the
character of the Village of Hales Corners with a view of conserving the value of the
buildings placed upon the land, providing the best possible environment for human
habitation, and for encouraging the most appropriate division and use of land throughout
the Village.
(2) General Provisions.
(a) Jurisdiction. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply within the corporate
limits of the Village of Hales Corners. Included in this jurisdiction shall be:
1. Subdivisions. Any division of land within the Village which results in a
subdivision as defined herein shall be surveyed and a plat thereof made,
approved and recorded as required by this Chapter and by Chapter 236,
Wis. Stats.
2. Other Divisions. Any division of land other than a subdivision resulting
in the creation of two (2) parcels or building sites, any one of which is 1-
1/2 acres or less in area, shall be surveyed and a certified survey map or
assessor’s map shall be approved by the Village and recorded by the
Register of Deeds as required by this Chapter. Wherever a public
sanitary sewer is available to the newly divided parcel or parcels, as a
condition precedent to such approval, prior to execution of the certified
survey by the Village Clerk, after preliminary approval by the Village
Board, the applicant shall be required to pay into the general funds of the
Village in a lump sum the sewer connection charge required under
Section 13.02, Village code, for each additional parcel. No such division
of land shall be approved unless the applicant shall file with the Village a
certificate from the real estate office of the Treasurer of Milwaukee
County attesting that all real estate taxes have been paid and that the
description has been checked by said office. Any special assessments
shall have been paid. To the extent reasonably practicable the division
shall comply with the provisions of this Chapter relating to general
requirements and design standards and required improvements. In
addition to the fee prescribed in Section 9.03(1)(e), the applicant shall
pay the cost of recording such land division, and upon final approval, the
Village Clerk shall be responsible for causing such certified survey to be
recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds for Milwaukee County.
This shall not pertain to those transfers or divisions of land specifically
excluded by Chapter 236, Wis. Stats., namely:
a. Transfers of interest in land by will or pursuant to court order.
b. Leases for a term not to exceed 10 years, mortgages, or
easements.
c. The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of
adjoining lots are not thereby created and the lots resulting are
not reduced below the minimum size required by the Zoning
Code for the Village and by other applicable laws or ordinances.
d. Cemetery plats made under §157.07, Wis. Stats., and assessor’s
plats, unless specifically required by the Village, made under
§70.27, Wis. Stats., but such assessor’s plats shall comply with
§236.15(a) to (g) and 236.20(1) and (2)(a) to (e), Wis. Stats.
e. The sale or exchange of parcels of public utility or railroad rightof-
way to adjoining property owners if the Village Board and
County Planning Agency approve such sale or exchange on the
basis of applicable ordinances and the provisions of Chapter 236,
Wis. Stats.
(b) Basis of Approval. The Village shall condition the approval of the preliminary or
final plat, the certified survey map, or the assessor’s map upon compliance with:
1. Chapter 236, Wis. Stats.
2. Any Village or County ordinance.
3. Official Map of the Village.
4. The rules of the State Board of Health relating to lot size, lot elevation,
percolation test, test borings, etc.
5. The rules of the State Highway Commission relating to traffic safety and
preservation of public interest and investment in State Trunk Highways
or connecting streets.
6. Compliance with the most restrictive requirements when requirements of
approving authorities conflict.
(c) Land Unsuitable for Subdividing. No land shall be subdivided for residential use
which the Village Board determines to be unsuitable for such use by reason of
flooding, bad drainage, adverse earth or rock conditions, topography, or any
other feature likely to create a subdivision contrary to the purpose of this
Chapter.
9.02 DEFINITIONS
(1) General Interpretation. All words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular includes the plural and the plural the singular; the word “person” includes
associations, co-partnerships, or corporations; and the term “shall” is mandatory while
the word “may” is permissive. All terms used which are defined in Chapter 236, Wis.
Stats., shall have the same meaning as ascribed thereto in the Chapter, unless otherwise
defined in this Chapter or unless the context and subject matter clearly indicate otherwise.
(2) Specific Words and Phrases.
(a) Alley. A public way affording only secondary access to abutting properties.
(b) County. Milwaukee County, Wisconsin.
(c) County Planning Agency. Architectural and Engineering Division, Department
of Public Works, Milwaukee County.
(d) Lot. A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a unit for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of ownership or for building development.
1. Butt Lot. A lot with the rear lot line abutting the side lot line of another
lot platted in the same block and not separated by an alley or other open
space.
2. Double Frontage Lot. A lot, other than a corner lot, abutting on two
streets.
(e) Official Map. The map indicating the location and size of existing and proposed
streets, highways, parkways, parks, and playgrounds as adopted and amended by
the Village Board pursuant to §62.23, Wis. Stats.
(f) Outlot. A portion of a subdivision or other land division not of standard “lot”
size and shape but provided as a remnant of the subdivision, the intention of
which is to either redivide it in the future into “lots” or combine it with one or
more other adjacent parcels of land to create buildable “lots”.
(g) Plat. A map of a subdivision.
1. Final Plat. A map of a subdivision which has been accurately surveyed,
clearly and definitely showing the streets, alleys, blocks, lots, and other
divisions thereof, in such a manner that the same can be clearly and
distinctly identified.
2. Preliminary Plat. A map showing the salient features of a proposed
subdivision submitted to an approving authority for purpose of
preliminary consideration prior to preparation of the final plat.
(h) Recording a Plat. The filing of the original of the final plat with the Register of
Deeds for recordation.
(i) Register of Deeds. The Register of Deeds for Milwaukee County.
(j) Street. An area which serves as a vehicular and pedestrian access to
neighborhoods.
1. Collector Street. A street intended to serve and provide access to
neighborhoods.
2. Frontage Street. A street auxiliary to and located on the side of an
arterial highway for service to abutting property and for control of access
to the arterial or major street.
3. Major Street. Principal arterials of through traffic such as highways,
parkways, and thoroughfares.
4. Minor Streets. A street intended to serve and to provide access primarily
to the properties abutting thereon. A cul-de-sac is a minor street having
one opened end and being terminated at the other by a turn-around.
(k) Subdivider or Owner. Includes any firm, association, partnership, private
corporation, public or quasi-public corporation, or a combination of any of them,
or other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be
subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same.
(l) Subdivision. The division of a lot, parcel, or tract of land by the owner thereof or
his agent for the purpose of sale or building development, where:
1. The act of division creates five (5) or more parcels or building sites of
1½ acres each or less in area; or
2. Five (5) or more parcels or building sites of 1½ acres each or less in area
created by successive divisions within a period of five (5) years.
(m) Village. The Village of Hales Corners, Milwaukee County.
9.03 PLAT APPROVAL PROCEDURE.
(1) General Procedure.
(a) Filing. The subdivider shall file 17 legible copies of the preliminary or final plat
with the Clerk of the Village who shall note the date of filing on each print.
(b) Forwarding of Plats. Within two (2) days after preliminary or final plat has been
submitted for approval, the Clerk shall forward the specified number of copies to
the following agencies authorized to object to the plat along with a list of all
agencies authorized to object or approve the plat:
1. State Agencies. Two (2) copies for the Director, Planning Division,
Department of Resource Development, and, in addition, two (2) copies
for each of the other State agencies which have authority to object to the
plat:
a. State Highway Commission. Two (2) copies for the State
Highway Commission if the subdivision abuts or adjoins a State
Trunk Highway or connecting street.
b. State Board of Health. Two (2) copies for the State Board of
Health if the subdivision is not served by a public sewer and
provision for such service has not been made.
2. County Department of Public Works, Architectural and Engineering
Division. Six (6) copies to that Department division.
3. Village Engineer. Two (2) copies to the Village Engineer for his report
on the technical aspects of the plat, and for his estimates of the costs
involved to install the improvements required by this ordinance.
4. Village Planning Consultant. Two (2) copies to the Village Planning
Consultant for his comments on the general design of the plat.
(c) Objections to the Plat. Within 20 days of the date of receiving the copies of the
plat, any agency having the authority to object shall notify the subdivider and all
approving or objecting authorities of any objection, or, if there is no objection, it
shall so certify on the face of a copy of the plat and return that copy to the
approving authority from which it was received. The Village Engineer and
Village Planning Consultant shall make their report to the Village within the
same 20-day period.
1. Objections Must be Satisfied. The plat shall not be approved or deemed
approved until all objections have been satisfied.
2. Failure to Act. If the agency having the authority to object fails to act
within the 20-day limit, it shall be deemed to have no objections to the
plat.
(d) Approvals to Plat.
1. Preliminary Plat. The subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat in
sufficient detail to determine whether the final plat will meet layout
requirements. The subdivider shall also submit data required by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources regarding percolation tests
and soil borings. Where the plat will be sewered, the developer shall
submit satisfactory proof that the proposed development conforms with
the area-wide plan of the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Plan
Commission.
a. Approval or Rejection. Within 90 days of the date of submittal,
the Village Board shall take action to approve, approve
conditionally, or reject such plat and shall state in writing any
conditions of approval or reasons for rejection. If the Village
Board approves conditionally, the Village Attorney shall prepare
for execution by the subdivider all documents necessary to meet
the conditions of approval determined by the Village Board.
b. Failure to Act. Failure of the approving authority to act within
such 90 days shall constitute an approval of the preliminary plat
unless the time is extended by agreement with the subdivider.
c. Approval Required Prior to Construction. No subdivder shall
proceed with any construction work, including grading, until the
preliminary plat has been approved.
d. Principles of Design. The design principles of this Chapter shall
apply to subdivisions within the Village.
e. Filing Fee. To defray the administrative costs resulting from the
act of subdividing land within the Village, the subdivider shall
pay the following fee to the Clerk at the time of plat submittal:
$400.00.
2. Final Plat. If the final plat conforms substantially to the layout shown in
the preliminary plat as approved, including any conditions of that
approval, it shall be entitled to approval with respect to such layout.
a. Submission Date. If the final plat is submitted within six (6)
months of the last required approval of the preliminary plat, the
Village shall take action to approve or reject the plat. If the final
plat is not submitted within said six (6) months, the Village may
refuse to approve the final plat and may require re-submittal of
the preliminary plat.
b. Plat Portion of Preliminary Plat. The final plat, may, if permitted
by the Village, constitute only that portion of the approved
preliminary plat the subdivider proposes to record at that time.
c. Approval or Rejection. The Village Board shall take action to
approve or reject the final plat within 60 days of its submission,
unless the time is extended by agreement with the subdivider. If
a plat is rejected, the reasons therefore shall be stated in the
minutes of the meeting and a copy thereof or a written statement
of the reasons supplied to the subdivider and all objecting
authorities.
d. Failure to Act. If the Village fails to act within 60 days of
submittal and the time has not been extended by agreement and
if no unsatisfied objections have been field within that period,
the final plat shall be deemed approved, and, upon demand, a
certificate to that effect shall be made on the face of the plat by
the Village Clerk.
e. Penalty. Any subdivider or his agent who offers or contracts to
convey or conveys, any subdivision, or lot, or parcel of land
which lies in a subdivision, knowing that the final plat thereof
has not been recorded with the Register of Deeds, may be
penalized not more than $500.00 or, in default of payment of
such forfeiture, may be imprisoned in the County jail until
payment thereof, but not exceeding six (6) months; except where
the preliminary or final plat of the subdivision has been filed for
approval with the Village, an offer or contract to convey may be
made if that offer or contract states on its face that it is
contingent upon approval of the final plat and shall be void if
such plat is not approved.
f. Fee. To defray the administrative costs resulting from the act of
subdividing land within the Village, the subdivider shall pay the
following fee to the Clerk at time of final plat submittal:
$200.00. Additionally, all costs for Village engineering and
planning consulting services, and inspections of the final plat and
the improvements installed therein shall be paid by the
subdivider. The Village may require that part or all of this fee be
paid prior to granting approval to the final plat.
g. Surety. Whenever the improvements required by this Chapter
have not been installed and accepted by the Village prior to
approval of the final plat, the final plat shall not be approved
until the subdivider has legally guaranteed their installation by
filing an adequate surety bond, performance bond, cash, or
certified check approved by the Village Attorney with the
Village Clerk.
(2) Procedure for Land Divisions Other than Subdivisions.
(a) Filing. The subdivider shall file 6 legible copies of the certified survey or
assessor’s map with the Village Clerk who shall forward two (2) copies to the
Village Engineer and Planning Consultant.
(b) Approval or Rejection. The Village Board shall take action to approve, approve
conditionally, or reject the certified survey map within 40 days of submittal. The
subdivider shall be notified in writing of any conditions of approval or the
reasons for rejection. The certificate of approval of the Village Board shall be
typed, lettered, or reproduced legibly with non-fading black ink on the face of the
map and signed by the Village Clerk. If the Village Board approves
conditionally, the Village Attorney shall prepare for examination by the
subdivider all documents necessary to meet the conditions of approval
determined by the Village Board.
(c) Filing Fee. To defray the administrative costs resulting from the act of dividing
land within the Village, the subdivider shall pay the following fee to the Clerk at
the time of certified survey map or assessor’s map submittal: $125.00.
(3) Alternate Procedure. In lieu of the previously described procedure, the subdivider or
his agent may submit the original plat directly to each of the agencies authorized to
object. Each such agency shall have 20 days from the date of the submission of the
original plat in which to object to the plat. Failure to act within said 20 days from the
date of submission shall mean that the agency has no objection to the plat and, upon
demand, it shall so certify on the face of the plat.
(4) Approvals Required Prior to Recording. The Village Board shall approve the final
plat prior to recording. The subdivider shall file a 22”x30” reproducible linen tracing or
acceptable substitute of the final plat with the Village Clerk before recording the final
plat with the Register of Deeds. The Village Clerk shall certify to approval of the final
plat only after this requirement has been met.
(5) Recording of Final Plat. The subdivider shall file the muslin original of the final plat
with the Register of Deeds within 30 days of the date of the Village approval. Any
subdivider causing his final plat to be recorded without submitting such plat for approval
as herein required, or who shall fail to present the same for record within 30 days of the
date of the Village approval, shall forfeit not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00
to the Village (§236.30, Wis. Stats.)
(6) Recording of Certified Survey Map. The subdivider shall file a reproducible tracing
with the Village before recording the certified survey map with the Register of Deeds.
The subdivder, after filing the above reproducible tracing with the Village, shall file the
certified survey map or a true scale photostatic copy of a map prepared on tracing cloth or
paper with the Register of Deeds within 30 days of the date of Village approval. The
forfeiture for improper recording shall be the same as for the final plat.
(7) Recording of Assessor’s Map. Where it is not practicable to require that a final plat of
the subdivision created by successive divisions be filed in accordance with this Chapter,
the Board may order an assessor’s map to be made under §70.20, Wis. Stats., and may
assess the cost thereof as provided in such section or to the subdivider. The subdivider
shall file a reproducible tracing with the Village after approval has been given.
9.04 REQUIREMENTS FOR PLATS, CERTIFIED SURVEY MAPS, AND
ASSESSOR’S MAPS.
(1) Preliminary Plat. The preliminary plat shall clearly show the following features and
information:
(a) Surveyor. The name of the registered land surveyor preparing the preliminary
plat.
(b) Owner and Subdivider. The name and address of the owner and the subdivider.
(c) Title. The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded.
(d) Scale. Not more than 100 feet to one (1) inch.
(e) Location. The location of the subdivision by government lot, recorded private
claim, quarter section, section, township, range, and county noted immediately
under the title.
(f) Vicinity Sketch. A small drawing oriented on the sheet in the same direction as
the main drawing of the section or governmental subdivision of the section in
which the subdivision lies with the location of the subdivision indicated thereon.
(g) Boundary Lines. The approximate bearings and distances of the boundary lines
of the tract to be subdivided.
(h) Streets & Other Features. The location, widths, and names of all existing or
platted streets or other public ways within or adjacent to the tract, and other
important features such as existing permanent buildings, wooded areas,
watercourses, railroad lines, corporation lines, township lines, etc.
(i) Topography. Topographic data shall be referred to Village datum and shall be
plotted at two (2) foot intervals except where the ground slope exceeds 10%
making five (5) foot interval contours acceptable.
(j) Streets, Drainage, Lots, Etc. The layout, names, and widths of proposed streets,
alleys, and drainage and utility easements; the location and approximate sizes of
culverts, catch basins, and other drainage structures; the layout and approximate
dimensions of proposed lots. The street names shall not duplicate or closely
approximate any existing street names within the Village unless they constitute
an extension or definite relationship to said existing street.
(k) Public Uses. All parcels of land intended to be dedicated or temporarily reserved
for public use, or to be reserved in the deeds for the common use of property
owners in the subdivision, with the purpose, conditions, or limitations of such
reservation indicated.
(l) North Arrow. A north arrow shall be shown.
(m) Deed Restrictions. The Village may require that any public and specific
restrictions pertaining to the land included in the plat be submitted with the
preliminary plat.
(n) Street Profiles. The Village may require that proposed street profiles for
centerline and building line grades extending 300 feet beyond the boundaries of
the subdivision be approved by the Village prior to approval of the preliminary
plat.
(o) Zoning. The zoning on and adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
(p) Adjoining Properties. The location and names of adjacent subdivisions and the
owners of the adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land.
(q) Water Elevations. The water elevations of adjoining lakes, streams, and ponds at
the date of the survey and the approximate high and low water elevations of such
lakes, streams, and ponds. If the subdivision borders any such body of water, the
meander line shall be established not less than 20 feet back from the ordinary
high water mark of said body of water.
(r) State Board of Health Information. Percolation test date, test boring information,
and any other information requested by the State Board of Health for those
subdivisions not being served by sanitary sewers shall be attached to and
submitted with the preliminary plat for use by the State and Village.
(s) Additional Information. Any additional information requested by the Village to
verify ownership, clarify questions raised during the approval procedure, and any
other information the Village deems necessary to reach a decision of the
preliminary plat.
(2) Final Plat. The final plat shall be drawn with waterproof, non-fading black ink on
muslin-backed white paper, 22” wide by 30” long with a 1½” binding margin on the left
side of the 30” length and a one (1) inch margin on all other sides. The following
information shall be shown:
(a) Boundary Lines. Boundary lines with lengths of courses to hundredths of a foot
and bearings to seconds as determined by an accurate field survey performed by
a registered land surveyor and balanced and closed with an error of closure not to
exceed 1 to 3,000.
(b) Recorded Streets. The exact location and the width along the property line of all
existing recorded streets intersecting or abutting the boundaries of the tract.
(c) Tie to Government Survey. True bearings and distances to the nearest
established survey lines, or other official monuments, which monuments shall be
located or accurately described on the plat. Any patent or established survey or
corporation lines shall be accurately monumented and located on the plat.
(d) Monuments. The accurate location and material of all permanent reference
monuments as specified in §236.15, Wis. Stats.
(e) Design. The exact design including:
1. Streets and Alley Lines. Names, bearings, angles of intersections, width
including widths along the line of any obliquely intersecting street,
length of centerlines, etc.
2. Curve Data. Length of arcs, bearings, and lengths of main chords, radii,
central angles, and tangent bearings at either the point of curve or point
of tangency shall be shown either in their proper place or in a separate
table for all streets and alleys. Lot lines may be shown in the same
manner or by bearings and distances.
3. Easements and Rights-of-way. Easements and rights-of-way shall be
shown by center line and width when lines are parallel to a boundary,
otherwise boundary bearings and distances shall be shown.
4. Blocks. Blocks, if designated, shall be consecutively numbered, or
lettered in alphabetical order. The blocks in numbered additions to
subdivisions bearing the same name shall be numbered or lettered
consecutively through the several additions. The exact length and
bearing of the boundary lines of all blocks shall be shown.
5. Lots. All lots in each block shall be consecutively numbered. Outlots
shall be lettered in alphabetical order within each block.
6. Meander Lines. Distances and bearings for meander lines shall be shown
with the distance between the point of intersection of such meander lines
with lot lines and the high water mark also shown.
7. Additional Requirements. As required by §236.20, Wis. Stats.
(f) Name of Subdivision. The name of the subdivision shall be shown and shall not
duplicate the name of any other subdivision in Milwaukee County.
(g) North Arrow, Scale, Date. The north arrow, graphic scale, scale as drawn, and
dates involved.
(h) Deed Restrictions and Setback Lines. When it is in the best interests of the
Village, the Village Board may require that private deed restrictions and setback
lines be either shown on the plat or filed with the Register of Deeds.
(i) Affidavits and Certificates. The surveyor’s certificate, the owner’s certificate,
the certificate of taxes paid, and other affidavits and certificates required by
Chapter 236, Wis. Stats., shall be lettered or printed legibly with waterproof,
non-fading black ink or typed legibly with black ribbon on the final plat.
(j) Additional Information. Any additional information required by Chapter 236,
Wis. Stats., or requested by the Village.
(3) Certified Survey Map. A certified survey map for not more than four (4) parcels of land
may be recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds if such certified survey meets the
following requirements:
(a) Registered Land Surveyor. The survey has been performed and the map
prepared by a registered land surveyor.
(b) Monuments. All corners have been monumented in accordance with
§236.15(1)(c) and (d), Wis. Stats.
(c) Map. The map shall be prepared in accordance with §236.20(2)(a), (b), (c), (d),
(e), (f), (g), (i), (j), and (k) on durable white paper 8½ inches wide by 14 inches
long. All lines shall be made with non-fading black ink on a scale of not more
than 100 feet to an inch.
(d) Certificates and Description. The certified survey map shall include the
certificate of the registered land surveyor who surveyed and mapped the parcel
including a clear and concise description of the land surveyed by bearings and
distances, commencing with some corner marked and established in the
government survey, and acceptable to the Village Engineer.
(e) Additional Information. The map shall also show all existing buildings,
watercourses, drainage ditches, setbacks or building lines if required by the
Village Board, and other information deemed pertinent by the Village.
(4) Assessor’s Map. An assessor’s map shall meet the following requirements:
(a) Registered Land Surveyor. The survey has been performed and the map
prepared by a registered land surveyor.
(b) Monuments. All corners have been monumented in accordance with §236.15,
Wis. Stats., insofar as they are applicable.
(c) Map. The map shall be prepared in accordance with §236.20, Wis. Stats., insofar
as it is applicable with all lines made with non-fading black ink on a scale of not
more than 100 feet to the inch.
(d) Certificates and Description. The assessor’s map shall include the surveyor’s
certificate including the name of the governing body by whose order the plat was
made and the date of the order; a clear and concise description of the land
surveyed and mapped, commencing with some corner marked and established in
the government survey, and acceptable to the Village Engineer; a statement that
the plat is a correct representation of all the exterior boundaries of the land
surveyed and each parcel thereof; and a statement that he has fully complied with
the provisions of §70.27, Wis. Stats, in filing the same.
(e) Additional Information. The map shall also show any other information deemed
pertinent by the Village relating to existing buildings, watercourses, drainage
ditches, easements, setbacks, and building lines, etc.
9.05 DESIGN STANDARDS.
(1) Streets.
(a) Design Criteria. The streets shall be designed and located in relation to existing
and planned streets, to topographical conditions and natural terrain features such
as streams and tree growth, the public convenience and safety, and in their
appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets.
(b) Construction Standards. Streets shall be constructed to conform to section 9.06
of this Chapter and to all applicable policies of the Commission of Public Works.
(c) Widths and Locations. The widths and locations of all streets shall conform to
the Official Map of the Village and to applicable State and County ordinances.
(d) Arrangement.
1. Major Streets. Major streets shall be properly integrated as principal
arterials of through traffic.
2. Collector Streets. Collector streets shall be properly related to mass
transit route, to special traffic generating from facilities such as schools,
churches, shopping centers, to population densities, and to the major
streets into which they feed traffic.
3. Minor Streets. Minor streets shall be designed to conform to topography,
to discourage use of through traffic, to permit efficient drainage, and to
require the minimum length of street necessary to provide convenient,
safe access to property.
4. Frontage Streets. Frontage streets shall be designed in relation to the
major street which it services and to the existing topography to provide
for safe traffic flow and property value preservation.
5. Names. Street names shall not duplicate the names of existing streets in
the Village unless they can be considered as continuations or definitely
related to the existing streets to warrant the same name.
6. Half-Streets. Where a half-street exists adjacent to the subdivision, the
other half-street shall be dedicated by the subdivider. Platting of new
half-streets shall be permitted only with specific approval of the Village
Board.
7. Access Reserve Strips. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall
be prohibited except where the access control has been placed under
Village Board control and such control has been accepted by the Village
Board.
(2) Intersections.
(a) Right Angle. Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and not
more than two (2) streets shall intersect at one point unless approved by the
Village Board.
(b) Corners. Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of
15 feet or of a greater radius where the Village Board considers it necessary.
This may be accomplished either by dedication or by easement.
(c) Jogs. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided.
Where streets intersect major streets, their alignment shall be continuous.
(3) Alleys.
(a) Residential Districts. Alleys shall not be provided in residential districts unless
necessitated by topographic or other exceptional circumstances accepted by the
Village Board.
(b) Commercial and Industrial Districts. The Village Board may require alleys in
commercial and industrial districts when necessary to assure service access for
off-street loading and parking.
(c) Dead End Alleys. Dead end alleys and “T” or “L” shaped alleys shall be
prohibited.
(4) Easements. Easements shall be centered on rear or side lot lines whenever possible.
(a) Utility. Easements shall be provided for utilities where required by the Village
Board and shall be at least 10 feet wide.
(b) Drainage. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way,
channel, or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage
right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and
such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose.
Wherever possible, it is desirable that the drainage be maintained by an open
channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential
volume of flow.
(5) Blocks.
(a) Shape and Size. The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be such as are
appropriate for the type of development contemplated but block lengths in
residential areas shall not exceed 1,500 feet nor be less than 400 feet.
(b) Pedestrian Crosswalks. Pedestrian crosswalks not less than 15 feet wide may be
required by the Village Board within blocks more than 900 feet long to provide
convenient pedestrian circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping
centers, transportation, and other community facilities.
(6) Lots.
(a) General. The size, shape, and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the
location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use
contemplated.
(b) Dimensions.
1. Depth and Width. Lots shall be designed so that the depth to width ratio
does not exceed 2½ to 1.
2. Area. Lot area shall meet the minimum requirements of the Zoning
Code. Residential lots to be served by private sewerage disposal
facilities shall comply with the rules of the State Board of Health as to
minimum area where it exceeds the minimum required by the Zoning
Code.
3. Commercial and Industrial. Depth and width of properties reserved or
laid out for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to
provide for the off-street services and parking facilities required by the
type of use and development contemplated.
4. Fronting or Backing into Major Streets. Residential lots, fronting or
backing into major streets, should be platted with extra depth to permit
generous distances between the buildings and such traffic ways even if
the 2½ to 1 ratio has to be exceeded.
(c) Corner Lots. Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit full
building setback from both streets.
(d) Access to Public Streets. Every lot shall front or abut on a public street for at
least 40 feet. Lots with access only to private drives or streets shall be permitted
only with Village Board approval and subject to the conditions of said approval.
(e) Right Angles. Lots at right angles, butt lots, shall be avoided.
(f) Lot Lines. Lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines.
(g) Oversized Lots. Where lots are created of a size larger than normal for the area,
the Village Board may require that the plat be so designated as to allow for the
possible future re-subdivision of such lots into normal sizes compatible with the
immediate area.
(h) Village Boundaries. Lots shall follow Village boundary lines wherever
practicable.
(i) Double Frontage and Reversed Frontage. Double frontage and reversed frontage
lots shall be avoided except where necessary to provide separation of residential
development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of
topography and orientation.
(7) Minimum Street Widths. The minimum right-of-way dedication for streets shall be as
follows:
(a) Major Streets. As shown on the Official Map but not less than 80 feet.
(b) Collector Streets. 80 feet.
(c) Minor Streets. 60 feet.
(d) Frontage Streets. 40 feet.
(e) Alleys. 20 feet.
(8) Minimum Pavement Widths.
(a) Major Streets. Depends on the pavement cross-section selected, but not less than
44 feet.
(b) Collector Streets. 44 feet or 24 feet with 10 feet outside shoulders.
(c) Minor Streets. 24 feet.
(d) Frontage Streets. 24 feet.
(e) Alleys. 20 feet.
(9) Minimum and Maximum Street Grades.
(a) Minimum Grades. The minimum grade for all streets and alleys shall be 0.50%,
and such minimum shall not be permitted for long sustained distances.
(b) Maximum Grades. Unless conditions warrant otherwise, the maximum grades
for all streets and alleys shall be:
1. Major Streets. Six (6) percent.
2. Collector Streets. Six (6) percent.
3. Minor and Frontage Streets. 10 percent.
4. Alleys. 10 percent.
(10) Horizontal and Vertical Curves.
(a) Horizontal Curves. Horizontal curves shall be designed so that a minimum sight
distance with clear visibility along the centerline is provided as follows:
1. Major Streets. 300 feet.
2. Collector Streets. 250 feet.
3. Minor and Frontage Streets. 100 feet.
4. Alleys. 100 feet.
(b) Vertical Curves. Vertical curves shall be designed so that all changes in grade in
excess of one (1) percent shall be connected by vertical curves of a minimum
length equal to 15 times the algebraic difference in the rate of grade.
(c) Tangents. A tangent of at least 100 feet in length shall be provided between
reverse curves on major and collector streets.
(11) Intersection Grades. The change in grade across an intersection and within 50 feet of
the property line limits of said intersection shall not exceed three (3) percent.
9.06 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND RESERVATIONS.
(1) General. Before a final plat of a subdivision located in the Village will be approved, the
subdivider shall provide and dedicate the following facilities and improvements, all of
which must be installed or constructed within the time stipulated by the Village Board,
but not to exceed two (2) years after approval of the final plat unless the time is extended
by the Village Board:
(a) Streets. Streets graded and surfaced according to Board of Public Works
specifications.
(b) Other Facilities. Drainage channels, culverts, and such other facilities necessary
to provide adequately for surface drainage according to the established standards
of the Village. Where steep grades or soil conditions warrant, the Village Board
may require the subdivider to oil the ditches with liquid asphalt or to rip-rap and
sod the ditches depending on the circumstances in each instance. When culverts
are required, corrugated metal or reinforced concrete culverts shall be installed
prior to the acceptance of streets. Culverts in excess of 18 inches in diameter
shall be arch culverts. Intersection culverts shall be a minimum length of 44 feet.
(c) Alternate Procedure – Financial Guarantee. In the event the aforesaid facilities
and improvements have not been fully installed at the time the plat is submitted
for final approval, the subdivider shall file with the Village Clerk a surety bond
or other satisfactory financial guarantee approved by the Village Attorney to
amply cover the costs of completing said facilities and improvements in such
amount as the Village Board shall determine to be adequate based on the Village
Engineer’s estimates. If the improvements are not installed within two (2) years
from the date of approval of the final plat by the Village Board and no extension
of this time period has been given, the Village Board may cause all uncompleted,
required work to be constructed, and the parties executing the bond or other form
of surety shall be firmly bound for the payment of all necessary costs therefore.
As the required improvements are installed and accepted, the Village Board may
authorize reduction of the surety in the amount deemed appropriate.
(d) Approvals. The adequacy of such facilities and improvements and their proper
installation shall be subject to approval of the Village Board and the Village
Engineer with the acceptance of said facilities following approval. Formal
acceptance of these improvements by the Village Board will be made only
between May and November 1 of any year.
(e) Stage Development. The Village Board may authorize the subdivider to proceed
with the installation of improvements required on a portion of said subdivision
with the requirements of this Chapter applying only to that portion.
(2) Reservations of Public Streets. Whenever a plat is filed of a subdivision in which is
located the site of a proposed park, parkway, playground, school, or other public use as
shown on the Official Map of the Village, the subdivider shall reserve said site on the
final plat for acquisition by the Village or School District. These proposed public lands
shall be reserved for a period not to exceed three (3) years from the date of approval of
the final plat by the Village unless extended by mutual agreement.
(3) Construction Standards.
(a) Streets.
1. Cross-Section. Copies of the standard cross-sections are available from
the Clerk and the Village Engineer. These sections include Plate 1-A,
rural cross-section, and Plate 2-A, urban cross-section. The Village shall
specify the type of cross-section at the time of platting. Alternate crosssections
will be discussed at the time of platting for major and collector
streets.
2. Profiles. The Village Board shall require that profiles of streets to be
constructed be prepared by a Registered Professional Engineer or
Registered Land Surveyor and be submitted to the Village Board for
approval of all grades and drainage easements prior to proceeding with
any grading.
3. Culverts. The length and size of all culverts shall be determined by the
Village Engineer.
4. Surfacing. All streets shall be surfaced according to Board of Public
Works specifications. Maintenance of the streets shall be the
responsibility of the subdivider until final acceptance of the streets by the
Village.
5. Unstable Material. Top soil, mucky soil, peat, and other unstable
material shall be removed below the subgrade of streets and replaced
with suitable, sound fill materials approved, placed, and compacted as
directed by the Village Engineer.
6. Street Signs, Culvert Posts, Guard Rails. Street signs, culvert posts,
guard rails, etc., as required by the Village Board, shall be obtained and
placed by the Village with the expenses incurred paid by the subdivider.
7. Side Slopes. Side slopes shall be covered with top soil, prepared, seeded
or sodded, fertilized, and maintained for a sufficient period to provide
adequate grass cover prior to acceptance by the Village Board.
8. Culvert Abutments. An abutment of mortared stone or reinforced
concrete or other approved material shall be constructed at each end of
all street and driveway culverts by the subdivider.
9. Storm Sewer. If the urban cross-section is specified, an adequate storm
sewer system shall be installed as directed by the Village Engineer.
(b) Drainage Easements. All drainage easements shall be graded so as to confine
water flow to the easement area as shown on the plat and all such grading shall
be approved by the Village Engineer.
(c) Final Inspection and Acceptance. Prior to the request for final street inspection,
the subdivider shall provide the Village Engineer with a written certification
from the subdivider’s engineer or surveyor to the effect that the streets conform
to the grades as indicated on the profile maps previously approved. Final
inspection will be made a minimum of seven (7) days after the surface course has
been applied. Final acceptance of the streets, drainage ditches, culverts, etc., will
be made only between May 1 and November 1 of any year.
(d) Village Engineer’s Expenses. The expenses of the Village Engineer due to the
subject subdivision, to the extent they exceed the fee paid at the time the final
plat was submitted, shall be paid by the subdivider or owner as required by the
Village Board.
9.07 REPLATS, VACATING AND ALTERING PLATS, CORRECTION
INSTRUMENTS.
(1) Replat. A replat of all or any part of a recorded subdivision may not be made or
recorded except after proper court action has been taken to vacate the original plat or the
specific part thereof; provided that such replat may be made and recorded without taking
court action to vacate the original plat or the specific part thereof when all the parties in
interest in writing agree thereto. The subdivider shall follow the same procedure for
processing a replat as he does for any other preliminary and final plat. The Village will
then apply the applicable provisions of this ordinance to the replat.
(2) Vacating and Altering Plats. The owner of the subdivision, the owner of any lot in the
subdivision by tax deed, or the County Board, if the County has acquired an interest in
the subdivision or in any lot in the subdivision by tax deed, may apply to the Circuit
Court for Milwaukee County for the vacation or alteration of all or part of the recorded
plat of that subdivision. The provisions of §236.40, 236.41, 236.42, 236.43, 236.44, and
236.445, Wis. Stats., shall be followed.
(3) Correction Instruments. Correction instruments approved by the Village Board shall be
recorded with the Register of Deeds as provided by §236.293, Wis. Stats.
9.08 APPEALS. Any person aggrieved by an objection to a plat or a failure to approve a plat
may appeal therefrom as provided in §62.23(7)(e)10 to 15, Wis. Stats., within 30 days of
notification of the rejection of the plat. For the purpose of such appeal, the term “Board
of Appeals” means an “approving authority”. Where the failure to approve is based on an
unsatisfied objection, the agency making the objection shall be made a party to the action.
The court shall direct that the plat be approved if it finds that the action of the approving
authority or objecting agency is arbitrary, unreasonable, or discriminatory.
9.09 MODIFICATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS. In any particular case where the subdivider
can show that, by reason of exceptional topographic or other physical condition, strict
compliance with any requirement of this ordinance would cause practical difficulty or
hardship, the Village Board may relax such requirement to the extent deemed proper, so
as to relieve such difficulty or hardship, provided such relief may be granted without
detriment to the public good and without impairing the intent and purpose of this Chapter
or the desirable general development of the neighborhood and the Village. A threefourths
vote of the entire Village Board shall be required to grant modifications or
exceptions to this Chapter, and any modifications or exceptions so granted shall be
entered in the minutes of the Village Board setting forth the reasons justifying the action.
9.10 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
(1) Enforcement. The Village may institute injunction or other appropriate action or
proceeding to enjoin a violation of this Chapter or any provision of Chapter 236, Wis.
Stats., adopted by reference.
(2) Penalties. Except as otherwise expressly provided, any subdivder who fails to comply
with the provisions of this Chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than
$100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and the costs of prosecution for each violation, and in
default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the County jail
until payment thereof, but not exceeding six (6) months. Each day a violation exists or
continues shall constitute a separate offense. In addition the remedies provided by
§236.30 and 236.31, Wis. Stats., shall apply.
CHAPTER 10
Alcohol Beverages
10.01 Purpose and Authority
10.02 Statutes Incorporated
10.03 License Required
10.04 License Fees
10.05 Additional Application Requirements
10.06 Quota on “Class A” Licenses
10.07 Grant or Denial of License
10.08 Additional Conditions of License
10.09 Closing Hours for Off-premises Consumption Sales
10.10 Class A Display Area
10.11 Book Kept by Licensee and Permitees
10.12 Nude Dancing in Licensed Establishments Prohibited
10.13 License Transfers
10.14 Licensee Responsible
10.15 Penalty
10.01 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY. The regulations set forth under this Chapter are
enacted pursuant to §125.10, Wis. Stats., to act for the good order of the Village and for
the health, safety and welfare of the public and to protect against potential adverse
secondary effects which may result from activities involving the sale of alcohol
beverages, including the disruption of the peace, depreciation of the value of real
property, injury to persons, damage to property, increased crime, harm to the economic
welfare of the community and negative effects upon the quality of life within the Village.
10.02 STATUTES INCORPORATED. The following sections of Chapter 125 of the
Wisconsin Statutes, as amended from time to time, excepting any terms or provisions
therein specifying a penalty of imprisonment, are hereby incorporated by reference as if
fully set forth herein:
125.02 Definitions.
125.03 Department rule making (and the rules adopted threreunder).
125.035 Civil liability exemption: furnishing alcohol beverages.
125.037 Civil liability exemption for municipalities.
125.04 General licensing requirements.
125.06 License and permit exceptions.
125.07 Underage and intoxicated persons; presence on licensed
premises; possession; penalties.
125.075 Injury or death by providing alcohol beverages to a minor.
125.085 Proof of age.
125.09 General restrictions
125.105 Impersonating an officer.
125.12 Revocations, suspensions, refusals to issue or renew.
125.17 Issuance of operators’ licenses.
125.18 Issuance of manager’s licenses.
125.185 Provisional retail licenses.
125.25 Class “A” licenses.
125.26 Class “B” licenses.
125.28 Wholesalers’ licenses.
125.31 Multiple licenses and permits; brewers.
125.315 Evading provisions of law by giving away fermented malt
beverages.
125.32 General restrictions and requirements.
125.33 Restrictions on dealings between brewers, wholesales, and
retailers.
125.51 Retail licenses and permits (except sub. (5)).
125.66 Sale without license; failure to obtain permit; penalties.
125.67 Evading provisions of law by giving away intoxicating liquor;
penalties.
125.68 General restrictions and requirements.
125.69 Restrictions on dealings between manufacturers, rectifiers,
wholesalers, and retailers.
125.70 Trade show samples.
10.03 LICENSE REQUIRED. No person may sell, manufacture, rectify, brew or engage in
any other activity: i) for which this Chapter provides a license, permit or other type of
authorization without holding the appropriate license, permit, or authorization issued
under this Chapter; or ii) in violation of any term or provision of this Chapter.
10.04 LICENSE FEES. License fees for alcohol beverage licenses shall be paid to the Village
within 15 days of the approval of any license or such approval shall be void. The license
fee amounts shall be as follows:
(1) Class “A”: $100.00
(2) Class “B”: $100.00
(3) Temporary Class “B”: $10.00
(4) Wholesaler’s Fermented Malt Beverage: $25.00
(5) Operator’s: $60.00
(6) Provisional Operator’s: $15.00
(7) Manager’s: $55.00
(8) “Class A”: $500.00
(9) “Class B”: $500.00
(10) Reserve “Class B” (Initial Issuance): $10,000
(11) “Class B” issued under §125.51(4)(v), Stats.: $500.00
(12) Temporary “Class B”: $10.00
(13) “Class C”: $100.00
(14) Provisional Retail: $15.00
10.05 ADDITIONAL APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS. In addition to those application
requirements set forth under Chapter 125 Stats., incorporated under §10.02 of this
Chapter:
(1) An application for any license required under this Chapter shall be filed with the Village
Clerk at least 15 days prior to the granting of the license.
(2) Any application for a license which must be published prior to the issuance of the license
shall be published in the official newspaper of the Village.
(3) The application for a manager’s license and an operator’s license shall be in such form
and content as approved by the Village Board as reasonably necessary to obtain such
information regarding the applicant to determine whether the applicant is qualified to be
granted such license and that such determination may be efficiently administered
pursuant to all of the terms and provisions of this Chapter.
(4) The Village Clerk shall refer all applications to the Police Chief and any applications
pertaining to any premises or activities involving the scope of their respective duties,
shall be additionally referred to the Health Officer and Building Inspector, for the review
and investigation by such officer(s) to determine that the applicant, application and any
premises comply in all respects with all terms and provisions of this Chapter. Such
officer(s) shall report to the Village Board in writing the results of their respective
review(s) and investigation(s). The provision of such written report shall not be a
precondition to action upon the application by the Village Board.
(5) Operators’ licenses shall be valid for a period of 2 years expiring on June 30 of even
numbered years.
(6) The Village Clerk is designated as the municipal official having authority to issue
provisional operators’ licenses and provisional retail licenses.
10.06 QUOTA ON “CLASS A” LICENSES. No more than three 3 “Class A” licenses may
be granted or issued for concurrent license terms within the Village. No more than 4
Class “A” licenses may be granted or issued for concurrent license terms within the
Village.
10.07 GRANT OR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
(1) The Village Board shall approve an application for a license required under this Chapter
provided that the application, applicant and any premises to be licensed are qualified and
comply in all respects with all of the terms and provisions of this Chapter.
(2) The Village Board may deny any application or condition the approval of same, should
the application, applicant or any premises to be licensed under this Chapter fail to qualify
or otherwise meet any requirement of Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin Statutes incorporated
under §10.02 of this Chapter or any additional term or provision of this Chapter. In
addition, the Village Board may deny or conditionally approve an application where it
has determined that:
(a) The application is incomplete;
(b) The application is incorrect or contains false or misleading statements;
(c) Any premises to be licensed fail to comply in all respects with all applicable state
and Village health, building, fire prevention, zoning, plumbing, electric,
sanitation and safety codes, regulations and orders applicable to the premises;
(d) There exist any unpaid general property taxes or interest or penalties thereon,
special assessments, or special charges due to the Village, applicable to any
premises to be licensed, then due and owing as provided by law; or
(e) The applicant or any premises to be licensed have previously been in violation of
any term or provision of Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin Statutes or Chapter 10 of
the Municipal Code.
(f) Upon a renewal application, the applicant has not operated or the subject
premises have not been open for business at least 90 days within the 6 month
period immediately prior to the filing of the application.
10.08 ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS OF LICENSE. In addition to all of the terms and
provisions of Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin Statutes and this Chapter, all premises
subject to a license granted under this Chapter shall be subject to the following:
(1) Inspection of Premises. Every licensee under this Chapter consents to the entry of any
peace officer or any officer of the Village at all reasonable hours for the purposes of
inspection to determine whether same complies in all respects with all of the terms and
provisions of this Chapter and all other applicable laws, statutes, ordinances, rules, codes,
regulations and orders.
(2) Conduct of Premises. Each licensed premises shall at all times be conducted in an
orderly manner, no disorderly, riotous or indecent conduct shall be allowed at any time
on any licensed premises.
(3) Gambling Prohibited. No gambling or games of chance of any sort shall be permitted
in any form upon the licensed premises.
10.09 CLOSING HOURS FOR OFF-PREMISES CONSUMPTION SALES. Pursuant to
§125.32(3)(d), Stats., between 9:00 P.M. and 8:00 A.M., no person may sell fermented
malt beverages on Class “A” licensed premises and between 9:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M., no
person may sell fermented malt beverages on Class “B” licensed premises in an original
unopened package, container, or bottle or for consumption away from the premises.
Pursuant to §125.68(4)(c)3, Stats., between 9:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M. no person may sell
intoxicating liquor, beer or wine on “Class B” licensed premises in an original unopened
package, container or bottle or for consumption away from the premises.
10.10 SEPARATE DISPLAY AREA REQUIRED FOR “CLASS A” LICENSED
PREMISES.
(1) If, upon initial application or upon application for renewal thereof, the affidavit of the
license holder who has 2 or more checkout counters discloses that more than 50% of the
holder’s retail sales involve sales other than intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages, such license holder shall be required to provide a separate area for the display
and sale of intoxicating liquors in accordance with this subsection. The Village Board
may require such license holder to provide any and all data, including original copies of
accounting and tax records, in order to support any representations by the license holder
contained in the above referenced affidavit. This requirement shall not apply to an
applicant with only one checkout counter.
(2) Partition, Checkout Site, and Plan of Operation.
(a) Partition. A license holder subject to the requirements of this subsection shall
construct a partition between the portion of the premises used for display and sale
of intoxicating liquor and that portion of the premises used for display and sale of
other merchandise so as to separate such intoxicating liquor department from all
other departments at which other merchandise is sold.
(b) Plan of Operation.
1. All intoxicating liquor license holders shall submit a plan of operation at
the time of initial application or renewal thereof, with a diagram or
photograph of the proposed or existing sale and display area for
intoxicating liquor. Such plan of operation shall be reviewed by the
Village Board, which shall approve or disapprove the same.
2. In addition to other grounds for revocation as set forth in this Chapter,
failure to obtain approval of the plan of operation required hereunder
shall be grounds for license revocation.
10.11 BOOK KEPT BY LICENSEES AND PERMITTEES. Every retail alcohol beverage
licensee or permittee shall keep a book for the purposes of determining whether or not the
licensee or permittee violated any restrictions relating to underage persons, pursuant to
§125.07(6), Stats. The licensee or permittee or employee thereof shall require those
persons to sign the book as set forth under §125.07(7)(a)1. and 2. Stats., and shall enter
such information in the book as set forth under §125.07(7)(b), Stats.
10.12 NUDE DANCING IN LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.
(1) It is unlawful for any person to perform or engage in, or for any licensee or manager or
agent of the licensee to permit any person, employee, entertainer or patron to perform or
engage in any live act, demonstration, dance or exhibition on the premises of a licensed
establishment which:
Shows his or her genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a
fully opaque covering; or
Shows any portion of the female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola; or
Shows the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
(2) Exemptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to the following licensed
establishments: theaters, performing arts centers, civic centers, and dinner theaters where
live dance, ballet, music and dramatic performances of serious artistic merit are offered
on a regular basis and in which the predominant business or attraction is not the offering
to customers of entertainment which is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual
gratification to such customers and where the establishment is not distinguished by an
emphasis on, or advertising or promotion of, employees engaging in nude erotic dancing.
(3) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the term “licensed establishment” means any
establishment licensed by the Village Board to sell alcohol beverages pursuant to this
Chapter. The term “licensee” means the holder of a retail “Class A”, “Class B”, Class
“A”, Class “B” or “Class C” license granted by the Village Board.
10.13 LICENSE TRANSFERS. In addition to the requirements set forth under §125.04(12),
Stats., no license may be transferred to another person or to another place or premises
unless an application for such transfer is filed with the Village Clerk at least 15 days prior
to the approval of such transfer. Any applicant for a transfer to another place or premises
shall pay an application fee of $10.00 and such application shall be published at least
once in the official newspaper of the Village prior to the granting of such application by
the Village Board. The form and content of such transfer applications shall be as
approved by the Village Board pursuant to the standards set forth under §10.05(c) of this
Chapter or otherwise as required by the Wisconsin Department of Revenue. The
applicant shall pay the cost of such publication upon filing the application. Upon
consideration of an application to transfer a license to another place or premises, in
addition to finding full compliance of the transferee premises with all terms and
provisions of this Chapter and all other applicable laws, statutes, ordinances, rules, codes,
regulations and orders, shall also find that such premises if licensed, will not be
detrimental to or endanger the public health or safety, will not impede the planned
development of such premises and the surrounding area or have an adverse effect upon
surrounding property values, that the proposed use of such premises will not cause traffic
congestion or adversely affect municipal services, with the burden of proof to such
determination being upon the applicant.
10.14 LICENSEE RESPONSIBLE. A violation of any term or provision of this Chapter by
an agent or employee of a licensee or permittee shall constitute a violation by the licensee
or permittee.
10.15 PENALTY. Any person who shall violate any term or provision of this Chapter for
which a specific forfeiture or monetary penalty has not been set forth, shall be subject to
the penalty provisions set forth under §19.04 of this Code. Such penalties shall be in
addition to all other Village actions or remedies available at law or in equity, which shall
include, but not be limited to license suspension or revocation or refusal to issue or
refusal to renew a license.
History:
Ord. 08-03 (Class “A” quota amended)
CHAPTER 11
Licenses and Permits
11.01 Direct Sales
11.02 Closing Out Sales
11.03 Taxicabs
11.04 Racing Cars, “Go-Karts”, and Similar Vehicles
11.05 Public dances and Dance Halls
11.06 Amusement Devices
11.07 Cigarettes
11.08 Licensing of Dogs and Cats; Regulation of Animals
11.09 Penalty
11.10
11.11 Cable Communication System Franchise
11.12 Alarm Systems
11.13 Food Establishments
11.14 Public Swimming Pools
11.15 Special Event Parking
11.16 Filing Fee for Tax Exempt Properties
11.17 Payment of Taxes, Special Assessments, and Special Charges
11.18 Adult Oriented Establishments
11.19 Registry of Massage Therapists and Bodyworkers Required
11.20 Massage Establishments
11.21
11.22
11.23 Administrative Codes Adopted
11.24 Weights and Measures Regulations
11.01 DIRECT SALES.
(1) Licensing and Registration Required. It shall be unlawful for any direct seller to
engage in direct sales or solicitation within the Village of Hales Corners without being
registered and having a licensed issued for that purpose as provided herein.
(2) Definitions. The following definitions shall be applicable in this Section:
(a) Direct Seller.
1. “Direct Seller” means any individual who, for him/herself, or for a
partnership, association, or corporation sells goods, or takes sales orders
for the later delivery of goods, at any location other than the permanent
business place or residence of said individual, partnership, association, or
corporation, and shall include, but not be limited to, peddlers, solicitors,
and transient merchants. The sale of goods includes donations required
by the direct seller for the retention of goods by a donor or prospective
customer and a sale in which the personal services rendered upon or in
connection with the goods constitutes the greatest part of value for the
price received.
2. The term “direct seller” as herein used shall also specifically include any
peddler, canvasser, solicitor, or transient merchant, agent, or employee
who engages in, does, or transacts any temporary or transient business in
the Village, either in one (1) location or by moving his place of business
from place to place in the Village, selling goods, wares, or merchandise,
or solicits for such trade and whether or not for the purpose of carrying
on such business, such individual hires, leases, occupies, or uses a
building, structure, vacant lot, or vehicle for the exhibition or sale of
such goods, wares, or merchandise.
3. The term “direct seller” as herein used shall also mean “solicitor”. A
“solicitor” is any person, organization, corporation, institution,
association, agency, or co-partnership that agrees, for whatever reason, to
solicit or collect contributions or other benefits for any charitable
organization.
(b) Permanent Merchant. “Permanent merchant” means a direct seller who, for at
least one (1) year prior to the consideration of the application of this Section to
said merchant:
1. He previously operated an established place of business in the Village; or
2. Has continuously resided in the Village and now does business from
his/her residence.
(c) Goods. “Goods” shall include personal property of any kind and shall include
goods provided incidental to services offered or sold.
(d) Charitable Organization. “Charitable organization” is any person, organization,
corporation, institution, association, agency, or co-partnership which is or
purports to be a charitable, benevolent, health, educational, religious, patriotic, or
other similar public cause organization, or any organization to alleviate cruelty
toward animals.
(e) Solicitation. “Solicitation” is any act of seeking or obtaining money through
solicitors, any of the following benefits: a grant of money or property, including
a promise to give any such grant; a gift of goods, wares, merchandise, or other
items of value; the sale or distribution or offer for sale or distribution to the
public of any item to raise money; the sale of membership, periodicals, books, or
advertising space; and the promotion of any public bazaar, sale, entertainment,
exhibition, or other event to secure money, goods, or property.
(f) Person. “Person” shall mean all humans of any age or sex, partnerships,
corporations, associations, groups, organizations, and any other description of a
collection of human beings working in concert or for the same purpose or
objective.
(3) Exemptions. The following persons shall be exempt from licensing and registration
provisions of this Section:
(a) Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, fruit juices, dairy products, or bakery
goods to regular customers on established routes;
(b) Any person selling goods at wholesale to dealers in such goods;
(c) Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders away from the
established place of business for goods regularly offered for sale by such
merchant within this county and who delivers such goods in their regular course
of business;
(d) Any person who has an established place of business where the goods being sold
are offered for sale on a regular basis, and in which the buyer has initiated
contact with, and specifically requested a home visit by, said person;
(e) Any person who has had, or one who represents a company which has had, a
prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit arrangement, with the
prospective customer;
(f) Any person holding a sale required by stature or by order of any court and any
person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law;
(g) Any person, officer, or agent of a charitable organization who engages in direct
sales for or on behalf of said organization, provided there is submitted to the
Village Clerk proof that such charitable organization is registered under §440.41,
Wis. Stats. Any charitable organization engaging in the sale of merchandise or
services and not registered under §440.41, Wis. Stats., or which is exempt from
that statute’s registration requirements, shall be required to register under this
ordinance;
(h) Any person who claims to be a permanent merchant, but against whom complaint
has been made to the Village Clerk that such person is a transient merchant;
provided that there is submitted to the Village Clerk proof that such person has
leased for at least one (1) year, or purchased, that premises from which he/she
has conducted business in the market area for at least one (1) year prior to the
date the compliant was made;
(i) Any individual licensed by an examining board as defined in §15.01(7), Wis.
Stats.;
(j) Any ex-soldier of the United States holding a license under §440.51, Wis. Stats.,
who shall, while engaged in the business as such merchant or peddler, carry the
special license and proof required for the issuance of such special license under
such section;
(k) Trick or treaters on approved days for Halloween;
(l) Any person selling agricultural products which the person has grown;
(m) This ordinance does not apply to transient merchants while doing business at
special events authorized by the Village Board.
(4) Licensing and Registration Procedures.
(a) License Required.
1. No direct seller shall solicit or sell, offer to sell, vend, or dispose of
goods, wares, or merchandise within the Village without first having
obtained a license.
2. No charitable organization, nor any other organization or person on its
behalf, intrastate or foreign, unless specifically exempted by this Section,
shall solicit benefits from residents of the Village unless it has filed a
request with the Village Clerk for a license and is so licensed as provided
by this Section.
(b) Application Information. Applicants for registration and license must complete
and return to the Village Clerk a registration form furnished by the Village Clerk
which shall require the following information:
1. Name (including middle initial), permanent address and telephone
number, and temporary address, if any;
2. Date of birth, height, weight, color of hair and eyes;
3. Name, address, and telephone number of the person, firm association,
corporation, or charitable organization that he direct seller represents or
is employed by, or whose merchandise is being sold;
4. Temporary address and telephone number from which business will be
conducted, if any;
5. Nature of business or solicitation to be conducted and a brief description
of the goods, membership, or services offered;
6. Proposed method of delivery of goods, if applicable;
7. Make, model, and license number of any vehicle to be used by the
applicant in the conduct of his/her business;
8. Most recent cities, villages, towns, not to exceed three (3), where
applicant conducted similar business or solicitations just prior to making
this registration and licensing request;
9. Place where applicant can be contacted for at least seven (7) days after
leaving the Village;
10. Statement as to whether applicant has been convicted of any crime or
ordinance violation related to applicant’s transient merchant business or
soliciting within the last five (5) years, the nature of the offense, and the
place of conviction;
11. The length of time for which the license is desired.
(c) Documentation. Applicants shall present to the Village Clerk for examination:
1. A driver’s license or some other proof of identity as may reasonably
required;
2. Whenever the business of the applicant shall require the use of weighing
or measuring devices, the application shall be accompanied by a
certificate from the Village Sealer of Weights and Measures stating that
said devices have been examined and approved;
3. A State health officer’s certificate where applicant’s business involves
the handling of food or clothing and is required to be certified under
State law; such certificate to state that applicant is apparently free from
any contagious or infections disease, dated not more than 90 days prior
to the date the application for license is made.
(d) Investigation.
1. At the time of filing an application, a license fee of the less of $20.00 per
day or $200.00 per license year, as determined by applicant’s proposed
time period of use at the time of application, without refund thereafter,
for each person to be covered by the license shall be paid to the Village
Clerk to cover the cost of administration of the application and
investigation of facts stated in the application. The application shall be
referred to the Chief of Police who may require additional information
for the effective enforcement of this Section and the safeguarding of the
residents of the Village from fraud, misconduct, or abuse.
2. Upon receipt of each such application, the Chief of Police shall institute
such investigation of the application as reasonably necessary for the
protection of the public good and shall return the application to the
Village Clerk with any findings and recommendations.
3. The Village Clerk may refuse to register the applicant if it is determined,
pursuant to the investigation, that: the application contains any material
omission or materially inaccurate statement; complaints of a material
nature have been received against the applicant by authorities in the most
recent cities, villages, and towns, not exceeding three (3), in which the
applicant conducted similar business; the applicant was convicted of a
crime, statutory violation, or ordinance violation within the last five (5)
years, the nature of which is directly related to the applicant’s fitness to
engage in soliciting or direct selling; or the applicant failed to comply
with any applicable provision of this Section.
4. Any person refused or denied registration may appeal the denial pursuant
to Article XII of the Village Bylaws.
(e) Issuance of License.
1. Upon compliance with this Section, the Village Clerk shall issue to the
applicant a license. All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which
they are issued and shall state clearly the place where the business or
solicitation may be carried on, the kind of goods, wares, and merchandise
to be sold, disposed of, or contracted for, the dates of issuance and
expiration of the license, the fee paid, and the name of the licensee.
Daily or short term license shall expire at the end of the last day for
which the license is issued. Other licenses shall automatically expire one
(1) year following the date of issuance, but such license may specifically
state and provide for an earlier expiration date. No license shall be
granted to a person under the minimum ages of various employments as
required under §103.67, Wis. Stats., and no applicant to whom a license
has been refused or who has had a license revoked shall make further
application until at least six (6) months shall have elapsed since the last
previous rejection or revocation, unless he/she can show the reason for
such rejection or revocation no longer exists. Every licensee, while
exercising the license, shall post his/her license in a conspicuous place
and shall exhibit the same upon demand of any Village official,
customer, or prospective vendee.
2. The applicant shall sign a statement appointing the Village Clerk as the
applicant’s agent to accept service of processing in any civil action
brought against the applicant arising out of any sale or service performed
by the applicant in connection with the direct sales activities of the
applicant, in the event the applicant cannot, after reasonable effort, be
served personally.
(5) Regulation of Direct Sellers.
(a) Prohibited Practices.
1. A direct seller shall be prohibited from: calling at any dwelling or other
place between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. except by
appointment; calling at any dwelling or other place where a sign is
displayed bearing the words “No Peddlers”, “No Solicitors”, or works of
similar meaning; calling at the rear door of any dwelling place or any
garage, or out building thereof or entering the rear yard of any premises;
or remaining on any premises after being asked to leave by the owner,
occupant, or other person having authority over such premises.
2. A direct seller may not misrepresent or make false, deceptive, or
misleading statements concerning the quality, quantity, or character of
any goods offered for sale, the purpose of his/her visit, his/her identity or
the identity of the organization he/she represents. A charitable
organization direct seller shall specifically disclose what portion of the
requested donation or the sale price of goods being offered will actually
be used for the charitable purpose for which the organization is
soliciting. Said portion shall be expressed as percentage of the sale price
of the goods.
3. No direct seller shall impede the free use of sidewalks and streets by
pedestrians and vehicles. Where sales are made from vehicles, all traffic
and parking regulations shall be observed.
4. No direct seller shall make any loud noises or use any sound amplifying
device to attract customers if the noise produced is capable of being
plainly heard outside of a 100-foot radius of the source.
5. No direct seller shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in or around
the area in which he/she is conducting business.
(b) Disclosure Requirements.
1. After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to a
prospective customer, a direct seller shall expressly disclose his/her full
name, the name of the company or organization he/she is affiliated with,
if any, and the identity of goods or services he/she offers to sell.
2. If any sale of goods is made by a direct seller or any sales order for the
later delivery of goods is take by the seller, the buyer shall have the right
to cancel said transaction if it involves the extension of credit or is a cash
transaction of more than $25.00, in accordance with the procedure as set
forth in §423.203, Wis. Stats., the seller shall give the buyer two (2)
copies of a typed or printed notice of that fact. Such notices shall
conform to the requirements of §423.203(1)(a)(b) and (c), (2) and (3),
Wis. Stats.
3. If the direct seller takes a sales order for the later delivery of goods,
he/she shall, at the time the order is taken, provide the buyer with a
written statement containing the terms of the agreement, the amount paid
in advance, whether full, partial, or not advance payment is made, the
name, address, and telephone number of the seller, the delivery or
performance date and whether a guarantee or warranty is provided and, if
so, the terms thereof.
(c) License Nonassignable. A license shall not be assignable and any holder of such
license who permits it to be used by another person and also any persons who use
a license granted to any other person, shall be guilty of a violation of this Section.
Whenever a license shall be lost or destroyed, a duplicate in lieu thereof under
the original application may be issued by the Village Clerk upon the filing with
him by the licensee of an affidavit setting forth the circumstances of the loss and
what, if any, search has been made for its recovery and upon the payment of a
replacement fee.
(d) Mutilation of License. On the expiration of the license, the licensee shall
surrender the same to the Village Clerk. No person shall alter or change in any
manner any license issued under the provisions of this Section.
(e) Additional Regulations. A licensed direct seller shall comply with all laws,
statutes, ordinances, governmental regulations, rules, and orders applicable to the
licensee and the licensee’s activities.
(6) Records. The Chief of Police shall report to the Village Clerk all convictions for
violation of this Section and the Village Clerk shall note any such violations on the
record of the licensee convicted.
(7) Revocation of Registration.
(a) Registration may be revoked by the Village Board after notice and hearing if the
licensee made any material omission or materially inaccurate statement in the
application for registration, made any fraudulent, false, deceptive, or misleading
statement or representation in the course of engaging in direct sales or
solicitations, violated any provision of this Section or was convicted of any
crimes or ordinance or statutory violation which is directly related to the
registrant’s fitness to engage in direct selling or solicitation.
(b) Written notice of the hearing shall be served personally or pursuant to subsection
(4)(e)2 above on the licensee at least 72 hours prior to the time set for the
hearing; such notice shall contain the time and place of hearing and a statement
of the acts upon which the hearing will be based.
11.02 CLOSING OUT SALES. §100.18(3m) and 100.20(1m), Wis. Stats., is adopted by
reference.
11.03 TAXICABS PERMIT AND LICENSE REQUIRED. Effective July 1, 2005, pursuant
to §349.24 of the Wisconsin Statutes, no person may operate any motor vehicle for
taxicab purposes within the Village of Hales Corners unless the person is licensed as a
chauffeur and operator and unless the taxicab business is licensed by the licensing of each
taxicab. Said license(s) shall be current and valid.
11.04 RACING CARS, “GO-KARTS”, AND SIMILAR VEHICLES.
(1) No person shall operate a racing car, “Go-kart”, or similar vehicle in the Village except
upon a track constructed and licensed under this section.
(2) A vehicle race track license shall be issued for a license year from July 1 to June 30,
subject to the following terms and conditions:
(a) The track must be located at least 2,000 feet from nay dwelling.
(b) The track must be covered by a public liability insurance policy with limits of
$100,000/300,000/10,000, and a certificate of insurance shall be filed with the
Village Clerk before the license is issued.
(c) The track must have toilet facilities approved by the Health Officer of the
Village.
(d) All structures must comply with the Building Code and Zoning Code of the
Village and must be approved by the Building Inspector.
(e) The track shall be operated only between 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(f) The track shall be hard surfaced with concrete, macadam, or equivalent material.
(g) The licensee shall post a bond with the Village, indemnifying and holding
harmless the Village in the amount of $100,000 from any and all claims and
damages which might arise from the licensing or operation of the track.
(3) License applications shall be on forms supplied by the Village Clerk. Before any license
is granted, the Village Board shall hold a public hearing on the application, with at least
one notice thereof to be published in the official Village newspaper. The license shall
issue only if the Board finds that the public health, safety, and welfare will not be
adversely affected thereby.
(4) No vehicle shall be operated on a licensed track which is not equipped with an adequate
muffler in constant operation and properly maintained to prevent any excessive or
unusual noise or annoying smoke.
11.05 PUBLIC DANCES AND DANCE HALLS.
(1) Definitions.
(a) Public Dance. Any dance to which admission can be had, either without charge
or by payment of a fee or by the purchase, possession, or presentation of a ticket
or token in which a charge is made for caring for clothing or other property, or
any other dance to which the public generally may gain admission with or
without payment of a fee.
(b) Public Dance Hall. Any room, place, or space in which public dance may be
held.
(2) License Required. No person shall hold any public dance within the Village until the
public dance hall in which the same may be held shall first have been duly licensed for
such purpose under this section.
(3) License.
(a) Where Permitted. Public dance hall licenses shall only be granted for premises
within a zoned business district.
(b) Exceptions. This section shall not apply to eleemosynary and religious
institutions.
(c) Fees. The applicant for a public dance hall license may either apply for an
annual license at a fee of $30.00 for a calendar year, or for an occasional license
of $5.00 for each occasion.
(d) Application. Such application shall state:
1. The name, address, and age of the applicant.
2. The location at which such public dance hall is intended to be conducted.
3. The name of the person owning the premises for which a license is
asked.
4. If for an occasional license, the date and hours for which the license is
sought.
(4) Police Supervision.
(a) Every licensed owner of a public dance hall shall, immediately upon application
being received by him from any person, club, or society to lease or rent his hall
for the purpose of holding a public dance, report to the Chief of Police the name
and address of such person, club, or society and the date when such public dance
is proposed to be held. The Chief of Police shall at once make or cause to be
made an investigation for the purpose of determining whether such dance shall be
held. If the Chief of Police shall determine that the proposed dance ought not to
be held he shall, within five (5) days after receipt of the aforesaid notice of
application for lease or rental, notify the licensed owner of such public dance hall
in writing that the proposed public dance shall not be held therein, and the
licensed owner of such public dance hall shall thereupon refuse to permit such
public dance to be held in such hall. In such event, for an occasional license, the
license fee shall be returned.
(b) All public dance halls shall be kept at all times in a clean, healthful, and sanitary
condition, and all stairways and outer passages and all rooms connected with a
public dance hall shall be kept open and well lighted, and it shall be unlawful to
dim the lights in a public dance hall while a dance number is going on. The
Chief of Police shall cause the place, hall, or room where any dance is being held
or given, to be vacated whenever any indecent act shall be committed or when
any disorder of a violent or vulgar character shall take place.
(c) Whenever practicable, the licensee shall engage the services of an off-duty law
enforcement official from the Village, if possible, otherwise from some other law
enforcement agency within Milwaukee County, to be in attendance during the
dance.
(5) Minors at Public Dances.
(a) Within premises where no intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are
available, it shall be unlawful after 10:00 p.m. to permit any person to attend or
take part in any public dance who has not reached the age of 18 years, unless
such person be in the company of a parent or guardian, or spouse, one of whom
shall be 18 years of age.
(b) In event the premises are licensed for the sale of intoxicating liquor or fermented
malt beverages, at no time shall a person under the age of 21 be permitted to be
in attendance, unless accompanied by his parent or guardian or spouse, one of
whom shall be 21 years of age. Such premises shall include any shall which is
attached to or under the same roof as or abutting on the same plot as one licensed
for the sale of intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages.
(c) No person shall misrepresent his age in order to obtain admission to a public
dance hall or be permitted to remain therein when such person in fact is under
age, and no person shall represent himself to be a parent, guardian, or spouse of
any person in order that such person may obtain admission to a public dance hall,
nor shall he be permitted to remain therein when the party making the
representation is not in fact either a parent, guardian, or spouse of the other
person.
(6) Closing Hour. All public dances shall be discontinued on or before 2:00 a.m. on
weekdays, 2:30 a.m. on Sundays and on New Year’s Day.
(7) Serving of Liquor. No licensee shall permit any person to serve, dispense, sell, or drink
any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages upon the licensed public dance hall
premises unless such premises are duly licensed for such sales.
(8) Marathons Prohibited. The holding, showing, or exhibiting of dance marathons or
walkathons is prohibited within the Village.
(9) Prior to the issuance of any such dance hall license, the Village Clerk shall refer the
matter to the Fire Inspector and Chief of Police of the Village to ascertain whether the
premises comply in all respects with the Fire Code of the Village for such use and further
to ascertain whether supervision is necessary under Subsection (4) hereof. The Village
Clerk shall be empowered to issue occasional licenses upon the affirmative report of such
Village personnel. For an annual dance hall license, the Village Clerk shall only be
authorized to issue a license upon the affirmative approval of a majority of the License
Committee of the Village Board.
11.06 AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
(1) Purpose. This section is enacted to preserve the public peace and safety, and is a matter
of urgency, being occasioned by the fact that various persons are or may be establishing
so-called pin games, digger games, slot machines, rotary merchandisers, or other devices,
in the Village of Hales Corners, which by offering chances or hazards have a tendency to
adversely affect the morals of youth and to inspire gambling.
(2) Definitions.
(a) A “coin operated phonograph” and a “coin operated soundy” are machines or
devices which are so constructed or installed that upon the insertion in the slot of
the machine of a coin it, in return, reproduces musical sounds or speeches with or
without cinema or moving picture reproduction.
(b) An “amusement device” is any mechanical device or shuffle board used or
designed to be used or operated for amusement only, but the insertion of a coin of
any kind and shall include the type of mechanical device commonly known as a
baseball, football, basketball, hockey, bowling, ray gun, bumper and skee ball
amusement games. The aforementioned enumerated shall not be deemed to be
exclusive. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize the use or operation of
any slot machine or other gambling device. A pool table in a commercial
establishment, including on which does not require the insertion of a coin, shall
be considered an amusement device.
(c) “Premises” is the place where coin operated phonographs, soundies, or
amusement devices are kept for the use of the public.
(d) “Owner” is one who has dominion of the premises, whether a freeholder,
leaseholder, person, firm, or corporation.
(3) License Required. No owner shall, within the Village, place, install, or permit to be
placed or installed for use by the public or any person any coin operated phonographs,
soundies, or amusement devices without first having obtained a license as herein
provided and prescribed, which shall be referred to as an “Amusement Device License”.
(4) Application for License. Any owner desiring to obtain an amusement device license
shall obtain a license application from the Village Clerk. He shall fill out this application
form stating:
(a) The name of the applicant;
(b) The permanent address of the applicant;
(c) The name and address of firm or corporation the applicant represents, if any;
(d) The number of coin operated phonographs, soundies, or amusement devices he
intends to have on his premises;
(e) The premises where coin operated phonographs, soundies, or amusement devices
are to be kept for the use of the public.
All applications must be singed by the applicant.
(5) License. Upon the filing of the application properly filled out, and upon filing a receipt
showing the payment of a license fee to the Village Treasurer who shall transfer said fee
to the general fund, the Village Clerk shall issue to the applicant a license. All licenses
shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and shall state clearly the name
and address of the licensee, the fee paid, the premises, the date of issuance, and the
number of coin operated phonographs, soundies, or amusement devices to be used on the
premises. Such license shall automatically expire on June 30, following the date of
issuance unless sooner revoked in the manner herein provided.
Whenever a license is lost or destroyed without fault on the part of the holder or his agent
or employee, a duplicate in lieu thereof under the original application shall be issued by
the Village Clerk on satisfying himself of the facts, and upon the payment of a fee of
$1.00. No transfer from person to person of the license shall be permitted except that if
any licensee shall die during any license year the administrator or, if not administrator is
appointed, the surviving spouse of such deceased licensee may continue or sell, and, if he
sells the same, may assign or transfer such license.
(6) License Fee. The license fee shall be paid to the Village Treasurer at or before the
making of the application for the license, and shall consist of the sum of $40.00 per year
or fractional part thereof for each coin operated phonograph, sounds, or amusement
device to be used on the premises.
(7) Additional Regulations.
(a) No coin operated phonograph or sound movie shall be permitted to reproduce
vulgar, obscene, or indecent reproductions or pictures.
(b) No licensee shall permit any person to use any amusement device for gambling
or for playing thereon a game of chance.
(c) No person shall willfully or maliciously remove, destroy, tamper, or injure
mutilate or alter any coin operated phonograph, sound movie, or amusement
device or insert any slug, token, or counterfeit coin in any licensed coin machine.
(d) No licensee shall suffer or permit any minor under the age of 18 years to operate
an amusement device unless said minor is accompanied by his or her parent,
guardian, or spouse of whom one shall be 18 years of age, nor shall any license
hereunder be issued to any owner who permits minors to loiter on his premises.
(e) No person shall own, operate, or use within the Village any gambling device or
devices used for gambling.
(f) No person shall use or permit the use of any device whereby any person shall or
may be induced to believe that he will or may receive any money, merchandise,
replay, thing, or the consideration, or any token exchangeable for any money,
merchandise, replay, thing, or consideration, as the result in whole or part of any
contest of skill between the person and the device whatever being so operated.
(g) All licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the premises.
11.07 CIGARETTES.
(1) License Required. No person shall within the Village manufacture, sell, exchange,
barter, dispose of, or give away, or keep for sale any cigarettes, cigarette paper, or
cigarette wrappers, or any paper made or prepared for the purpose of being filled with
tobacco without first obtaining a license therefore, as herein provided. The provisions
hereof shall not apply to the sales of jobbers or manufacturers doing an interstate business
with customers outside the State of Wisconsin.
(2) Application for License. Any person desiring to engage in the cigarette business as
aforesaid shall obtain a license application form from the Village Clerk. He shall fill out
this application form stating the name of the person and the place for which such license
is desired.
(3) License. Upon the filing of the application properly filled out, and upon filing a receipt
showing the payment of a license fee of $100.00 to the Village Treasurer who shall
transfer said fee to the general fund, the Village Clerk shall issue to the applicant a
license. All licenses shall be numbered in the order they are issued, shall be signed by
the Village Clerk, and shall name the licensee and the place where he is authorized to
conduct such business. Every license shall be issued on July1, in each year or thereafter
whenever applied for and shall continue in force from the date of issuance until the
succeeding June 30, unless sooner revoked for a violation of this section. In case of a
change of ownership in any licensed location, the Village Clerk may transfer such license
to the new owner.
(4) No Sales to Persons Under 18. No person shall sell, give away, or otherwise dispose of
to any person under the age of 18 years any cigarettes, cigarette paper, or cigarette
wrappers, or any substitute therefore, or any paper made or prepared for the purpose of
being filled with tobacco for smoking.
(5) Possession of Cigarette or Tobacco Products by a Person Under the Age of 18. No
person under the age of 18 shall possess any cigarette or tobacco product.
11.08 LICENSING OF DOGS AND CATS; REGULATION OF ANIMALS.
(1) Definitions; Statutes Adopted.
(a) Definitions. In this Section, unless the context or subject matter otherwise
require, the following definitions shall be applicable:
1. "Owner" shall mean any person owning, harboring or keeping a domestic
animal and the occupant of any premises on which a domestic animal
remains or to which it customarily returns daily for a period of ten (10)
days; such person is presumed to be harboring or keeping the domestic
animal within the meaning of this Section.
2. "Domestic Animal" shall include all members of the common dog (canis
familiaritas) family, common cat (feline domesticus) family and any
other animal kept as a pet for other than utilitarian purposes, including,
but not limited to rabbits, snakes, ferrets and lizards.
3. "At Large" includes any domestic animal off the premises of its owner.
A domestic animal shall not be deemed at large if:
a. It is attached to a leash of sufficient strength to restrain the
domestic animal and not more than twelve (12) feet in length,
where said leash is held by a person competent to govern the
domestic animal.
b. When properly restrained within a motor vehicle.
c. When not more than six (6) feet from its owner or his agent or
competent to govern such dog at such distance, if such dog is not
annoying or worrying pedestrians or trespassing on private
property.
4. "Dog" shall mean any canine of the canis familiaritas family, regardless
of age or sex.
5. "Cat" shall mean any feline of the feline domesticus family, regardless of
age or sex.
6. "Neutered" as used herein as describing a domestic animal having
nonfunctional reproductive organs.
7. "Animal" means mammals, reptiles and birds.
8. "Cruel" means causing unnecessary and excessive pain or suffering or
unjustifiable injury or death.
9. "Law Enforcement Officer" has that meaning as appears in Sec.
967.02(5), Wis. Stats., and includes a humane officer under Sec. 173.03,
et seq., Wis. Stats., but does not include a conservation warden appointed
under Sec. 23.10, Wis. Stats.
10. "Farm Animal" means any warm-blooded animal normally raised on
farms in the United States and used for food or fiber.
11. "Pet" means an animal kept and treated as a pet.
(b) Incorporation of Statutory Regulations. Sections 174.01 through 174.042 of the
Wisconsin Statutes and such sections as they may hereafter be amended and/or
renumbered are hereby incorporated by reference with respect to restraining
action against dogs, the imposition of forfeitures for violations of such
regulations and other regulations of dogs imposed under this Code, and the
impoundment and subsequent delivery, treatment and disposition of dogs,
provided, however, that this Section shall not be construed to restrict or limit any
authority heretofore granted to the Police Department with respect to the
regulation of dogs and shall not operate to reduce any forfeitures or other
penalties which might otherwise be imposed under this Code.
State Law Reference: Sections 174.05 through 174.15, Wis. Stats.
(2) Rabies Vaccination Required for License.
(a) Rabies Vaccination. The owner of a dog shall have the dog vaccinated against
rabies by a veterinarian within thirty (30) days after the dog reaches five (5)
months of age and revaccinated within one (1) year after the initial vaccination.
If the owner obtains the dog or brings the dog into the Village of Hales Corners
after the dog has reached five (5) months of age, the owner shall have the dog
vaccinated against rabies within thirty (30) days after the dog is brought into the
Village unless the dog has been vaccinated as evidenced by a current certificate
of rabies vaccination. The owner of a dog shall have the dog revaccinated
against rabies by a veterinarian before the date of that immunization expires as
stated on the certificate of vaccination or, if no date is specified, within three (3)
years after the previous vaccination. The certificate of vaccination shall meet the
requirements of Sec. 95.21(2), Wis. Stats.
(b) Issuance of Certificate of Rabies Vaccination. A veterinarian who vaccinates a
dog against rabies shall complete and issue to the owner a certificate of rabies
vaccination bearing a serial number and in the form approved by the Village
stating the owner's name and address, the name, sex, spayed or unspayed,
neutered or unneutered, breed and color of the dog, the date of vaccination, the
type of rabies vaccination administered and the manufacturer's serial number, the
date that the immunization expires as specified for that type of vaccine by the
Center for Disease Control of the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services and the Village.
(c) Copies of Certificate. The veterinarian shall keep a copy of each certificate of
rabies vaccination in a file maintained for this purpose until the date that the
immunization expires or until the dog is revaccinated, whichever occurs first.
(d) Rabies Vaccination Tag. After issuing the certificate of rabies vaccination, the
veterinarian shall deliver to the owner a rabies vaccination tag of durable material
bearing the same serial number as the certificate, the year the vaccination was
given and the name, address and telephone number of the veterinarian.
(e) Tag to be Attached. The owner shall attach the rabies vaccination tag or a
substitute tag to a collar and a collar with the tag attached shall be kept on the
dog at all times, but this requirement does not apply to a dog during competition
or training, to a dog while hunting, to a dog securely confined indoors or to a dog
securely confined in a fenced area. The substitute tag shall be of a durable
material and contain the same information as the rabies vaccination tag. The
requirements of this paragraph do not apply to a dog which is not required to be
vaccinated under Subsection (a).
(f) Duplicate Tag. The veterinarian may furnish a new rabies vaccination tag with a
new serial number to an owner in place of the original tag upon presentation of
the certificate of rabies vaccination. The veterinarian shall then indicate the new
tag number on the certificate and keep a record in the file.
(g) Cost. The owner shall pay the cost of the rabies vaccination and the cost
associated with the issuance of a certificate of rabies vaccination and the delivery
of a rabies vaccination tag.
(3) Issuance of Dog and Cat Licenses.
(a) The Village Treasurer shall issue cat and dog licenses upon due application as
required by State law and Milwaukee County Ordinances. The licensee, upon
procuring a license, shall securely attach the license tag to a collar or harness;
and this collar or harness shall, whenever the dog or cat is outside the dwelling of
the licensee, be kept on the dog or cat for which the license is issued.
(b) The owner shall be liable for the payment of the license fee of any dog or cat
owned.
(c) Upon payment of the required license tax and upon presentation of evidence that
the dog is currently immunized against rabies, as required by Subsec. (2) of this
Section, the Village Treasurer shall complete and issue to the owner a license for
such dog containing all information required by State law.
(d) The fact that a dog is without a tag attached to the dog by means of a collar shall
be presumptive evidence that the dog is unlicensed. Any Village police or
humane officer shall seize, impound or restrain any dog for which a dog license
is required which is found without such tab attached.
(e) Notwithstanding the foregoing, every dog specifically trained to lead blind or
deaf persons is exempt from the dog license tax, and every person owning such a
dog shall receive annually a free dog license for the Village Treasurer upon
application therefor.
(f) The license fee shall be:
Neutered Male or Spayed Female Cat or Dog - $12.00
Un-neutered Male or Un-spayed Female Cat or Dog - $24.00
The above mentioned fees are equal in amount to those recommended by the Milwaukee
Area Domestic Animal Control Commission (MADACC) upon the adoption of this
Ordinance and such fees set forth in this subsection shall be deemed amended from time
to time to be equal to such amounts as recommended by MADACC from time to time,
which are incorporated herein by reference.
State Law Reference: Sec. 174.053, Wis. Stats.
(4) Late Fees. The Village Treasurer shall assess and collect a late fee of $6.00 from every
owner of a dog or cat five (5) months of age or over if the owner failed to obtain a license
prior to April 1 of each year, or within thirty (30) days of acquiring ownership of a
licensable dog or cat or if the owner failed to obtain a license on or before the dog or cat
reached licensable age. Said late fee shall be charged in addition to the required license
fee.
(5) Rabies Control Program.
(a) District Quarantine.
1. Animals Confined. If a district is quarantined for rabies, all animals
within that district shall be kept securely confined, tied, leashed or
muzzled. Any animal not confined, tied, leashed or muzzled is declared
a public nuisance and may be impounded. All officers shall cooperate in
the enforcement of the quarantine. The Village Clerk shall promptly post
in at least three (3) public places in the Village notices of quarantine.
2. Exemption of Vaccinated Dog or Cat from District Quarantine. A dog or
cat which is immunized currently against rabies, as evidenced by a valid
certificate of rabies vaccination or other evidence, is exempt from the
district quarantine provisions of Subsection (a)(1) if a rabies vaccination
tag or substitute tag is attached to the dog's or cat's collar.
(b) Quarantine or Sacrifice of an Animal Suspected of Biting a Person or Being
Infected or Exposed to Rabies.
1. Quarantine or sacrifice of animal. A Village law enforcement officer,
health officer, or humane officer shall order an animal quarantined if the
officer has reason to believe that the animal bit a person, is infected with
rabies or has been in contact with a rabid animal. If a quarantine cannot
be imposed because the animal cannot be captured or there is a threat to
public health and safety, the officer may kill the animal. The officer
shall attempt to kill the animal in a humane manner and in a manner
which avoids damage to the head of the animal.
2. Sacrifice of Other Animals. An officer may order killed or may kill an
animal other than a dog or cat if the officer has reason to believe that the
animal bit a person or is infected with rabies.
3. Report. Any person who shall suspect that any animal is infected with
hydrophobia or rabies shall report his suspicions to the police or health
authorities, describing the animal and giving the name of the owner, if
known. Any such animal shall, upon demand of any police officer or
health officer of the Village, be delivered to such officer. If, upon
examination by the health authorities, the animal shall prove, in fact, to
be infected with such disease, the animal may be killed by any such
officer.
4. Failure to Report. No person shall fail to report to the police or health
authorities of the Village the existence of any animal which he knows to
be infected with hydrophobia or rabies.
(c) Quarantine of Animals.
1. Delivery to isolation facility or quarantine on premises of owner. An
officer who orders an animal to be quarantined shall deliver the animal or
shall order the animal delivered to an isolation facility as soon as
possible, but no later than twenty-four (24) hours after the original order
is issued or the officer may order the animal to be quarantined on the
premises of the owner if the animal is immunized currently against rabies
as evidenced by a valid certificate of rabies vaccination or other
evidence.
2. Health risk to humans. If an animal is ordered to be quarantined because
there is reason to believe that the animal bit a person, the custodian of an
isolation facility or the owner shall keep the animal under strict isolation
under the supervision of a veterinarian for at least ten (10) days after the
incident occurred. A vaccinated animal may be quarantined on the
premises of the owner and under the supervision of a veterinarian for at
least ten (10) days after the incident if the animal is kept in an escape
proof enclosure or in the home. If a quarantine of a vaccinated animal
cannot be adequately maintained on the premises of the owner, an officer
may order a vaccinated dog or cat to be quarantined at an isolation
facility. If the dog, cat or other domesticated animal or wild animal held
captive is unvaccinated, such animal shall be held under strict isolation at
an isolation facility under the supervision of a veterinarian for a period of
ten (10) days. In this paragraph, "supervision of a veterinarian" includes,
at a minimum, examination of the animal on the first day of isolation, on
the last day of isolation, and on one (1) intervening day. If the
observation period is not extended and if the veterinarian certifies that
the animal has not exhibited any signs of rabies, the animal may be
released from quarantine at the end of the observation period.
3. Risk to animal health.
a. If an animal is ordered to be quarantined because there is reason
to believe that the animal has been exposed to a rabid animal and
if the animal is not currently immunized against rabies, the
custodian of an isolation facility or the owner shall keep the
animal leashed or confined for one hundred eighty (180) days.
The owner shall have the animal vaccinated against rabies
between one hundred fifty-five (155) and one hundred sixty-five
(165) days after the exposure to a rabid animal.
b. If an animal is ordered to be quarantined because there is reason
to believe that the animal has been exposed to a rabid animal but
if the animal is immunized against rabies, the custodian of an
isolation facility or the owner shall keep the animal leashed or
confined for sixty (60) days. The owner shall have the animal
revaccinated against rabies as soon as possible after exposure to
a rabid animal.
4. Sacrifice of an animal exhibiting symptoms of rabies. If a veterinarian
determines that an animal exhibits symptoms of rabies during the
original or extended observation period, the veterinarian shall notify the
owner and the officer who ordered the animal quarantined and the officer
or veterinarian shall kill the animal in a humane manner and in a manner
which avoids damage to the animal's head. If the animal is suspected to
have bitten a person, the veterinarian shall notify the person or the
person's physician.
(d) Delivery of Carcass; Preparation; Examination by Laboratory of Hygiene. An
officer who kills an animal shall deliver the carcass to a veterinarian or local
health department. The veterinarian or local health department shall prepare the
carcass, properly prepare and package the head of the animal in a manner to
minimize deterioration, arrange for delivery by the most expeditious means
feasible of the head of the animal to the State Laboratory of Hygiene and dispose
of or arrange for the disposal of the remainder of the carcass in a manner which
minimizes the risk of exposure to any rabies virus. The State Laboratory of
Hygiene shall examine the specimen and determine if the animal was infected
with rabies. The State Laboratory of Hygiene shall notify the Village, the
veterinarian or local health department which prepared the carcass and, if the
animal is suspected to have bitten a person, that person or the person's physician.
(e) Cooperation of Veterinarian. Any practicing veterinarian who is requested to be
involved in the rabies control program by an officer is encouraged to cooperate in
a professional capacity with the Village, the State Laboratory of Hygiene, the
local health department, the officer involved and, if the animal is suspected to
have bitten a person, the person's physician.
(f) Responsibility for Quarantine and Laboratory Expenses. The owner of an animal
is responsible for any expense incurred in connection with keeping the animal in
an isolation facility, supervision and examination of the animal by a veterinarian,
preparation of the carcass for laboratory examination and the fee for the
laboratory examination. If the owner is unknown, the county is responsible for
these expenses, unless otherwise provided for under the duties of the Milwaukee
Area Domestic Animal Control Commission (MADACC).
(6) Restrictions on Keeping Domestic Animals.
(a) Restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any person within the Village of Hales
Corners to own, harbor or keep any domestic animal which:
1. Habitually pursues any vehicle upon any public street, alley or highway
in the Village.
2. Runs at large within the Village. Any domestic animal found at large
shall be deemed to be so without the permission or at the sufferance of its
owner.
3. Customarily, frequently, inveterately or habitually barks or howls, or
makes other disturbing noises to the annoyance of any person or persons
(see Subsec. (11) of this Section).
4. Assaults or attacks any person in the Village or has a propensity to attack
or bite persons, when such propensity is known or ought reasonably to be
known to the owner.
5. Kills, wounds, or worries any domestic animal.
6. Is known by such person to be infected with rabies or to have been bitten
by an animal known to have been infected with rabies.
7. In the case of a dog or cat, is unlicensed.
(b) Setting at Large Unlawful. No person other than the owner of a domestic animal
or his agent shall open any door or gate of any private premises or otherwise
entice or enable any domestic animal to leave any private premises for the
purpose or with the result of setting such domestic animal at large. A domestic
animal shall not be deemed at large if:
1. It is attached to a leash of sufficient strength to restrain the domestic
animal and not more than twelve (12) feet in length, where said leash is
held be a person competent to govern the domestic animal.
2. When properly restrained with a motor vehicle.
3. When not more than six (6) feet form its owner or his agent or competent
to govern such domestic animal at such distance, if such domestic animal
is not annoying or worrying pedestrians or trespassing on private
property.
(c) Restraining Action Against Dogs. A person may take restraining action with
respect to any dog running at large or any dog which attacks or injures a
domestic animal while the dog is not on the property of its owner. Restraining
action with respect to a dog includes:
1. Notifying the dog's owner and requesting that the owner capture and
restrain the dog.
2. Notifying a police officer and requesting that the officer capture and
restrain the dog.
3. Capturing and restraining the dog.
A person under attack by a dog may use any means the situation requires to
subdue the dog to protect one’s person or the person of another from bodily harm
or death.
(d) Vicious Dogs and Animals.
1. For purposes of enforcing this Subsection, a domestic animal shall be
deemed as being vicious if it has a propensity, tendency or disposition to
attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise threaten the safety of
human beings or domestic animals, or if it has attacked or bitten a human
being or domestic animal.
2. Whenever any person is charged with harboring, owning or keeping a
vicious animal as defined in this Subsection, that person shall, to the
satisfaction of the Court, remove said animal from the Village until the
trial of the citation. If the owner fails to remove the animal within fortyeight
(48) hours of the service of the citation, the Police Department shall
impound the animal until the trial on the citation.
3. In a trial or hearing upon a charge of owning or keeping a vicious
animal, the Municipal Court shall make a finding that said animal is
either a vicious animal, a dangerous animal, or not a danger to the
community, and shall order the appropriate disposition of the animal as
guided by this Section.
4. No person shall harbor, keep or maintain within the Village limits any
vicious animal. If an animal is determined by plea or trial to be a vicious
animal, the Court shall order that the animal either be destroyed by
humane means or not be returned to the Village. Any animal returned to
the Village after being determined to be a vicious animal constitutes a
public nuisance. Maintaining or keeping a vicious animal within the
Village limits, after a finding in Municipal Court that the owner of that
animal has violated any provision of this Subsection relating to vicious
animals, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
(e) Dangerous Dogs.
1. For purposes of enforcing this Subsection, a dog shall be deemed
dangerous if, because of its aggressive nature, training or characteristic
behavior, it is capable of inflicting serious physical harm or death to
humans; if it constitutes a danger to human life or property if not kept in
the manner required by this Subsection; or if it, when unprovoked,
chases or approaches a person in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude
of attack on public or private property.
2. Any person may petition the Municipal Court to declare a dog
dangerous. Upon receipt by the Municipal Court Clerk of the sworn
affidavit of any person setting forth the nature and date of the act, the
name and address of the owner and a description of the dog, the
Municipal Court Clerk shall give notice of hearing to the complainant
and issue a Summons addressed to the owner. Any dog determined by
the Court to be dangerous shall be subject to the restrictions for
dangerous dogs as provided in this ordinance. Any dog declared
dangerous shall be micro-chipped for permanent identification at the
owner’s expense by a local veterinarian.
3. All owners of dangerous dogs shall, on or before April 15, 2003, and
annually thereafter on or before April 15th of each year, register their
dog and shall provide a current color photograph of the dog to the
Treasurer's office and pay a registration fee of Fifteen Dollars ($15.00).
This fee shall be in addition to any dog license fee required. At the time
of registration, each owner of any dangerous dog kept within the Village
limits shall provide to the Treasurer's office proof of liability insurance in
the amount of at least One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00) for
any acts of property damage or liability incurred by virtue of injury
inflicted by such dog. Such insurance shall name the Village as coinsured
solely for the purpose of notice of cancellation of the policy.
Upon payment of the fee, the Treasurer shall issue a current dangerous
dog collar of an approved color for the purpose of identification, which
collar is to be worn by the dog at all times as proof of registration. If,
when due to the length of the dog's hair, the collar is not visible, an
approved colored lead or chain may be used. An owner of a dangerous
dog who fails to register the dog is subject to a forfeiture of not less than
Twenty Five Dollars ($25.00) nor more than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars
($250.00) per day. An owner of a dangerous dog who registers but
neglects to have the dangerous dog collar worn by the dog at all times is
subject to a forfeiture of not less than Twenty Five Dollars ($25.00) nor
more than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) per day, excepting that
the collar may be removed for grooming or purposes of other care when
the dog is secured indoors or in an approved pen.
4. While on the owner's property, a dangerous dog must be securely
confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure,
suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and designed to prevent
the animal from escaping. Such pen or structure must have minimum
dimensions of five (5) feet by ten (10) feet and must have secure sides
and a secure top. If it has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must
be imbedded into the ground no less than two (2) feet. The enclosures
must also provide protection from the elements for the dog.
5. The owner or keeper shall display a sign on the owner's or keeper's
premises facing out from all sides of the premises warning that there is a
dangerous dog on the property. This sign should be visible and capable
of being read from a public highway or thoroughfare or within twenty
(20) feet of its placement, whichever distance is less. In addition, the
owner shall conspicuously display a sign with a symbol warning children
of the presence of a dangerous dog.
6. A dangerous dog may be off the owner's or keeper's premises if it is
muzzled and restrained by an approved lead or chain not exceeding three
(3) feet in length and is under the control of an adult, able-bodied person.
The muzzle must be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the
dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but must prevent it from
biting any person or animal.
7. It shall be the duty of the Police Department and such others persons as
from time to time may be designated by resolution of the Village Board
to apprehend any dangerous dogs running at large. If any dog suspected
of being dangerous is found running at large, it shall be impounded and
shall be returned to its owner only upon proof of registration as a
dangerous dog.
8. The owner or keeper of any dog previously determined to be a dangerous
dog, found running at large shall, upon conviction, pay a forfeiture of not
less than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) nor more than One Thousand
Dollars ($1,000.00).
(f) For purposes of this Section, no dog shall be declared to be a vicious or
dangerous dog if the proof of viciousness or dangerousness concerns injury or
damage sustained by a person, who, at the time, was teasing, tormenting, abusing
or assaulting the dog, or where the dog was protecting its owner from attack by a
human being or animal.
(g) The provisions of this ordinance regarding dangerous and vicious dogs shall not
apply to animals owned by law enforcement agencies and used for law
enforcement purposes.
(h) Owner’s Liability for Damage Caused by Dogs; Penalties. The provisions of
Sec. 174.02, Wis. Stats., relating to the owner’s liability for damages caused by
dogs together with the penalties therein set forth are hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference.
(7) Impoundment of Animals.
(a) Animal Control Agency.
1. The Village of Hales Corners may contract with or enter into an
agreement with such person, persons, organization or corporation to
provide for the operation of an animal shelter, impoundment of stray
animals, confinement of certain animals, disposition of impoundment
animals and for assisting in the administration of rabies vaccination
programs.
2. The Village of Hales Corners does hereby delegate to any such animal
control agency the authority to act pursuant to the provisions of this
Section.
(b) Impounding; Repossession; Disposal.
1. Upon the complaint of any person injured by an animal or upon the
complaint of any parent or guardian of a minor child injured by an
animal, the Police Department shall investigate the complaint, and if the
animal is alleged to be vicious, the animal may be impounded.
2. Whenever an animal is impounded, the impounding authority shall give
notice to the owner or keeper whether and under what circumstances the
animal may be redeemed. The owner or keeper of any animal
impounded, confined or destroyed under the terms of this Section shall
be responsible for all costs of such confinement, impoundment or
destruction.
3. In addition to the authority to impound animals as is elsewhere provided
in this Section, any police officer, health officer, representative of the
Department of Public Works or humane officer finding a domestic
animal at large or otherwise in violation of this Section or knowing of
any unlicensed dog or cat either at large or upon private premises shall
seize such domestic animal and impound it in the place provided by the
Village or by the Milwaukee Area Domestic Animal Control
Commission (MADACC).
4. The possession of any licensed dog or cat so seized or impounded may
be obtained by the owner upon payment of an impoundment fee in the
amount of $50.00 to the Village, plus the daily boarding fee to the animal
control agency for keeping such dog or cat for each day or fraction
thereof during which the said dog or cat has been impounded. The
possession of any unlicensed dog or cat may be obtained by the owner
after obtaining a license and paying the fee provided therein.
5. If any domestic animal that has been impounded for eight (8) days has
not been reclaimed by its owner, said domestic animal may be disposed
of in the most humane manner by the Police Department, the health
officer or the animal control agency.
(c) Report of Impounded or Killed Domestic Animals. Any person or any officer
who shall kill or impound any domestic animal, after delivery of said domestic
animal or its carcass to the Police Department of the Village, shall make a report
to the Village Clerk stating when and under what conditions he seized,
impounded or killed such domestic animal and the owner's name, if known.
(d) Village not Liable for Impounding Animals. The Village and/or its animal
control agency shall not be liable for the death of any animal which has been
impounded or disposed of pursuant to this Section.
(8) Domestic Animals Restricted in Cemeteries. No domestic animal shall be permitted in
any public cemetery. Every dog specially trained to lead blind persons shall be exempt
from this Subsection.
(9) Duty of Owner in Case of Animal Bite.
(a) Whenever a dog, cat or other domestic animal, or wild animal held captive, bites
a person within the Village, and such bite penetrates or lacerates the skin of the
person bitten, such dog, cat or other domesticated animal or wild animal held
captive shall be restricted to the premises of its owner, if within the Village, or to
a veterinarian’s care as a suspect rabies case for a period of ten (10) days. If the
dog, cat or other domesticated animal or wild animal held captive is
unvaccinated, such animal shall be held under strict isolation at an isolation
facility under the supervision of a veterinarian for a period of ten (10) days.
Additionally, such owner or keeper shall immediately, in writing, report the fact
that his domestic animal has bitten a person to the Health Officer of the Village.
(b) If, during the confinement time, said animal shows signs of illness, lameness or
paralysis, the owner or veterinarian shall immediately report such condition to
the health officer. Such domestic animal shall not be released from confinement
until the health officer of the Village shall have given written approval. Any
such domestic animal shall be surrendered to the police or health officer upon
demand.
(c) The owner of an animal is responsible for any expense incurred in connection
with keeping the animal in an isolation facility and supervision and examination
of the animal by a veterinarian.
(10) Injury to Property by Animals.
(a) No person who owns or is governing and accompanying a dog off the owner's
premises shall permit such dog to go upon any public area, or upon private lands
or premises without the permission of the owner of the lands or premises, and
break, bruise, tear up, crush or injure any lawn, plant, tree, shrub or garden or any
other object upon such public or private lands and premises or to defecate
thereon.
(b) Any person governing and accompanying a dog off the premises of its owner,
including its owner, shall carry a waste deposit receptacle and a hand shovel or
other reasonably similar device and shall utilize same to immediately remove any
feces deposited by such animal on any public or private premises and shall
dispose of same in any method allowable by law at the consenting owner's or
such person's residence. Compliance with the requirements of this subsection
shall not constitute a defense to or in any way absolve any person from any
liability or penalty resulting from a violation of subsection 7(a) above.
(c) Any person who shall violate any provision of paragraphs (a) or (b) of this
subsection shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit the sum of Forty Dollars
($40.00), together with the costs of prosecution and in default of payment of such
forfeiture or costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the county jail or county
house of correction, until said forfeitures and costs are paid, but not exceeding
ninety (90) days. A violation of one (1) or more of the prohibitions under
paragraph (a) above, shall constitute a separate offense for each parcel of land or
lot upon which such violation(s) occur. A violation of each requirement under
paragraph (b) above, shall constitute a separate offense.
(11) Barking Dogs or Crying Cats. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to keep or
harbor any domestic animal which habitually, customarily, frequently or inveterately
barks, howls or yelps, or makes other disturbing noises to the great discomfort of the
peace and quiet of the neighborhood or in such manner as to materially disturb or annoy
persons in the neighborhood who are of ordinary sensibilities. Such dogs and cats are
hereby declared to be a public nuisance. A dog or cat is considered to be in violation of
this Section when two (2) formal, written complaints are filed with the Police Department
within a four (4) week period.
(12) Prohibited and Protected Animals, Fowls, Reptiles, and Insects.
(a) Protected Animals.
1. Possession and Sale of Protected Animals. It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to possess, possess with intent to sell or offer
for sale, or buy or attempt to buy, within the Village, any of the
following animals, alive or dead, or any part or product thereof: all wild
cats of the family felidae, polar bear (Thalarctos maritimus), red wolf
(canis niger), vicuna (vicugna vicugna), or alligator, caiman or crocodile
of the order of crocodilia, gray or timber wolf (canis lupus), sea otter
(enhydra lutis), Pacific ridley turtle (lepidochelys olivacea), Atlantic
green turtle (chelonia mydas), Mexican ridley turtle (lepidochelys
kempi).
2. Compliance with Federal Regulations. It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to buy, sell or offer for sale a native or
foreign species or subspecies of mammal, bird, amphibian or reptile, or
the dead body or parts thereof, which appears on the endangered species
list designated by the United States Secretary of the Interior and
published in the Code of Federal Regulations pursuant to the Endangered
Species Act of 1969 (Public Law 135, 91st Congress).
3. Regulating the Importation of Certain Birds. No person, firm or
corporation shall import or cause to be imported into this Village, any
part of the plumage, skin or dead body of any species of hawk, owl or
eagle. This paragraph shall not be construed to forbid or restrict the
importation or use of the plumage, skin, body or any part thereof legally
collected for use by the American Indians for ceremonial purposes or in
the preservation of their tribal customs and heritage.
(b) Exceptions. The provisions of Subsection (a) above shall not be deemed to
prevent the lawful importation, possession, purchase or sale of any species by
any public agency, institute of higher learning, persons holding federal permits,
or by a person holding a Scientific Collectors Permit issued by the Secretary of
the Department of Natural Resources of the state, or to any person or
organization licensed to present a circus.
(c) Wild Animals; Prohibition on Keeping. It shall be unlawful for any person to
keep, maintain or have in his possession or under his control within the Village,
any poisonous reptile or any other dangerous or carnivorous wild animal or
hybrid thereof, insect or reptile, any vicious or dangerous domesticated animal or
any other animal or reptile of wild, vicious or dangerous propensities.
Specifically, it shall constitute a public nuisance and be unlawful for any person
to keep, maintain or have in his possession or under his control within the
Village, any of the following animals, reptiles or insects:
1. All poisonous animals and reptiles including rear-fang snakes.
2. Apes; chimpanzees (Pan); gibbons (Hylobates); gorillas (Gorilla);
orangutans (Pongo); and siamangs (Symphalangus).
3. Baboons (Papoi, Mandrillus).
4. Bears (Ursidae).
5. Bison (Bison).
6. Cheetahs (Acinonyx jubatus).
7. Crocodilians (Crocodilia) thirty (30) inches in length or more.
8. Constrictor snakes six (6) feet in length or more.
9. Coyotes (Canis latrans).
10. Deer (Cervidae); includes all members of the deer family; for example,
whitetailed deer, elk, antelope and moose.
11. Elephants (Elephas, Loxodonta).
12. Game cocks and other fighting birds.
13. Hippopotami (Hippopotamidae).
14. Hyenas (Hyaenidae).
15. Jaguars (Panthera onca).
16. Leopards (Panthera pardus).
17. Lions (Panthera leo).
18. Lynxes (Lynx).
19. Monkeys, old world (Cercopithecidae).
20. Ostriches (Struthio).
21. Pumas (Felis concolor); also known as cougars, mountain lions and
panthers,
22. Rhinoceroses (Rhinocero tidae).
23. Sharks (class Chondrichthyes).
24. Snow leopards (Panthera uncia).
25. Tigers (Panthera tigris).
26. Wolves (Canis lupus).
27. Poisonous insects.
28. Horses, mules, ponies, donkeys, lamas, cows, pigs, goats, sheep, ducks,
chickens or farm animals if not included aforesaid or any animal raised
for fur-bearing purposes unless otherwise permitted under this Section.
(d) Exceptions; Pet Shops. The prohibitions of Subsection (c) above shall not apply
where the creatures are in the care, custody or control of: a veterinarian for
treatment; agricultural fairs; shows or projects of the 4-H Clubs; a display for
judging purposes; an itinerant or transient carnival, circus or other show; dog or
cat shows or trials; public or private educational institutions; licensed pet shops;
zoological gardens, photo studios conducting seasonal portraitures, if:
1. Their location conforms to the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the
Village.
2. All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and sanitary condition
and so maintained as to eliminate objectionable odors.
3. Animals are maintained in quarters so constructed as to prevent their
escape.
4. No person lives or resides within one hundred (100) feet of the quarters
in which the animals are kept.
(13) Sale of Rabbits, Chicks, or Artificially Colored Animals.
(a) No person may sell, offer for sale, raffle, give as a prize or premium, use as an
advertising device or display living chicks, ducklings, other fowl or rabbits that
have been dyed or otherwise colored artificially.
(b) No person may sell, offer for sale, barter or give away living chicks, ducklings or
other fowl without providing proper brooder facilities for the care of such chicks,
ducklings or other fowl during the time they are in such person's care, custody or
control.
(c) No retailer, as defined in Sec. 100.30(2)(g), Wis. Stats., may sell, offer for sale,
barter or give away living baby rabbits, baby chicks, ducklings or other fowl
under two (2) months of age, in any quantity less than six (6), unless the purpose
of selling these animals is for agricultural, wildlife or scientific purposes.
(14) Providing Proper Food and Drink to Confined Animals.
(a) No person owning or responsible for confining or impounding any animal may
refuse or neglect to supply the animal with a sufficient supply of food and water
as prescribed in this Subsection.
(b) The food shall be sufficient to maintain all animals in good health.
(c) If potable water is not accessible to the animals at all times, it shall be provided
daily and in sufficient quantity for the health of the animal.
(15) Providing Proper Shelter.
(a) Proper Shelter. No person owning or responsible for confining or impounding
any animal may fail to provide the animal with proper shelter as prescribed in
this Section.
(b) Indoor Standards. Minimum indoor standards of shelter shall include:
1. Ambient temperatures. The ambient temperature shall be compatible
with the health of the animal.
2. Ventilation. Indoor housing facilities shall be adequately ventilated by
natural or mechanical means to provide for the health of the animals at
all times.
(c) Outdoor Standards. Minimum outdoor standards of shelter shall include:
1. Shelter from sunlight. When sunlight is likely to cause heat exhaustion
of an animal tied or caged outside, sufficient shade by natural or artificial
means shall be provided to protect the animal from direct sunlight.
2. Shelter from inclement weather.
a. Animals generally. Natural or artificial shelter appropriate to the
local climatic conditions for the species concerned shall be
provided as necessary for the health of the animal.
b. Dogs. If a dog is tied or confined unattended outdoors under
weather conditions which adversely affect the health of the dog,
a shelter of suitable size to accommodate the dog shall be
provided.
(d) Space Standards. Minimum space requirements for both indoor and outdoor
enclosures shall include:
1. Structural strength. The housing facilities shall be structurally sound and
maintained in good repair to protect the animals from injury and to
contain the animals.
2. Space requirements. Enclosures shall be constructed and maintained so
as to provide sufficient space to allow each animal adequate freedom of
movement. Inadequate space may be indicated by evidence of debility,
stress or abnormal behavior patterns.
(e) Sanitation Standards. Minimum standards of sanitation for both indoor and
outdoor enclosures shall include periodic cleaning to remove excreta and other
waste materials, dirt and trash so as to minimize health hazards.
(16) Neglected or Abandoned Animals.
(a) Neglected or Abandoned Animals.
1. No person may abandon any animal.
2. Any law enforcement or humane officer may remove, shelter and care
for an animal found to be cruelly exposed to the weather, starved or
denied adequate water, neglected, abandoned or otherwise treated in a
cruel manner and may deliver such animal to another person to be
sheltered, cared for and given medical attention, if necessary. In all
cases, the owner, if known, shall be immediately notified and such
officer, or other person, having possession of the animal shall have a lien
thereon for its care, keeping and medical attention and the expense of the
notice.
3. If the owner or custodian is unknown and cannot, with reasonable effort,
be ascertained or does not, within five (5) days after notice, redeem the
animal by paying the expenses incurred, it may be treated as a stray and
dealt with as such.
4. Whenever in the opinion of any such officer an animal is hopelessly
injured or diseased so as to be beyond the probability of recovery, it shall
be lawful for such officer to kill such animal and the owner thereof shall
not recover damages for the killing of such animal unless he shall prove
that such killing was unwarranted.
5. Sec. 173.10, Investigation of Cruelty Complaints, and Sec. 173.24, Wis.
Stats., Reimbursement for expenses, are hereby adopted by reference and
made a part of this Section.
(b) Injured Animals. No person who owns, harbors or keeps any animal shall fail to
provide proper medical attention to such animal when and if such animal
becomes sick or injured. In the event the owner of such animal cannot be
located, the Village or any animal control agency with whom the Village has an
agreement or contract shall have the authority to take custody of such animal for
the purpose of providing medical treatment, and the owner thereof shall
reimburse the person or organization for the costs of such treatment.
(17) Cruelty to Animals and Birds Prohibited.
(a) Acts of Cruelty Prohibited. No person except a police officer, health officer, or
humane officer in the pursuit of his duties shall, within the Village, shoot, kill or
commit an act of cruelty to any animal or bird or disturb any bird's nests or bird's
eggs.
(b) Leading Animal from Motor Vehicle. No person shall lead any animal upon a
Village street from a motor vehicle or from a trailer or semi-trailer drawn by a
motor vehicle.
(c) Use of Poisonous and Controlled Substances. No person may expose any pet
animal owned by another to any known poisonous substance or controlled
substance listed in Sec. 961.14, Wis. Stats., whether mixed with meat or other
food or not, where it is reasonable to anticipate the substance may be eaten by
such animal or for the purpose of harming the animal. This Subsection shall not
apply to poison used on one's own premises and designed for the purpose of
rodent and pest extermination, nor the use of a controlled substance used in
accepted veterinarian practice or in research by persons or organizations
regularly engaged in such research.
(d) Use of Certain Devices Prohibited. No person may directly or indirectly, or by
aiding, abetting or permitting the doing thereof either put, place, fasten, use or fix
upon or to any animal used or readied for use for a work purpose or for use in an
exhibition, competition, rodeo, circus or other performance any of the following
devices: a bristle bur, tack bur or like device; or a poling device used to train a
horse to jump which is charged with electricity or to which have been affixed
nails, tacks or other sharp points.
(e) Shooting at Caged or Staked Animals. No person may instigate, promote, aid or
abet as a principal, agent, employee, participant or spectator, or participate in the
earnings from or intentionally maintain or allow any place to be used for the
shooting, killing or wounding with a firearm or any deadly weapon any animal
that is tied, staked out, caged or otherwise intentionally confined in a man-made
enclosure, regardless of size.
(18) Trapping of Animals.
(a) In the interest of public health and safety, it shall be unlawful for any person in or
on Village-owned land within the Village to set, place or tend any trap for the
purpose of trapping, killing, catching, wounding, worrying or molesting any
animal.
(b) This Subsection shall not apply to trapping within the confines of building or
homes.
(c) Nothing in this Subsection shall prohibit or hinder the Village or its employees or
agents from performing their official duties.
(19) Dognapping or Catnapping. No person may take the dog or cat of another from one
place to another without the owner's consent or cause such a dog or cat to be confined or carried
out of the Village or held for any purpose without the owner's consent. This Section does not
apply to law enforcement officers or humane society agents engaged in the exercise of their
official duties, or as otherwise permitted herein.
(20) Number of Domestic Animals Per Residence.
(a) No more than three (3) dogs and three (3) cats over the age of six (6) months may
be kept at any residence within the Village.
(b) Any resident of the Village who, at the time of the adoption of this Section, owns
more than three (3) dogs and three (3) cats over the age of six (6) months may
continue to keep such animals, although such ownership does not conform with
the provisions of this Ordinance. Such nonconforming ownership may not be
extended. If such nonconforming ownership is discontinued for any reason, any
future ownership shall conform to this Section.
(21) Keeping of Bees.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or maintain any hive, stand or box
where bees are kept or keep any bees in or upon any premises within the
corporate limits of the Village.
(b) Nothing in this Subsection shall be deemed or construed to prohibit the keeping
of bees in a hive, stand or box located within a school or university building for
the purpose of study or observation.
(22) Penalties. Any person or entity violating any term or provision of this Section shall be
subject to the penalties set forth under §19.04 of the Municipal Code
11.11 CABLE FRANCHISE.
(1) Short Title. This section shall be known and may be cited as the “Hales Corners
Telecommunications Franchise Ordinance”, hereinafter “this ordinance”.
(2) Definitions. As used in this ordinance:
(a) Basic Services means any subscriber tier provided by the Grantee which includes
the delivery of local broadcast stations and public, educational, and governmental
access channels. The Basic service does not include optional program and
satellite service tiers, a la carte services, per channel, per program or auxiliary
services for which a separate charge is made. However, Grantee may include
other satellite signals on the Basic tier.
(b) Cable System or System or Cable Television System means a system of
antennas, cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides, and/or other conductors,
converters, equipment, or facilities designed and constructed for the purpose of
producing, receiving, transmitting, amplifying, and distributing audio, video,
and/or other forms of electronic, electrical, or optical signals, which includes
cable television service and which is located in the Village. This definition does
not include any such facility which only serves or only will serve subscribers in
one (1) or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or
management and which does not use any Village rights-of-way.
(c) Village means the Village of Hales Corners, Wisconsin.
(d) Class IV Channel means a signaling path provided by a cable communications
system to transmit signals of any type from a subscriber terminal to another point
in the cable communications system.
(e) Control and/or Controlling Interest shall mean actual working control or
ownership of a system in whatever manner exercised. A rebuttal presumption of
the existence of control or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial
ownership, directly or indirectly, by any person or entity (except underwriters
during the period in which they are offering securities to the public) of 10 percent
or more of a cable system or franchise under which the system is operated. A
change in the control or controlling interest of an entity which has control or a
controlling interest in a Grantee shall constitute a change in the control or
controlling interest of the system under the same criteria. Control or controlling
interest as used herein may be held simultaneously by more than one person or
entity.
(f) Converter means an electronic device which converts signals to a frequency not
susceptible to interference within a television receiver of a subscriber and by an
appropriate channel selector permits a television receiver of a subscriber to
televise or depict for viewing by a subscriber, more than 12 channels delivered
by the system at designated converter dial locations.
(g) FCC means the Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed,
designated, or elected agent or successor.
(h) Franchise means the rights and privileges granted by the Village under an
agreement (hereinafter “franchise agreement”) incorporating the terms and
provisions of this Ordinance with a Grantee to construct, maintain, and operate a
cable system in the Village.
(i) Grantee means a person or entity to whom or which a franchise agreement under
this ordinance is awarded by the Village, along with the lawful successors or
assigns of such person or entity.
(j) Gross Revenue means all revenue collected directly or indirectly by the Grantee,
from the provision of cable service within the Village including, but not limited
to, basic subscriber service monthly fees, pay cable fees, installation and
reconnection fees, franchise fees, leased channel fees, converter rentals, program
guides, studio rental, production equipment, personnel fees, late fees, downgrade
fees, revenue from the sale, exchange, use, or cable case of any programming
developed on the system for community or institutional use, advertising fees, any
value (at retail price levels) of any non-monetary remuneration received by
Grantee in consideration of the performance of advertising or any other service of
the system, and such other revenues to the maximum permitted by law; provided,
however, that gross revenue shall not include any local, state, or federal taxes,
denominated as a tax by statute or ordinance, upon services furnished by the
Grantee to subscribers in the Village which are imposed directly upon any such
subscriber any collected by the Grantee on behalf of and for full payment to the
governmental unit imposing such tax. Subject to applicable federal law, the term
gross revenues includes revenues attributed to franchise fees and revenues
collected directly or indirectly from other ancillary telecommunications services
including, but not limited to, point-to-point telecommunications, point-to-point
multi-point telecommunications, and data transmissions, but only to the extent
that all other providers of such telecommunications services in the Village are
subject to the same compensation requirements of the Village.
(k) Initial Service Area means all areas in the Village having at least 20 dwelling
units per street mile.
(l) Installation means the connection of the system from feeder cable to subscribers’
terminals.
(m) May is permissive.
(n) Monitoring means observing a communications signal or the absence of a signal,
where an observer is neither the subscriber nor the programmer, whether the
signal is observed by visual or electronic means, for any purpose whatsoever,
provided “monitoring” does not mean system-wide, non-individually addressed
sweeps of the system for purposes of verifying system integrity, controlling
return paths transmissions, or billing for pay services.
(o) Normal Business Hours, as applied to the Grantee, shall mean those hours during
which similar businesses in the Village are open and operating to server
customers. In all cases, normal business hours shall include some evening hours
at least one week night per week and/or some weekend hours.
(p) Normal Operating Conditions shall mean those service conditions which are
within the control of the Grantee. Those conditions which are not within the
control of the Grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil
disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual
weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of
the Grantee include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view
events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand period, and maintenance
or upgrade of the cable system.
(q) Shall is mandatory.
(r) Service Interruption and/or Outages shall mean the loss of either picture or sound
or both for a single or multiple subscriber(s).
(s) Street means the surface of and all rights-of-way and the space above and below
any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way or place,
sidewalk, alley, court, boulevard, parkway, drive, or easement now or hereafter
held by the Village for the purpose of public travel and shall include other
easements and rights-of-way as shall be now held or hereafter held by the Village
which shall, within their proper use and meaning entitle the Grantee to the use
thereof for the purposes of installing poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts,
conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other
property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a telecommunications
system.
(t) Subscriber shall mean any person, firm, Grantee, corporation, partnership, or
association lawfully receiving Basic and/or any additional or other services from
a Grantee.
(u) User means a party utilizing a cable television system channel for purposes of
production or transmission of material to subscribers, as contrasted with the
receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity.
(3) Rights and Privileges of Grantee. Any franchise granted by the Village pursuant to a
franchise agreement incorporating the terms and provisions of this Ordinance, as
authorized by Wis. Stats. 66.082, shall grant to the Grantee under the franchise agreement
the rights and privileges to erect, construct, install, operate, and maintain in, upon, and
along, across, above, over, and under the streets now in existence and as may be crated or
established during the term of such franchise agreement, any poles, wires, cable,
underground conduits, manholes, and other television conductors and fixtures necessary
for the maintenance and operation of a cable system.
(4) Franchise Agreement.
(a) Upon adoption of any franchise agreement and execution thereof by the Grantee,
the Grantee agrees to be bound by all the terms and conditions contained herein.
(b) Any Grantee also agrees to provide all services specifically set forth in its
application, if any, and to provide cable television service within the confines of
the Village; and, by its acceptance of its cable franchise application, the Grantee
specifically grants and agrees that its application, if any, is thereby incorporated
by reference and made a part of the franchise agreement. In the event of a
conflict between the elements of the application and the provisions of this
Ordinance, that term or provision which provides the greatest benefit to the
Village or its residential subscribers, as determined in the sole discretion of the
Village shall control.
(5) Franchise Territory. Any franchise granted by the Village shall be effective for all
areas within and shall extend to the Village municipal boundaries as they exist from time
to time during the term of the franchise agreement.
(6) Duration and Acceptance of Franchise Agreement. The franchise and the rights,
privileges, and authority granted shall take effect and be in force as set forth in the
franchise agreement and shall continue in force and effect for a term no longer than 15
years, provided that within 15 days after Grantee’s receipt from the Village of a franchise
agreement, executed by duly authorized officials of the Village before a notary public,
the Grantee executes before a notary public or other officer authorized by law to
administer oaths and delivers such executed franchise agreement to the Village. Such
franchise shall be non-exclusive and revocable.
(7) Franchise Renewal
(a) Current Federal Statutory Process
1. The Village may, on its own initiative, during the six-month period,
which begins with the thirty-sixth (36) month before the Franchise
expiration, commence a proceeding which affords the public in the
Village proper notice and participation for the purpose of
a. Identifying the future cable-related community needs and
interests and
b. Reviewing the performance of the Grantee under the Franchise.
If the Grantee submits, during such six-month period, a written renewal
notice requesting the commencement of such proceeding, the Village
shall commence such proceeding not later than six (6) months after the
date such notice is submitted.
2. Upon completion of he proceeding under paragraph (a)1 above, the
Grantee may on its own initiative shall at the request of the Village,
submit a proposal for renewal. The Village may establish a date by
which such proposal shall be submitted.
3. Upon submittal by the Grantee of a proposal to the Village for the
renewal of the franchise, the Village shall provide prompt, public notice
of such proposal and renew the Franchise or issue a preliminary
assessment that the Franchise should not be renewed, and, at the request
of the Grantee or on its own initiative, commence an administrative
proceeding after providing prompt, public notice of such proceeding.
4. The Village shall consider in any administrative proceeding whether:
a. The Grantee has substantially complied with material terms of
the existing franchise and with applicable law;
b. The quality of the Grantee’s service, including signal quality,
response to consumer complaints, and billing practices, but
without regard to the mix or quality of cable services or other
services provided over the system, has been reasonable in light
of community needs;
c. The Grantee has the financial, legal, and technical ability to
provide the services, facilities, and equipment as set forth in the
Grantee’s proposal; and
d. The Grantee’s proposal is reasonable to meet the future cablerelated
community needs and interests, taking into account the
costs of meeting such needs and interests.
5. In any proceeding under paragraph 4, the Grantee shall be afforded
adequate notice and the Grantee and the Village, or its designee, shall be
afforded fair opportunity for full participation, including the right to
introduce evidence (including evidence related to the issues raised in the
proceedings under paragraph (a)1 above), to require the production of
evidence and to question witnesses. A transcript shall be made of any
such proceeding.
6. At the completion of a proceeding under paragraph 4 above, the Village
shall issue a written decision granting or denying the proposal for
renewal based upon the record of such proceeding and transmit a copy of
such decision to the Grantee. Such decision shall state the reasons
therefore.
7. Any denial of a proposal for renewal that has been submitted in
compliance with the procedures set forth above, shall be based on one or
more adverse findings made with respect to the factors described in
paragraph 4a through 4d above, pursuant to the record of the proceeding
under said paragraph. The Village may not base a denial of renewal on a
failure to substantially comply with the material terms of the franchise
agreement or on events considered under paragraph 4b above unless the
Village has provided the Grantee with notice and the opportunity to cure
or in any case in which it is documented that the Village has waived its
right to object.
8. The Grantee may appeal any final decision or failure of the Village to act
in accordance with the procedural requirements of this section. The
court shall grant appropriate relief if the court finds that:
a. Any action of the Village is not in compliance with the
procedural requirements of this section; or
b. In the event of a final decision of the Village denying the
renewal proposal, the Grantee has demonstrated that the adverse
finding of the Village with respect to each of the factors
described in paragraph 4a through 4d above on which the denial
is based is not supported by the preponderance of the evidence,
based on the record of the administrative proceeding.
9. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 through 8 of this section,
any lawful action to revoke a Grantee’s franchise for cause shall not be
negated by the subsequent initiation of renewal proceedings by the
Grantee under this section.
b. Franchise Renewal in the Event of Change in Federal Law. In the event of an
amendment or repeal of 47 U.S.C. 546 et. seq., a franchise agreement may be
renewed by the Village upon application of the Grantee pursuant to and in
accordance with any then applicable law which mandates different procedures.
In the absence of such mandatory applicable law, a franchise agreement may be
renewed as follows:
1. At least 24 months prior to the expiration of the franchise agreement, the
Grantee shall inform the Village in writing of its intent to seek renewal
of the franchise agreement.
2. Concurrent with Grantee’s notification of intent to renew, the Grantee
shall submit to the Village a proposal for renewal which demonstrates:
a. That it has been and continues to be in substantial compliance
with the terms, conditions, and limitations of this Ordinance and
its franchise agreement;
b. That its system has been installed, constructed, maintained, and
operated in accordance with the accepted standards of the
industry, and this Ordinance and its franchise agreement;
c. That it has the legal, technical, financial, and other qualifications
to continue to maintain and operate its system, and to extend the
same as the state of the art progresses so as to assure its
subscribers high quality service; and
d. That it has made a good faith effort to provide services and
facilities which accommodate the demonstrated needs of the
community as may be reasonably ascertained by the Village.
3. After giving public notice, the Village shall proceed to determine
whether the Grantee has satisfactorily performed its obligations under the
franchise agreement. To determine satisfactory performance, the Village
shall consider technical developments and performance of the system,
programming and other services offered, cost of services, and any other
particular requirements set in this Ordinance and the franchise
agreement; also, the Village shall consider the Grantee’s reports made to
the Village and the Federal Communication Commission; may require
the Grantee to make available specified records, documents, and
information for this purpose, and may inquire specifically whether the
Grantee will supply services sufficient to meet community needs and
interests; and shall consider Grantee’s performance compared to the
industry performance on a national basis. Provision shall be made for
public comment.
4. The Village shall then prepare any amendments to this Ordinance that it
considers reasonable.
5. If the Village finds the Grantee’s performance satisfactory, and finds the
Grantee’s technical, legal, and financial abilities acceptable, and finds the
Grantee’s renewal proposal meets the future cable-related needs of the
Village, a new franchise agreement shall be granted pursuant to this
Ordinance as amended for a period to be determined.
6. If the Grantee is determined by the Village to have performed
unsatisfactorily, as governed by applicable state and federal law, new
applicants may be sought and evaluated and a franchise award shall be
made by the Village according to franchising procedures adopted by the
Village.
(8) Police Powers.
(a) In accepting a franchise agreement, the Grantee shall acknowledge that its rights
thereunder are subject to the police power of the Village to adopt and enforce
general ordinances necessary for the safety and welfare of the public, and
Grantee shall agree to comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances
enacted by the Village pursuant to such power.
(b) Any conflict between the provisions of this Ordinance and any other present or
future lawful exercise of the Village’s police powers shall be resolved in favor of
the latter, except that any such exercise that is not of general application in the
Village, or applies exclusively to the Grantee which contains provisions
inconsistent with the franchise agreement, shall prevail only if upon such
exercise the Village finds an emergency exists constituting a danger to health,
safety, property, or general welfare or such exercise is mandated by law.
(9) Cable Television Franchise Required. No cable television system shall be allowed to
occupy or use the Village streets for system installation and maintenance purposes or be
allowed to operate in the Village without a franchise agreement.
(10) Use of Grantee Facilities. The Village shall have the right, during the term of the
franchise agreement, to install and maintain free of charge upon the poles of the Grantee
any wire or pole fixtures that do not unreasonably interfere with the cable television
system operations of the Grantee. The Village shall indemnify and hold harmless the
Grantee from any claim that might arise due to or as a result of the Village’s aforesaid
wire installation or pole fixture use.
(11) Initial Franchise Costs. Costs to be borne by an initial Grantee shall include any
requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of an initial franchise, but
shall not be limited to all costs of publications of notices prior to any public meeting
provided for pursuant to this franchise, and any costs not covered by application fees,
incurred by the Village in its study, preparation of proposal documents, evaluation of all
applications, and examinations of the applicants’ qualifications.
(12) Notices. All notices from the Grantee to the Village pertaining to the franchise
agreement or cable system shall be sent to the Village Administrator’s Office. The
Grantee shall maintain with the Village, throughout the term of the franchise agreement,
an address for service of notices by mail. The Grantee shall maintain a central office to
address any issues relating to Grantee’s construction, maintenance, operation, and
administration of the system and its products and services, which office address shall be
the designated address of Grantee for the receipt of all notices and process by Grantee.
(13) Letter of Credit/Security Deposit.
(a) Within 15 days after the award of the initial franchise, the Grantee shall deposit
with the Village either an irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution
or a security deposit in the amount of $50,000.00. The form and content of such
letter of credit or security deposit shall be approved by the Village Attorney. The
letter of credit or security deposit shall be used by the Village to insure the
faithful performance of an initial Grantee of all provisions of this Ordinance and
initial franchise agreements and the compliance by the Grantee with all orders,
permits, and rules of any agency, commission, board, department, division, or
office of the Village having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under this
Ordinance and the initial franchise agreement, and the payment by the Grantee of
any claims, liens, and taxes due to the Village which arise by reason of the
construction, operation, or maintenance of the system.
(b) The letter of credit or security deposit, as required by the initial Grantee, shall be
“evergreen” and maintained at the $50,000.00 amount for the entire term of the
initial franchise agreement. If amounts are withdrawn by the Village pursuant to
Section (11) or (13)(a), the initial Grantee shall replenish the letter of credit or
security deposit with an amount equal to the amount of the withdrawal within 15
days of such withdrawal.
(c) If the Grantee fails to pay the Village any franchise fees or costs within the time
fixed herein; fails after 15 days notice to pay to the Village any taxes due and
unpaid; or fails to repay the Village within 15 days any damages, costs, or
expenses which the Village is compelled to pay by reason of any act or default of
the Grantee in connection with this Ordinance or the franchise agreement, or
fails, after three (3) days notice by the Village of such failure to comply with any
provision of this Ordinance or the franchise agreement which the Village
reasonably determines can be remedied by demand on the letter of credit or
security deposit, the Village may immediately request payment of the amount
thereof, with interest and any penalties, from the letter of credit or security
deposit. Upon such request for payment, the Village shall notify the Grantee of
the amount and date thereof. The letter of credit or security deposit instrument
tendered by an initial Grantee shall specify that the Village may draw upon the
written statement of the Village Administrator specifying the amount to be
withdrawn and the purpose for each draw.
(d) The rights reserved to the Village with respect to the letter of credit are in
addition to all other rights of the Village, whether reserved by this ordinance of
authorized by law, and no action, proceeding, or exercise of a right with respect
to such letter of credit, shall affect any other right the Village may have.
(14) Performance Bond.
(a) Concurrent with its required delivery to the Village of an executed franchise
agreement, the initial Grantee shall file with the Village a performance bond for
he benefit of the Village in the amount of not less than 50 percent of the
reasonably estimated cost to install the system components contemplated to be
installed in the new application or franchise agreement. This bond shall be
maintained in full force and effect until all such contemplated installation is
complete. The form and content of such bond shall be approved by the Village
Attorney and shall be incorporated into any franchise agreement.
(b) If the initial Grantee fails to comply with any law, ordinance, or resolution
governing the franchise or fails to well and truly observe, fulfill, and perform
each term and condition of this Ordinance or the franchise agreement as it relates
to the conditions relative to the construction of the system, there shall be
recoverable jointly and severally, from the principal and surety of the bond, any
damages or loss suffered by the Village as a result thereof, including the full
amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal or
abandonment of any property of the Grantee, plus a reasonable allowance for
attorney’s fees, including the Village’s legal staff and costs up to the full amount
of the bond. To the extent allowed by law, the performance bond shall also
provide additional security to the Village for the faithful performance by the
initial Grantee of all initial Grantee’s obligations specified to be secured by a
letter of credit or security deposit under Section (13).
(c) The Village may, upon completion of construction of the system, agree to reduce
the required amount of the bond. However, the Village may require an increased
performance bond to be posted by an initial Grantee for any construction
subsequent to the completion of the initial contemplated system installation, in a
reasonable amount and upon such terms as determined by the Village.
(d) The bond shall contain the following endorsement:
“It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be cancelled by the
surety nor the intention not to renew be stated by the surety until 30 days after
receipt by the Village, by registered mail, of a written notice of such intent to
cancel or to not renew.”
Upon any unlawful cancellation or removal of the performance bond without
Village consent, the Village shall be entitled to avail itself of all remedies and
shall be entitled to the maximum relief available under this Ordinance and
pursuant to law against an initial Grantee, including revocation of the franchise.
(e) The Village at any time during the term of this Ordinance may waive Grantee’s
requirements to maintain a performance bond. The invitation to waive the
requirement can be initiated by the Village or Grantee.
(15) Liability Insurance.
(a) The Grantee shall maintain and by its acceptance of the franchise agreement
specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise
agreement liability insurance insuring the Village and the Grantee in the
minimum amount of:
1. $1,000,000.00 for property damage per claimant;
2. $10,000,000.00 for property damage per occurrence;
3. $3,000,000.00 for personal injury damages per person; and
4. $10,000,000.00 for personal injury damages per occurrence.
(b) The certificate of insurance obtained by the Grantee in compliance with this
section must be approved by the Village Attorney and such certificate of
insurance, along with written evidence of payment of required premiums, shall
be filed and maintained with the Village at all times during the term of the
franchise agreement. The Grantee shall immediately advise the Village Attorney
of any litigation that may develop that would affect this insurance. The per claim
and per occurrence coverage amounts specified in this section shall not be
reduced by amounts paid for other claims or other occurrences.
(c) Neither the provisions of this section nor any damages recovered by the Village
against the Grantee for any reason shall be construed to or limit the liability of
the Grantee for any purpose or claim, other than to the extent Grantee has
satisfied such purpose or claim.
(d) All insurance policies maintained pursuant to this franchise shall contain the
following endorsement:
“It is hereby understood and agreed that this insurance policy may not be
cancelled by the surety nor the intention not to renew be stated by the surety until
30 days after receipt by the Village, by registered mail, of a written notice of
such intention to cancel or to not renew.”
Upon cancellation or nonrenewal of the insurance coverage without Village
consent, the Village shall be entitled to avail itself of all remedies and shall be
entitled to the maximum relief available under this Ordinance and pursuant to
law against Grantee, including revocation of the franchise.
(16) Indemnification
(a) Disclaimer of Liability. The Village shall not at any time be liable for injury or
damage occurring to any person or property from any cause whatsoever arising
out of the construction, maintenance, repair, use, operation, condition, or
dismantling of the Grantee’s system and due to the act or omission of any person
or entity other than the Village or those persons or entities for which the Village
is legally liable as a matter of law.
(b) Indemnification. The Grantee shall, at its sole cost and expense, defend,
indemnify, and hold harmless the Village, and its respective officers, boards,
commissions, employees, agents, attorneys, and contractors (hereinafter referred
to as “Indemnities”) from and against:
1. Any and all liability, obligation, damages, penalties, claims, liens, costs,
charges, losses, and expenses (including, without limitation, reasonable
fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses, and consultants) which
may be imposed upon, incurred by, or be asserted against the Indemnities
by reason of any act or omission of the Grantee, its personnel,
employees, agents, contractors, or subcontractors resulting in personal
injury, bodily injury, sickness, disease, or death to any person or damage
to, loss of use of, or destruction of tangible or intangible property, libel,
slander, invasion of privacy, and unauthorized use of any trademark,
tradename, copyright, patent, service mark, or any other right of any
person, firm, or corporation, which may arise out of or be in any way
connected with the construction, installation, operation, maintenance, or
condition of that Grantee’s system or products or services or agents or
the Grantee’s failure to comply with any federal, state, or local statute,
ordinance, rule, order, or regulation.
2. Any and all liabilities, obligations, damages, penalties, claims, liens,
costs, charges, losses, and expenses (including, without limitation,
reasonable fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses, and other
consultants), which are imposed upon, incurred by, or asserted against
the Indemnities by reason of any claim or lien arising out of work, labor,
materials, or supplies provided or supplied to the Grantee, its contractors,
or subcontractors for the installation, construction, operation, or
maintenance of the system.
3. Any and all liability, obligation, damages, penalties, claims, liens, costs,
charges, losses, and expenses (including, without limitation, reasonable
fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses, and consultants) which
may be imposed upon, incurred by, or be asserted against the Indemnities
by reason of any financing or securities offering by the Grantee for
violations of the common law or any laws, statutes, or regulations of the
State of Wisconsin or United States, including those of the Federal
Securities and Exchange Commission, whether by the Grantee or
otherwise.
(c) Assumption of Risk. The Grantee undertakes and assumes for its officers,
agents, contractors and subcontractors, and employees, all risk of dangerous
conditions, if any, on or about any Village-owned or controlled property,
including public rights-of-way, and the Grantee hereby agrees to indemnify,
defend, and hold harmless the Indemnities against and from any claim asserted or
liability imposed upon the Indemnities for personal injury or property damage to
any person arising out of the installation, operation, maintenance, or condition of
the system or the Grantee’s failure to comply with any federal, state, or local
statute, ordinance, or regulation.
(d) Defense of Indemnities. In the event any action or proceeding shall be brought
against the Indemnities by reason of any matter for which the indemnities are
indemnified hereunder, the Grantee shall, upon notice from any of the
Indemnities, at the Grantee’s sole cost and expense, resist and defend the same
with legal counsel mutually acceptable to the Village and Grantee, provided that
the Grantee shall not admit liability in any such matter on behalf of the
Indemnities without the written consent of the Village.
(e) Notice Cooperation and Expenses - The Village shall give the Grantee prompt
notice of the making of any claim or the commencement of any action, suit, or
other proceeding covered by the provisions of paragraph (4) above. Nothing
herein shall be deemed to prevent the Village from cooperating with the Grantee
and participating in the defense of any litigation by the Village’s own counsel.
The Grantee shall pay all reasonable expenses incurred by the Village in
defending itself with regard to any such actions, suits, or proceedings. These
expenses shall include all attorney fees and shall also include the actual expenses
of the Village’s agents, employees, or expert witnesses and disbursements and
liabilities assumed by the Village in connection with such suits, actions, or
proceedings. No withdrawal by the Village of any sum under the letter of credit
or security deposit shall limit the liability of the Grantee to the Village under the
terms of this section, except that any sum so withdrawn by the Village shall be
deducted from any recovery which the Village might have against the Grantee
under the terms of this section.
(f) Nonwaiver of Statutory Limits. Nothing in this agreement shall be construed to
in any way limit or waive the provisions of Section 893.80, Wis. Stats., as
amended from time to time.
(17) Rights of Individuals.
(a) The Grantee shall not deny services, deny access, or otherwise discriminate
against subscribers, channel users, or any person or entity on the basis of race,
color, religion, nation or ethnic origin, income, gender, or sexual orientation.
The Grantee shall comply at all times with all applicable federal, state, and local
laws, statutes, rules, and regulations and all executive and administrative orders
relating to discrimination which are hereby incorporated and made part of this
Ordinance by reference.
(b) The Grantee shall strictly adhere to the equal employment opportunity
requirements of the Federal Communications employment opportunity
requirements of the Federal Communications Commission, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, and other applicable federal, state, and local laws and
regulations, as amended from time to time.
(c) The Grantee shall, at all times, comply with the privacy requirements of state and
federal law.
(d) Grantee is required to make all services available to all residential dwellings
throughout the initial service area.
(18) Public Notice. Public notice of any public meeting relating to this Ordinance or a
franchise agreement shall be by publication of a Class I notice prior to the meeting and by
announcement on at least one (1) channel of the Grantee’s system between the hours of
7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. for five (5) consecutive days prior to the meeting, provided,
however, Operator’s failure to telecast such notice shall not invalidate any proceedings.
(19) System Availability and Record Request. The Grantee shall provide cable
communications service throughout the entire Village pursuant to the provisions of this
Ordinance and the franchise agreement and shall maintain a record of all requests for
services received by the Grantee for at least three (3) years from the date of any such
request. This record shall be available for public inspection at the local office of the
Grantee during normal business hours.
(20) System Construction.
(a) New Construction Timetable
1. Within two (2) years from the date of the award of the initial franchise
agreement, the Grantee must make cable television service available to
every dwelling unit within the initial service area.
a. The Grantee must make cable television service available to at
least 20 percent of the dwelling units within the initial service
area within six (6) months from the date of the award of the
initial franchise agreement.
b. The Grantee must make cable television service available to at
least 50 percent of the dwelling units within the initial service
area within one (1) year from the ate of the award of the initial
franchise agreement.
2. The Grantee, in its application, if any, may propose a timetable of
construction which will make cable television service available in the
initial service area sooner than the above minimum requirements, in
which case the said schedule will be made part of the franchise
agreement, and will be binding upon the Grantee.
3. Any delay beyond the terms of this timetable, unless specifically
approved by the Village, will be considered a violation of this Ordinance
for which the provisions of either Section (37) or (46) shall apply as
determined by the Village.
(b) Line Extensions.
1. In areas of the Village not included in the initial service areas, the
Grantee shall be required to extend its system pursuant to the following
requirements:
a. No customer shall be refused service arbitrarily. Grantee is
hereby authorized to extend the cable system as necessary within
the Village. To expedite the process of extending the cable
system into a new subdivision, the Village (or developer if
requested by the Village) shall forward to the Grantee an
approved engineering plan of each project. Subject to the
service extension requirements of this Ordinance, the Grantee
shall commence the design and construction process upon receipt
of the final engineering plan. Upon notification from the Village
or developer that the first home in the project has been approved
for building permit, the Grantee shall have a maximum of three
(3) months to complete the system construction/activation
process within the project phase.
b. The Grantee must extend and make cable television service
available to every dwelling unit in all unserved, developing areas
having at least 20 dwelling units per street mile, as measured
from the existing system, and shall extend its system
simultaneously with the installation of utility lines.
c. The Grantee must extend and make cable television service
available to any isolated resident outside the initial service area
requesting connection at the standard connection charge, if the
connection is to the isolated resident would require no more than
a standard 175 foot drop line.
2. Early Extension. In areas not meeting the requirements for mandatory
extension of service, the Grantee shall provide, within 30 days of the
request of a potential subscriber desiring service, an estimate of the costs
required to extend service to the subscriber and a proposed agreement in
writing specifying the payment terms and the time within which service
will be made available. The Grantee shall then extend service upon
acceptance of such agreement by the potential subscriber. The Grantee
may require advance payment or assurance of payment satisfactory to the
Grantee. The amount paid by the subscribers for early extensions shall
be nonrefundable, and, in the event the area subsequently reaches the
density required for mandatory extension, such payments shall be treated
as consideration for early extension. Grantee shall specify in the
aforesaid proposed agreement whether Grantee has any specific notice or
knowledge that the area may attain the density required for mandatory
extension.
3. New Development Undergrounding - In cases of new construction or
property development where utilities are to be placed underground, the
developer or property owner shall give the Grantee reasonable notice of
such construction or development, and at least 48 hours prior notice of
the particular date on which open trenching will be available for the
Grantee’s installation of conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals to
be provided at the Grantee’s expense. The Grantee shall also provide
specifications as needed for trenching. Costs of trenching and easement
required to bring service to the development shall be borne by the
developer or property owner, except that if the Grantee fails to install its
conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals within five (5) working days
of the date the trenches are available, as designated in the notice given by
the developer or property owner, then should the trenches be closed after
the five (5) day period, the cost of the new trenching is to be borne by the
Grantee. Except for the notice of the particular date on which trenching
will be available to the Grantee, any notice provided to the Grantee by
the Village or the developer of a preliminary plat request shall satisfy the
requirement of reasonable notice if sent to the local general manager or
system engineer of the Grantee prior to approval of the preliminary plat
request.
(c) Special Agreements. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the Grantee
from serving areas not covered under this section upon agreement with
developers, property owners, or residents after obtaining any necessary property
owner permission, provided that five (5) percent of those gross revenues are paid
to the Village as franchise fees under Section (27).
1. The Grantee, in its application, may propose a line extension policy
which will result in serving more residents of the Village than as required
above, in which case the Grantee’s policy will be incorporated into the
franchise agreement and will be binding upon the Grantee.
2. Any violation of this section shall be considered a breach of the terms of
this Ordinance for which the provisions of either Section (37) or (46)
shall apply, as determined by the Village.
(21) Construction and Technical Standards.
(a) Compliance with construction and technical standards. The Grantee shall
construct, install, operate, administer, and maintain its system in compliance with
all laws, statutes, rules, orders, ordinances, construction standards, governmental
requirements, and FCC technical standards. In addition, the Grantee shall
provide the Village, upon request, with a written report of the results of the
Grantee’s annual proof of performance tests conducted pursuant to Federal
Communications Commission standards and requirements.
(b) Additional Specifications.
1. Construction, installation, and maintenance of the system shall be
performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. All cables and wires
shall be installed, where possible, parallel with electric and telephone
lines. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and
bundled with due respect for engineering considerations.
2. The Grantee shall at all times comply with:
a. National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards);
b. National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters);
c. Bell System Code of Pole Line Construction; and
d. Applicable FCC or other federal, state, and local regulations
3. In any event, the system shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of
persons or property.
4. Any antenna structures used in the system shall comply with the
construction, marking, and lighting requirements of the United States
Department of Transportation.
5. All aspects of the facilities utilized and conditions provided during
construction, installation, and maintenance of the system by Grantee
shall comply with the standards of the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration.
6. RF leakage shall be checked forthwith by Grantee upon demand by the
Village or its representative at reception locations for emergency radio
services to prove no interference signal combinations are possible. Stray
radiation shall be measured adjacent to any proposed aeronautical
navigation radio sites to prove no interference to airborne navigational
reception sites in the normal flight patterns. FCC rules and regulations
shall govern the requirements of this paragraph.
7. The Grantee shall maintain equipment capable of providing standby
power for headend, transportation, and trunk amplifiers that transport
system for a minimum of two (2) hours.
8. In all areas of the Village where the cables, wires, and other like facilities
of public utilities are placed underground, the Grantee shall place its
cables, wires, or other like facilities underground. When public utilities
relocate their facilities from pole to underground, the Grantee shall
concurrently relocate its facilities to underground at its sole cost,
provided, however, that if the public utilities are compensated, in part or
in whole, for such relocation of their facilities, the Grantee shall be
similarly compensated.
(22) Use of Streets
(a) Interference with Persons and Improvements. The Grantee’s system, poles,
wires, and appurtenances shall be located, erected, and maintained so that none
of its facilities shall endanger or interfere with the lives or safety of persons or
interfere with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who
adjoin any of the streets or interfere with any improvements the Village may
deem proper to make or hinder or obstruct the free use of the streets, bridges,
easements, or public property.
(b) Restoration to Prior Condition. In case of any disturbance of pavement,
sidewalk, landscaping, driveway, or other surfacing, the Grantee shall, at its own
cost and expense and in a manner approved by the Village, replace and restore all
paving, sidewalk, driveway, landscaping, or surface of any street or property
disturbed in as good condition as before the work was commenced and in
accordance with standards for such work set by the Village.
(c) Erection, Removal, and Common Use of Poles.
1. No poles or other wire-holding structures shall be erected by the Grantee
without prior approval of the Village with regard to location, height,
types, and any other pertinent aspect. However, no location of any pole
or wire-holding structure of the Grantee shall create any vested right or
interest accruing to the Grantee, and such poles or structures shall be
removed or modified by the Grantee at its own expense whenever the
Village determines that the public convenience would be enhanced or
served thereby.
2. Where poles or other wire-holding structures already existing and
installed by a public utility for use in serving the Village are available for
use by the Grantee, but Grantee does not make arrangements or obtain
permission from the public utility for such use, the Village may require
the Grantee to use such poles and structures if it determines that the
public convenience would be enhanced or served thereby and the terms
of the use available to the Grantee are reasonable.
3. In the absence of any governing federal or state statute where the Village
or a public utility serving the Village desires to make use of the poles or
other wire-holding structures of the Grantee, but agreement thereof with
the Grantee cannot be reached, the Village may require the Grantee to
permit such use for such consideration and upon such terms as the
Village shall determine to be just and reasonable, if the Village
determines that such use would enhance or serve the public convenience
and would not unduly interfere with the Grantee’s operations.
(d) Relocation of system facilities. If at any time during the period of this franchise
agreement the Village shall lawfully elect to in any way alter any street or change
the grade of any street, the Grantee, upon reasonable notice by the Village, shall
remove or relocate as necessary its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes, and other fixtures at its own expense unless public utilities are
compensated by the Village fore removing or relocating facilities by such street
alteration project, in which case the Grantee shall be similarly compensated.
(e) Cooperation with Building Movers. The Grantee shall, on the request of any
person holding a building moving permit issued by the Village, temporarily raise
or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such
temporary removal, raising, or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person
requesting the same, and the Grantee shall have the authority to require such
payment in advance. The Grantee shall be give not less than 48 hours advance
notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes and shall perform such service
no later than five (5) days after such notice, unless extended with the consent of
the requestor.
(f) Tree Trimming. The Grantee shall not remove any tree or trim any portion,
either above, at, or below ground level, of any tree within any public place
without the prior consent of the Village. The Village shall have the right to do
the trimming requested by the grantee at the cost of the Grantee. Regardless of
who performs the work requested by the Grantee, the Grantee shall be
responsible for, indemnify, defend, and hold the Village harmless for any and all
damages to any tree as a result of trimming or to the land surrounding any tree,
whether such tree is trimmed or removed.
(23) Operational Standards.
(a) The Grantee shall install, keep, and maintain all parts of the system in good and
proper operating condition throughout the term of the franchise agreement.
(b) Upon a reasonable request for service by any person located within the Village,
the Grantee shall, within 30 days, furnish the requested service to such person
within terms of the line extension policy. A request for service shall be
unreasonable for the purpose of this subsection if no trunk line installation
capable of servicing that person’s block has not yet been installed.
(c) The Grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt
service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such
interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur
during periods of minimum system use.
(d) The Grantee shall not allow its cable or other operations to interfere with
television reception of subscribers or persons not served by the Grantee, nor shall
the system interfere with, obstruct, or hinder in any manner the operation of the
various utilities serving the residents within the Village nor shall other utilities
interfere with the Grantee’s system.
(e) The Grantee shall have representatives who have been trained and instructed in
the customer service operations and practices of the Grantee available to respond
to customer telephone inquiries 24 hours per day and seven days per week.
(f) Under normal operating conditions, the time within which a Grantee
representative shall answer any telephone, including wait time and the time
required to transfer the call, shall not exceed 30 seconds. This standard shall be
met no less than 90 percent of the time as measured on a calendar year quarter
basis. Such telephone answer time requirements shall be construed to mean that
a telephone shall be answered by a human being as opposed to any recorded or
electronic answering.
(g) Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a busy signal less
than three (3) percent of the time as measured on a calendar year quarter basis.
(h) Standard installations will be performed within seven (7) business days after an
order has been placed. A standard installation is one that is within 175 feet of the
existing system.
(i) Excluding those circumstances which are beyond its control, the Grantee shall
respond to any service interruption promptly and in no event later than 24 hours
from the time of initial notification. All other regular service requests will be
responded to within 36 hours. The appointment window period alternatives for
installations, service calls, and other installation activities shall be either:
“morning”, “afternoon”, or “evening” and no window period established shall
exceed four (4) hours during normal business hours for the system or at a time
that is mutually agreeable to the customer and Grantee. The Grantee will make
available additional hours during which appointments can be scheduled based
upon the needs of the community or as set forth in the franchise agreement. If at
any time a Grantee installer or technician is behind schedule, a Grantee
representative shall contact the customer and reschedule the appointment for a
time that is convenient to the customer.
(j) Customer service centers and bill payment locations will be open for walk-in
customer transactions a minimum of eight (8) hours a day, Monday through
Friday, unless there is a need to modify those hours because of the location or
customers served. The Grantee and Village, by mutual consent, will establish
supplemental hours on weekdays and weekends if such additional hours would
better fulfill the needs of the community.
(k) Subscriber Credit for Outages. Upon service interruption and/or outages of
subscriber’s cable service, the following shall apply:
1. For service interruptions and/or outages of over four (4) hours and up to
seven (7) days, the Grantee shall provide, at the Subscriber’s request, a
credit of one-thirtieth (1/30) of one month’s fees for affected services for
each 24-hour period service is interrupted for four (4) or more hours for
any single subscriber, with the exception of subscribers disconnected
because of non-payment or excessive signal leakage.
2. For service interruptions and/or outages of seven (7) days or more in one
(1) month, the Grantee shall provide, at the subscriber’s request, a full
month’s credit for affected services for all affected subscribers.
3. Grantee shall provide written notice to all customers at least once in
every 12-month period of Grantee’s policies and procedures.
(l) The Grantee shall provide to each customer written information at the time of
installation and at any future time upon the request of the customer describing
each of the following:
1. Products and services offered;
2. Prices and service options;
3. Installation and service policies; and
4. Instructions for the customer on use of the telecommunications services.
(m) Bills shall be clear, concise, and understandable to the subscriber and all cable
services charges shall be itemized.
(n) Credits shall be issued promptly, but no later than the customer’s next billing
following the occurrence causing the credit and, if service has been terminated,
the return of the equipment to the Grantee.
(o) Customers shall be notified a minimum of 30 days in advance of any customer
billing period application to any rate increase or channel change, provided that
the change is within the control of the Grantee.
(p) The Grantee shall maintain and operate the system in full compliance with the
laws, statutes, orders, and rules of the Federal Communications Commission, the
United States Congress, or the State of Wisconsin.
(q) The Grantee shall continue, throughout the term of the franchise agreement, to
maintain the technical standards and quality of service as set forth in this
Ordinance.
(r) The Grantee shall keep a monthly log which shall indicate the nature of each
service complaint received in the last 24 months, the date and time it was
received, the disposition of said complaint, and the time and date thereof. The
log shall be made available to the Village upon request.
(24) Continuity of Service Mandatory.
(a) It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving service insofar as their
financial and other obligations to the Grantee are honored. If the Grantee elects
to overbuild, rebuild, modify, or sell the system or the Village gives notice of
intent to terminate or fails to renew a franchise agreement, the Grantee shall act
at all times so as to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted
service regardless of the circumstances.
(b) If there is a change of franchise or if a new operator acquires the system, the
Grantee shall cooperate with the Village, new franchisee, or operator in
maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During such period, the
Grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates
the system and shall be entitled to reasonable costs for its services until it no
longer operates the system.
(c) If the Grantee fails to operate the system for seven (7) consecutive days without
prior approval of the Village or without just cause, the Village may, at is option,
operate the system or designate an operator until such time as the Grantee
restores service under conditions acceptable to the Village or a permanent
operator is selected. If the Village so opts, the Grantee shall reimburse the
Village for all reasonable costs or damages in excess of revenues from the system
received by the Village that are the result of the Grantee’s failure to perform
within 30 days of invoice for same.
(25) Complaint Procedure.
(a) The Village Administrator is designated as the Village liaison with the Grantee
for the purpose of forwarding to Grantee any complaints received by the Village
and monitoring Grantee’s complaint resolution process.
(b) During the term of a franchise agreement and any renewal thereof, the Grantee
shall maintain a central office for the purpose of receiving and resolving all
complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and similar
matters. The office must be reachable by a local, toll-free telephone call to
receive complaints regarding quality of service, equipment functions, and similar
matters. The Grantee shall arrange for one or more payment locations in or
within a reasonable distance of the Village where customers can pay bills or
conduct other system business activities.
(c) Upon subscribers receiving connection or reconnection to the system, the
Grantee shall provide written information describing the procedures for making
inquiries or complaints, including the name, address, and local telephone number
of the Grantee representative to whom such inquiries or complaints are to be
addressed.
(d) Upon any similar complaints made which, in the judgment of the Village, cast
doubt on the reliability or quality of cable services, the Village shall have the
right and authority to require the Grantee to test, analyze, and report on the
performance of the system. The Grantee shall fully cooperate with the Village in
performing such testing and shall prepare and deliver results and a report, if
requested, within 30 days after notice. Such report shall include the following
information:
1. The nature of the complaint or problem which precipitated the special
tests;
2. What system component was tested;
3. The equipment used and procedures employed in testing;
4. The methods by which such complaint or problem was resolved;
5. Any other information pertaining to the tests and analysis which may be
required by the Village.
The Village may require that tests be supervised by an independent professional
engineer or equivalent of the Village’s choice. The engineer shall have access to
all records of Grantee’s special tests and other pertinent information and forward
to the Village such records with a report interpreting the results of the tests and
recommending actions to be taken. Should such a test prove that the Grantee
failed to meet the technical standards required under this Ordinance or the
franchise agreement, the Grantee shall bear the cost of the test and the
independent engineer/equivalent. If the test should prove that the Grantee met
the technical standards, the Village shall bear the cost of the test and independent
engineer/equivalent.
The Village’s rights under this section shall be limited to requiring tests, analysis,
and reports covering specific subjects and characteristics based upon complaints
or other evidence when and under such circumstances as the Village has
reasonable grounds to believe that the complaints or other evidence require that
tests be performed to protect the public against substandard cable service.
(26) Grantee Rules and Regulations. The Grantee shall have the authority to promulgate
such rules, regulations, terms, and conditions governing the conduct of its business as
shall be reasonably necessary to enable the Grantee to exercise its rights and perform its
obligations under this franchise and to assure an uninterrupted service to each and all of
its customers provided, however, that such rules, regulations, terms, and conditions shall
not be in conflict with the franchise agreement, the provisions hereof or applicable state
and federal laws, rules, orders, and regulations.
(27) Franchise Fee.
(a) For the reason that the streets of the Village to be used by the Grantee in the
operation of its system within the boundaries of the Village are valuable public
properties acquired and maintained by the Village are valuable public properties
acquired and maintained by the Village at great expense to its taxpayers and that
the grant to the Grantee to the streets is a valuable property right without which
the Grantee would be required to invest substantial capital in right-of-way costs
and acquisitions, the Grantee shall pay to the Village an amount equal to five (5)
percent of the Grantee’s gross revenues from the operations of the Grantee within
the Village (the franchise fee), subject to the terms of this Ordinance. If the
statutory five (5) percent limitation of franchise fees is raised or the federal
statute deletes the franchise fee limitation entirely, then the franchise fee may be
subject to renegotiation. (Reference: Ordinance 00-11)
(b) The franchise fee imposed shall be in addition to any other tax or payment owed
to the Village by the Grantee.
(c) The franchise fee and any other costs or penalties assessed shall be payable
quarterly on a calendar year basis to the Village and the Grantee shall file a
complete and accurate verified statement of all gross receipts as previously
defined herein within 45 days after the expiration of the calendar quarter.
(d) The Village shall have the right to inspect the Grantee’s income records and the
right to audit and to recompute any amounts determined to the payable under this
Ordinance, provided, however, that such audit shall take place within 30 days
following written notice to the Grantee by the Village, which notice shall include
a copy of the audit report.
(e) If any franchise payment or recomputed amount, cost, or penalty is not made on
or before the applicable dates heretofore specified, interest shall not be paid to
Village by Grantee at the rate of one and one half (1½) percent per month or any
portion thereof until paid, and the Grantee shall reimburse the Village for any
additional expense and costs incurred by the Village for any additional expense
and costs incurred by the Village by reason of the delinquent payment(s).
(28) Transfer of Ownership or Control.
(a) Except as may be otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, this franchise
shall not be assigned or transferred, either in whole or in part, or leased, sublet or
mortgaged in any manner, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable or any
right, interest, or property therein, pass to or vest in any person without the prior
written consent of the Village. The Grantee may, however, transfer or assign the
franchise to a wholly owned subsidiary of the Grantee and such subsidiary may
transfer or assign the franchise back to the Grantee without such consent,
providing that such assignment is without any release of liability of the Grantee.
The proposed assignee must show financial responsibility as determined by the
Village and must agree to comply with all provisions of the franchise agreement.
The Village shall have 120 days to act upon receipt of any written request for
approval of such as sale or transfer which contains or is accompanied by such
information as is required in accordance with FCC regulations and by the Village
of Hales Corners. The Village shall be deemed to have consented to a proposed
transfer or assignment if its written refusal to consent is not mailed to the Grantee
within 120 days following receipt of proper request unless the requesting party
and the Village agree to an extension of time. The Village shall not unreasonably
withhold consent to the proposed transfer.
(b) Except as may be otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, the grantee shall
promptly notify the Village of any actual or proposed change in, or transfer of, or
acquisition by any other party of control of the Grantee. The word “control” as
used herein is not limited to major stockholders but includes actual working
control in whatever manner exercised. A rebuttable presumption that a transfer
of control has occurred shall arise upon the acquisition or accumulation of any
person or group of persons of 10 percent of the voting shares of the Grantee.
Every change, transfer, or acquisition of control of the Grantee shall make the
franchise subject to cancellation unless and until the Village shall have consented
thereto which consent will not be unreasonably withheld. For the purpose of
determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer, or acquisition of
control, the Village may inquire into the qualification of the prospective
controlling party, and the Grantee shall assist the Village in such inquiry.
(c) The consent or approval of the Village to any transfer of the grantee shall not
constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the Village in and to the streets, and
any transfer shall by its terms be expressly subordinate to the terms and
conditions of this Ordinance and the franchise agreement.
(d) In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the Village will not approve any
transfer or assignment of an initial franchise prior to substantial completion of
construction of the proposed system.
(e) In no event shall a transfer of ownership or control be approved without
successor in interest becoming a signatory to this franchise agreement.
(29) Availability of Books and Records
(a) The Grantee shall fully cooperate in making available at reasonable times and the
Village shall have the right to inspect and copy, where reasonably necessary to
the enforcement of the franchise, books, records, maps, plans, and other like
materials of the Grantee applicable to the cable television system at any time
during normal business hours provided; where volume and convenience
necessitate, the Grantee may require inspection and copying to take place on the
Grantee premises at the Village’s expense. Grantee’s per copy charge to the
Village shall not be greater than the Village’s per copy charge imposed on the
general public at its offices.
(b) The following records and/or reports are to be made available to the Village upon
request, but no more frequently than on an annual basis unless mutually agree
upon by the Grantee and the Village:
1. Quarterly reviews and resolutions or progress reports;
2. Periodic preventive maintenance reports;
3. Any copies of FCC Form 395-A (or successor form) or any supplemental
forms related to equal opportunity or fair contracting policies);
4. Subscriber inquiry/complaint resolution data; and
5. Periodic construction update reports, including as-built maps.
(30) Other Petitions and Applications. Copies of all petitions, applications,
communications, and reports either submitted by the Grantee to the Federal
Communications Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission, or any other
federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any
matters affecting cable television operations authorized pursuant to the franchise or
received from such agencies shall be provided to the Village upon request.
(31) Fiscal Reports.
(a) The Grantee shall file annually with the Village no later than 120 days after the
end of the Grantee’s fiscal year a copy of a gross revenues statement certified by
an officer of the Grantee.
(32) Removal of Cable Television System. Upon termination of a franchise agreement as
provided by this Ordinance and applicable federal law or the expiration and denial of the
renewal application as provided by this Ordinance and applicable federal law, the
Grantee shall forthwith at the option of and upon notice by the Village remove at its own
expense all designated portion of the cable television system from all streets and public
property within the Village. If the Grantee fails to do so, the Village may perform the
work at the Grantee’s expense. Upon the receipt of a notice for removal, a bond shall be
furnished by the Grantee to the Village in an amount sufficient to cover this expense or a
letter of credit or security deposit and any existing performance bond proceeds shall be
available to and may be withdrawn by the Village to the full extent of their value.
(33) Required Services and Facilities.
(a) The cable television system shall have a minimum channel capacity of 77
channels and at least 750 MHz of bandwidth available for future use.
(b) The Grantee shall maintain and the system shall include a plant having the
technical capacity for “two-way” communications.
(c) The Grantee shall maintain the following:
1. At least one (1) specially-designated, noncommercial public access
channel available on a first-come, nondiscriminatory basis;
2. At least one (1) specially-designated channel for use by local educational
authorities;
3. At least one (1) specially-designated channel for local governmental
uses;
4. At least one (1) specially-designated channel for leased access uses; and
5. An Institutional Network (I-Net) of cable, optical, electrical, or electronic
equipment used for the purpose of transmitting two-way
telecommunications signals interconnecting designated entities as set
forth in the franchise agreement and mutually agreed to by the Grantee
and the Grantor. Such Institutional Network may be provided as needed
by utilizing capacity on the subscriber system.
6. Provided, however, the above uses may be combined on one or more
channels until such time as additional channels become necessary in the
opinion of the Village. Financial and technical support, replacement, and
maintenance of studios and associated equipment of this facility shall be
separately incorporated into the franchise agreement.
(d) The Grantee shall incorporate into its cable television system the capacity to
permit the Village, in times of emergency, to override, by remote control, the
audio of all channels simultaneously which the Grantee may lawfully override.
The Grantee shall provide emergency broadcast capacity pursuant to FCC rules.
The Grantee shall cooperate with the Village in the use and operation of the
emergency alert override system.
(e)
1. Interconnection - The Grantee may be required to interconnect its system
with other adjacent cable television systems for the purpose of sharing
public, educational, and governmental access programming. Such
interconnection shall be made within a reasonable time limit to be
established by the Village.
2. Interconnection Procedure - Upon receiving the order of the Village to
interconnect, the Grantee shall immediately initiate negotiations with the
other affected system or systems in order that all costs may be shared
equally among cable companies for both construction and operation of
the interconnection link.
3. Relief - The Grantee may be granted reasonable extensions of time to
interconnect or the Village may rescind its order to interconnect upon
petition by the Grantee to the Village. The Village shall grant the request
if it finds that the Grantee has negotiated in good faith and has failed to
obtain an approval from the operator or franchising authority of the
system to be interconnected or the cost of the interconnection would
cause an unreasonable increase in subscriber rates.
4. Cooperation Required - The Grantee shall cooperate with any
interconnection cooperation, regional interconnection authority, or
Village, local, county, state, and federal regulatory agency which may be
hereafter established for the purpose of regulating, financing, or
otherwise providing for the interconnection of cable systems beyond the
boundaries of the Village.
5. Initial Technical Requirements to Assure Future Interconnection
Capability
a. All cable systems receiving franchises to operate within the
Village shall use the standard frequency allocations for television
signals.
b. All cable systems are required to use signal processors at the
headend for each television signal.
c. Grantee shall provide local origination equipment that is
compatible throughout the area so that video cassettes or
videotapes can be shared by various systems.
d. Grantee shall provide such additional services and facilities as
are contained in its application, if any.
(34) Rules and Regulations.
(a) The right and power is hereby reserved by the Village to promulgate such
additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of its lawful
powers and furtherance of the terms and conditions of this franchise, provide,
however, that such rules, regulations, terms, and conditions shall not be in
conflict with the provisions hereof or applicable state and federal laws, rules, and
regulations.
(b) The Village may also adopt such regulations at the request of the Grantee upon
application.
(35) Performance Evaluation Sessions.
(a) The Village and the Grantee may hold scheduled performance evaluation
sessions within 30 days of the third, sixth, and twelfth anniversary dates of the
Grantee’s award or renewal of the franchise and as may be required by federal
and state law. All such evaluation sessions shall be open to the public.
(b) Special evaluation sessions may be held at any time during the term of the
franchise agreement at the request of the Village or the Grantee.
(c) All evaluation sessions shall be open to the public and noticed in the Village’s
official newspaper. The Grantee shall notify its subscribers of all evaluation
sessions by announcements on at least one (1) channel of its system between the
hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. for five (5) consecutive days preceding each
session. Grantee’s failure to televise such notice shall not invalidate any
proceedings.
(d) Topics which may be discussed at any schedule or special evaluation session
shall include, but not be limited to, service rate structures; franchise fee;
penalties; free or discounted services; application of new technologies; system
performance; services provided; programming offered; customer complaints and
privacy; amendments to this ordinance; judicial and FCC rulings; line extension
policies; Grantee or Village rules; and topics raised by members of the public at
the session.
(36) Rate Change Procedures. Pursuant to the Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992, the Village of Hales Corners is currently certified to regulate
the Basic Service rates charged by the Grantee. Under these rules, the Grantee is
required to obtain approval from the Village for a rate increase for any change to the rates
for Basic Service. Should any federal or state law permit further rate regulation beyond
the Basic Service, the Village of Hales Corners may assume such rate regulation and
adopt appropriate procedures for such regulation.
(37) Forfeiture and Termination.
(a) In addition to all other rights and powers retained by the Village under this
Ordinance or otherwise, the Village reserves the right to forfeit and terminate the
franchise agreement and all rights and privileges of the Grantee thereunder in the
event of a substantial breach of its terms and conditions. A subsequent breach by
the Grantee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
1. Violation of any material provision of this Ordinance or the franchise
agreement or any material rule, order, regulation, or determination of the
Village made pursuant thereto;
2. Any act or omission to evade or circumvent any material provision of the
franchise or practice any fraud or deceit upon the Village or its
subscribers or customers;
3. Grantee’s failure to begin or complete system construction or system
extension as provided in Section (20);
4. Grantee’s failure to provide the services promised in the Grantee’s
application, if any, as incorporated herein by section (a)4;
5. Grantee’s failure to restore service after 96 consecutive hours of service
interruption, except when prior approval of such interruption is obtained
from the Village; or
6. Grantee’s material misrepresentation of fact in the application for or
negotiation of the franchise.
(b) The foregoing shall not constitute a substantial breach if the violation occurs but
is without fault of the Grantee or occurs as a result of circumstances beyond its
control. The Grantee shall not be excused by mere economic hardship for by
misfeasance or malfeasance of its directors, officers, or employees.
(c) The Village may make a written demand that the Grantee comply with any such
provision, rule, order, or determination under or pursuant to this ordinance or the
franchise agreement. If the violation by the Grantee continues for a period of 30
days following such written demand without written proof that corrective action
has been taken or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, the Village may
place the issue of termination of the franchise agreement before the Village
Board. Upon the consideration of termination, the Village shall cause to be
served upon the Grantee, at least 20 days prior to the date of such meeting, a
written notice of intent to see such termination and the time and place of the
meeting. Class I public notice shall be give of the meeting and the issue(s) which
the Village Board is to consider.
(d) The Village Board shall hear and consider the issue(s) and shall hear any person
interested therein and shall determine in its discretion whether or not any
violation by the Grantee has occurred.
(e) If the Village Board shall determine the violation by the Grantee was the fault of
the grantee and within its control, the Village Board may by resolution declare
that the franchise of the Grantee shall be in forfeited and terminated unless there
is compliance within such period as the Village Board may fix, such period shall
not be less than 60 days, provided, however, no opportunity for compliance need
be granted for fraud or misrepresentation.
(f) The issue of forfeiture and termination shall automatically be placed upon the
Village Board agenda at the expiration of the time set by it for compliance. The
Village Board then may terminate the franchise forthwith upon finding that the
Grantee has failed to achieve compliance or may further extend the period in its
discretion.
(38) Foreclosure. Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the
system, or upon the termination of any lease covering all or a substantial part of the
system, the Grantee shall notify the Village of such fact, and such notification shall be
treated as a notification that a change in control of the Grantee has taken place, and the
provisions of this Ordinance governing the consent of the Village to such change in
control of the Grantee shall apply.
(39) Right of Acquisition by the Village.
(a) 47 U.S.C. 537 shall apply to the right of acquisition by the Village. In the event
that the applicable federal regulations area repealed, the guidelines specified in
section (b) below shall apply.
(b) Upon the expiration of the term of the franchise agreement and denial of any
renewal or upon any other termination thereof as provided herein, the Village at
its election and upon the payment to the Grantee of a price equal to the then fair
market value of the system shall have the right to purchase and take over the
system upon resolution by the Village Board. If the Village has denied the
Grantee’s petition for renewal of its franchise as provided by Section (7), the
Village must exercise its option to purchase the system within 60 days of the
denial of renewal and at least six (6) months prior to the end of the franchise.
Nothing shall prohibit the Grantee in the event of the election of the Village to
purchase the system from requesting the court to set a reasonable bond of the
Village to secure the purchase price. The Grantee shall execute such warranty
deeds and other instruments as may be necessary to convey the system.
(40) Receivership. The Village shall have the right to terminate a franchise agreement 120
days after the appointment of a receiver or trustee appointed to take over and conduct the
business of the Grantee, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy, or other
action or proceeding unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been dismissed
prior to the expiration of 120 days or unless:
(a) Within 120 days after appointment, such receiver or trustee shall have fully
complied with all the provisions of this ordinance and the franchise agreement
and remedied all defaults thereunder; and
(b) Such receiver or trustee within the 120 after appointment shall have executed an
agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises
whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and
every provision of this Ordinance and the franchise agreement granted to the
Grantee.
(41) Compliance with State and Federal Laws.
(a) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance to the contrary, the
Grantee shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations of the state and
federal government or any administrative agencies thereof, provided, however, if
any such state or federal law or regulation shall require the Grantee to perform
any service or shall prohibit the Grantee from performing any service in conflict
with the terms of this franchise or of any law or regulation of the Village, then as
soon as possible following knowledge thereof, the Grantee shall notify the
Village of the point of conflict believed to exist between such regulation or law
and the laws or regulations of the Village or this Ordinance.
(b) If the Village determines that a material provision of this Ordinance is affected
by any subsequent action of the state or federal government, the Village and the
Grantee shall negotiate to modify any of the provisions herein to such reasonable
extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of this
agreement.
(42) Landlord/Tenant.
(a) Interference with Cable Service Prohibited. Neither the owner or any multiple
unit residential dwelling nor the owner’s agent or representative shall interfere
with the right of any tenant or lawful resident thereof to receive cable
communication service, cable installation, or maintenance from a cable
communication Grantee regulated by and lawfully operating under a valid and
existing franchise issued by the Village.
(b) Gratuities and Payments to Permit Service Prohibited. Neither the owner of any
multiple unit residential dwelling nor the owner’s agent or representative shall
ask, demand, or receive any payment, service, or gratuity in any form as a
condition for permitting or cooperating with the installation of a cable
communication service to the dwelling unit occupied by a tenant or resident
requesting service.
(c) Penalties and Charges to Tenants for Service Prohibited. Neither the owner of
any multiple unit residential dwelling nor the owner’s agent or representative
shall penalize, change, or surcharge a tenant or resident or forfeit or threaten to
forfeit any right of such tenant or resident or discriminate in any way against
such tenant or resident who requests or receives cable communication service
from a Grantee operating under a valid and existing cable communication
franchise issued by the Village.
(d) Reselling Service Prohibited. No person shall resell, without the expressed,
written consent of both the Grantee and the Village, any cable service program or
signal transmitted by a cable communication Grantee under a franchise issued by
the Village.
(e) Protection of Property Permitted. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a person
from requiring that cable communication system facilities conform to laws and
regulations and reasonable conditions necessary to protect the safety, use,
appearance, and value of premises or the convenience and safety of persons or
property.
(f) Risks Assumed by Grantee. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a person from
requiring a Grantee to indemnify the owner or the owner’s agents or
representatives for damages or from liability for damages caused by the
installation, operation, maintenance, or removal of cable communication
facilities.
(43) Applicant’s Bids for Initial Franchise.
(a) All bids received by the Village from the applicants for an initial franchise shall
become the sole property of the Village.
(b) The Village reserves the right to reject any and all bids and waive informalities
and/or technicalities where the best interests of the Village may be served.
(c) All questions regarding the meaning or intent of this Ordinance or application
documents shall be submitted to the Village in writing. Replies will be issued by
addenda mailed or delivered to all parties recorded by the Village as having
received the application documents. The Village reserves the right to make
extensions of time for receiving bids as it deems necessary. Questions received
less than 14 days prior to the date for the opening of the bids will not be
answered. Only replies to questions by written addenda will be binding. All bids
must contain an acknowledgement of receipt of all addenda.
(d) Bids must be sealed and submitted at the time and place indicated in the
application documents for the public opening. Bids may be modified at any time
prior to the opening of the bids, provided that any modifications must be duly
executed in the manner that the applicant’s bid must be executed. No bid shall be
opened or inspected before the public opening.
(e) Before submitting a bid, each applicant must:
1. Examine this Ordinance and the application documents thoroughly;
2. Inspect an determine any local conditions that may in any manner affect
performance under the franchise;
3. Examine federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations
affecting performance under the franchise agreement; and
4. Carefully correlate the bid with the requirements of this Ordinance and
the application documents.
(f) The Village may make such investigations as it deems necessary to determine the
ability of the applicant to perform under the franchise agreement, ad the applicant
shall furnish to the Village all such information and date for this purpose as the
Village may request. The Village reserves the right to reject any bid if the
evidence submitted by or investigation of such applicant fails to satisfy the
Village that such applicant is properly qualified to carry out the obligations of the
franchise and to complete the work contemplated therein. Conditional bids will
not be accepted.
(g) All bids received shall be placed in a secure depository approved by the Village
and not opened or inspected prior to the public opening.
(44) Financial, Contractual, Shareholder, and System Disclosure for Initial Franchise.
(a) No initial franchise will be granted to any applicant unless all requirements and
demands of the Village regarding financial contractual, shareholder, and system
disclosure have been met.
(b) Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest in the
applicant, shall fully disclose all agreements and undertakings, whether written,
oral, or implied, with any person, firm, group, association, or corporation with
respect to the franchise and the proposed cable television system. The Grantee of
the franchise shall disclose all other contracts to the Village as the contracts are
made. This section shall include, but not be limited to, any agreements between
local applicants and national companies.
(c) Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest in the
applicant, shall submit all requested information as provided by the terms of this
Ordinance or the application documents, which are incorporated herein by
reference. The requested information must be complete and verified as true by
the applicant.
(d) Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest in the
applicant, shall disclose the number of shares of stock, and the holders thereof,
and shall include the amount of consideration for each share of stock and the
nature of the consideration.
(e) Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest in the
applicant, shall disclose any information required by the application documents
regarding other cable systems in which they hold an interest of any nature,
including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Locations of all other franchises and the dates of award for each location;
2. Estimated construction costs and estimated completion dates for each
system;
3. Estimated number of miles of construction and number of miles
completed in each system as of the date of this application; and
4. Date for completion of construction as promised in the application for
each system.
(f) Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest in the
applicant, shall disclose any information required by the application documents
regarding pending applications for other cable systems, including, but not limited
to, the following:
1. Location of other franchise applications and date of application for each
system;
2. Estimated dates of franchise awards;
3. Estimated number of miles of construction; and
4. Estimated construction costs.
(45) Theft of Services and Tampering.
(a) No person may intentionally do any of the following:
1. Obtain or attempt to obtain cable television service from a Grantee by
trick, artifice, deception, use of an illegal device or illegal decoder or
other fraudulent means with compensation for rendering each type of
service obtained. The intent required for a violation of this paragraph
may be inferred from the presence on the property and in the actual
possession of the person or entity of a device not authorized by the
Grantee, the major purpose of which is to permit reception of cable
television services without payment. This interference is rebutted if the
alleged violator demonstrates that such person or entity purchased that
device for a legitimate use.
2. Give technical assistance or instruction to any person in obtaining or
attempting to obtain any cable television service without payment of all
lawful compensation to the Grantee providing that service. This
paragraph does not apply if the alleged violator demonstrates that the
technical assistance or instruction was given or the installation of the
connection, descrambler, or receiving device was for a legitimate
purpose.
3. Make or maintain a connection, whether physical, electrical, mechanical,
acoustical, or by other means with any cables, wires, components, or
other devices used for the distribution of cable television services for the
purpose of distributing cable service to any other dwelling unit without
authority from a Grantee.
4. Make or maintain a connection, whether physical, electrical, mechanical,
acoustical, or by other means with any cable, wires, components, or other
devices used for the distribution of cable television services for the
purpose of obtaining cable television service without payment of all
lawful compensation to the Grantee providing the service. The intent
required for a violation of this paragraph may be inferred from proof that
the cable service to the alleged violator’s residence or business was
connected under a service agreement with the alleged violator and has
been disconnected by the cable television company and that thereafter
there exists in fact a connection to the cable system at the alleged
violator’s residence or business.
5. Make or maintain any modification or alternation to any device installed
with the authorization of a Grantee for the purpose of intercepting or
receiving any program or other service carried by that Grantee which that
person is not authorized by that Grantee to receive. The intent required
for a violation of his paragraph may be inferred from proof that, as a
matter of standard procedure, the Grantee places written warning labels
on its converters or decoders explaining that tampering with the device is
a violation of law and the converter or decoder is found to have been
tampered with, altered, or modified so as to allow the reception or
interception of programming carried by the Grantee without authority to
do so. The trier of fact may also infer that a converter or decoder has
been altered or modified from proof that the Grantee, as a matter of
standard procedure, seals the converters or decoders with a label or
mechanical device, that the seal was shown to the customer upon
delivery of the decoder, and that the seal has been removed or broken.
The inferences under this paragraph are rebutted if the grantee cannot
demonstrate that the intact seal was shown to the customer.
6. Possess without authority any device or printed circuit board designed to
receive from a cable television system any cable television programming
or services offered for sale over that cable television system, whether or
not the programming or services are encoded, filtered, scrambled or
otherwise made unintelligible, or perform or facilitate the performance of
any of the acts under paragraphs 1 to 5 above with the intent that the
device or printed circuit be used to receive the Grantee’s services without
payment. Intent to violate this paragraph for direct or indirect
commercial advantage or private financial gain may be inferred from
proof of the existence on the property and in the actual possession of the
alleged violator of such a device, if the totality of circumstances,
including quantities or volumes, indicates possession for resale.
7. Manufactures, imports into this state, distributes, advertises, sells, leases,
or offers for sale or lease any devices, printed circuit board, or any plan
or kit for a device or for a printed circuit designed to receive the cable
television programming or services offered for sale over a cable
television system from a cable television system, whether or not the
programming or services are encoded, filtered, scrambled, or otherwise
made unintelligible with the intent that the device, printed circuit, plan,
or kit be used for the reception of that Grantee’s services without
payment. The intent required for a violation of this paragraph may be
inferred from proof that the defendant has sold, leased, or offered for sale
or lease any device printed circuit board, plan, or kit for a device or for a
printed circuit board in violation of this paragraph, and, during the course
of the transaction for sale or lease, the alleged violator expressly states or
implies to the buyer that the product will enable the buyer to obtain cable
television service without charge.
(b) Civil Liability for Theft of Telecommunications Service (including Cable
Television Service).
1. Any Grantee who sustains a loss as a result of a violation of section 45
may bring a civil action against the person who committed the violation
as allowed by law.
2. Except as provided in subsection (b)3, if the Grantee who incurs the loss
prevails, the court shall grant the prevailing party actual damages, costs,
and disbursements.
3. If a Grantee who incurs a loss prevails against a person or entity who
willfully violated any provision of Section (45), the court shall grant the
Grantee all of the following:
a. Except as provided in subsection 3e and 3f, not more than
$10,000.00;
b. Actual damages;
c. Any profits of the violators that are attributable to the violation
and that are not taken into account in determining the amount of
actual damages under subsection 3b;
d. Notwithstanding the limitations under 799.25 or 814.04, Wis.
Stats., costs, disbursement, and reasonable attorney fees;
e. If the court finds that a violation was committed willfully and for
the purpose of commercial advantage, the court may increase the
amount granted under subsection 3a not to exceed $50,000.00;
and
f. If the court finds that the violator had no reason to believe that
the violator’s action constituted a violation of this section, the
court may reduce the amount granted under subsection 3a.
4. If damages under subsection 3c are requested, the Grantee who incurred
the injury and loss shall have the burden of proving the violator’s gross
revenue and the violator’s deductible expenses and the elements of profit
attributable to factors other than the violation.
5. In addition to other remedies available under this section, the court may
grant the injured Grantee a temporary or permanent injunction.
(46) Penalties. Any person or entity violating any term or provision of this Ordinance shall
be subject to the penalties set forth under Chapter 1.06 of the Municipal Code. Penalties
upon conviction of the Grantee shall be chargeable to the letter of credit, security deposit,
or performance bond. The rights reserved to the Village under this section are in addition
to all other rights of the Village whether reserved by this franchise or authorized by law
or authorized by law or equity, and not action, proceeding, or exercise of a right with
respect to penalties shall affect any other right the Village may have. Notwithstanding,
Chapter 1.06 of the Municipal Code as it pertains to minimum forfeitures the following
offenses shall upon conviction carry the following minimum forfeitures:
(a) Failure to furnish, maintain, or offer all cable services to any potential subscriber
within the Village upon order of the Village - $200.00 per day.
(b) Failure to obtain or file evidence of required insurance, construction bond,
performance bond, or other required financial security - $200.00 per day.
(c) Failure to provide access to data, documents, records, or reports to the Village as
required by Sections (19), (29), (30), (31), and (37) - $200.00 per day.
(d) Failure to comply with applicable construction, operation, or maintenance
standards - $300.00 per day.
(e) Failure to comply with a rate decision or refund order - $500.00 per day.
(f) Any violations for noncompliance with the customer service standards of
Sections (23) through (25) - $200.00 per day.
(47) Procedures.
(a) Whenever the Village believes that the Grantee has violated one (1) or more
terms, conditions, or provisions of this Franchise and wishes to impose penalties,
a written notice shall be given to the Grantee informing it of such alleged
violation or liability. The written notice shall describe in reasonable detail the
specific violation so as to afford the Grantee an opportunity to remedy the
violation. The Grantee shall have 30 days subsequent to receipt of the notice in
which to correct the violation before the Village may impose penalties unless the
violation is of such a nature so as to require more than 30 days and the Grantee
proceeds diligently within the 30 days to correct the violation, or as promptly as
possible thereafter to correct the violation. In any case where the violation is not
cured within 60 days of notice from the Village or such other time as the Grantee
and the Village may mutually agree to, the Village may proceed to imposed
liquidated damages.
(b) The Grantee may, within 10 days of receipt of notice, notify the Village there is a
dispute as to whether a violation or failure has, in fact, occurred. Such notice by
the Grantee to the Village shall specify with particularity the matters disputed by
the Grantee and shall stay the running of the 30 days cure period pending Village
Board decision as required below. The Village Board shall hear the Grantees
dispute. Grantee must be given at least five (5) days notice of the hearing. At
the hearing, the Grantee shall be entitled to the right to present evidence and the
right to be represented by counsel. After the hearing, the Village shall provide
Grantee a copy of its action, along with supporting documents. In the event the
Village upholds the finding of a violation, the Grantee shall have 30 days
subsequent, or other time period as the Grantee and the Village mutually agree,
to correct the alleged violation before penalties may be imposed.
(c) The rights reserved to the Village under this section are in addition to all other
rights of the Village whether reserved by this franchise or authorized by law or
equity, and not action, proceeding, or exercise of a right with respect to penalties
shall affect any other right the Village may have.
(d) The Village shall stay or waive the imposition of any penalty set forth above
upon a finding that any failure or delay is a result of an act of nature or due to
circumstances beyond the reasonable
11.12 ALARM SYSTEMS.
(1) Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish a reasonable regulation of private
alarm systems in the Village of Hales Corners. It is recognized that private alarm
systems can significantly contribute to the protection of persons and property with the
Village provide that the use of the alarm systems is properly coordinated with the
Village’s Police and Fire Departments as to minimize the unwarranted use of police and
fire fighting personnel and resources in responding to false alarms.
(2) Legislative Findings. It is hereby found, as a fact, that those properties which are
serviced with mechanical alarm systems for alerting either the police department of the
fire department have substantially more service responses made by those departments
than other properties. This is due to a variety of reasons – alarms can be given easier by
mechanical systems than by direct personal notification or personal notification through
the telephone system; mechanical alarm systems are susceptible to the intentional or
inadvertent false alarms caused by employees, customers, and others; mechanical alarm
systems are also susceptible to false alarms activated by weather conditions and defects
in basic equipment or in related telephone equipment. For all these reasons, the
properties serviced by mechanical alarm systems tend to cause the Village more expense
than properties not so serviced.
(3) Definitions.
(a) “Alarm Systems” shall mean fire and/or burglar and/or other detection systems
that are designed to be connected to the police department alarm panel or a
commercial alarm company to alert the police and fire departments of danger to
persons or property.
(b) “Intrusion Alarm System” shall mean any device designed automatically to
detect an unauthorized entry into a residence or place of business and
automatically sound an alarm at the police station or a commercial alarm service.
(c) “Fire, smoke, water flow, and heat detection systems” shall mean any device
designated automatically to detect the existence of fire, smoke, automatic
activation of water flow in a sprinkler system and extreme heat which
automatically sounds an alarm at the police station or commercial alarm
company.
(d) “Local alarm systems” shall mean any detecting device that gives a signal which
is visible or audible to persons in the vicinity of the premises.
(e) “Multi-user emergency medical service (EMS Alarm Systems” shall mean any
emergency alarm system that may be activated by multiple users at multiple
locations within a building or structure that signals an alarm for police, fire, or
emergency medical services. This includes, but is not limited to, emergency
pull-cord systems at multi-family dwellings, assisted living facilities, nursing
homes, or other health care facilities.”
(4) General Prohibitions.
(a) Except for those residences connected to the alarm system of the Hales Corners
Police Department on the effective date of this ordinance, no additional
residential connections shall be allowed to such municipal alarm systems without
the approval of the police chief, who shall only allow such connection by reason
of an unusual danger to persons or property. Such limitation shall not apply to
fire, smoke, water flow, and heat detection systems.
(b) No person, firm, or corporation shall use or cause to be used any telephone or
electronic device or attachment that automatically selects a primary telephone
trunk line of the police or fire department, and then reproduces a prerecorded
message to report any burglary or other emergency.
(c) No person, firm, or corporation shall provide a private alarm system programmed
to a central office unless it shall also maintain a patrol and maintenance service
capable of immediately dispatching a company representative to respond within
30 minutes to the location of any alarm transmitted to the central office during
the hours such system is in operation.
(d) All alarm systems requiring a permit which are installed within the Village shall
have the Underwriter’s Laboratories Approval.
(e) All local alarm systems must be designed and maintained to automatically reset
or shut off the local portion of the alarm signal within 10 minutes of being
activated.
(5) Exemption from Permit Requirements.
(a) Private smoke detectors.
(b) Alarm systems which are used solely to warn inhabitants of a structure of an
occurrence where the signal does not carry to adjoining property or public ways.
(6) Permit Required.
(a) At least 10 days prior to the installation of an Intrusion Alarm System, or a Fire,
Smoke, Water Flow, and Heat Detection Alarm System or a Local Alarm
System, application must be made for a permit to install such system. Such
application shall include the following:
1. The name of the applicant.
2. The address of the premises where the alarm system will be installed.
3. Satisfactory proof that the contemplated system conforms with the
Village Code requirements.
4. The identity of a person or persons to be contacted in the event of an
alarm signal.
5. Such other information as the chiefs of the police and fire department
may deem necessary for safe and proper emergency response by their
department.
(b) An alarm permit shall be issued by the Village Clerk for a period of one (1) year
renewable automatically for each succeeding 12 months, except that any change
resulting in a decrease of services by, or the identity of, the commercial alarm
company, shall require a new permit, upon the filing of an alarm permit
application which has been approved by the Chief of the Fire Department in the
case of fire, smoke, water flow, and heat detecting alarms and by the Chief of the
Police Department in the case of all other alarms and upon payment of the permit
fee.
(c) The Chief of the Fire Department, in the case of fire smoke, water flow, and heat
detection alarms, and the Chief of the Police Department, in the case of all other
alarms, may cancel any permit under this section if in the judgment of such chief
the continued operation of the alarm system is not consistent with the stated
purpose of this section or if due to malfunction, improper maintenance, or other
cause, there are an unreasonable number of false alarms. Prior to cancellation,
the permit holder shall be given written notice of the intended cancellation and
shall be given an opportunity to be heard in a due process hearing pursuant to
Article XII of the Village Bylaws.
(d) These persons, firms, or corporation presently having alarm systems which are
prohibited in this section shall be permitted to maintain the connection until
January 1, 1985, after which date failure to disconnect shall be considered a
violation of this section.
(7) Permit Fees.
(a) Alarm Devices. Whenever an alarm device is used for fire or police protection
necessitating installation within the municipal building, the fire alarm system
must be approved by the Fire Chief and the police alarm system must be
approved by the Police Chief. Such system must have the approval of a
recognized rating bureau. An application describing said systems shall be filed
with the Village accompanied by a fee of $225.00 for Fire Alarm Systems and
$225.00 for Police Alarm Systems which shall be used to reimburse the Village
for the cost of installation within the municipal building. An annual fee of
$35.00 per year is hereby established for users of fire and police alarms so as to
provide funds for necessary maintenance of Village equipment used in
conjunction with the alarms.
(b) Other Alarm Systems Requiring Permits. An annual fee of $15.00 is hereby
established for other alarm devices requiring a permit.
(8) Conditions Which Must be Accepted by a Permit Holder.
(a) The Village shall not be responsible for normal line mileage charges assessed by
the telephone company to subscribers from their alarm terminal to the Hales
Corners Dispatch Center. Such costs are not included in the schedule of
installation and maintenance fees under subsection (7) hereof.
(b) Upon completion of installation, the system shall be tested by a factory
representative or by the installer, in the presence of the permit holder or his
authorized agent and by a representative of the Fire or Police Department to
insure that said system operates in conformance to the specifications as approved.
Subsequent tests shall be made at the frequency recommended by the appropriate
standard or the Fire and/or Police Chief.
(c) In even the Fire and/or Police Department responds to an alarm at the premises
covered by the alarm system, and in further event, neither the permit holder nor
his/her authorized agent is present, the permit holder consents to a municipal
breaking and entering of the premises to ascertain the cause of the alarm.
(d) The permit holder consents to the imposition of the false alarm service charge
hereinafter imposed.
(9) False Alarms.
(a) No person owning, using, or possessing an alarm system shall intentionally cause
or permit the giving of a false alarm.
(b) Any person, firm, or corporation having an alarm system requiring a permit shall
be charged a fee for false alarms in accordance with the following schedule:
1. Fire Alarms. For false alarms which result in the response of Fire
Department personnel and equipment, an amount equal to the actual cost
of the response as determined by the Fire Chief shall be paid for each
false alarm in excess of three (3) during any calendar year.
2. Other Alarms. For any other false alarm resulting in the response of
Police Department personnel, the following fees shall apply to false
alarms during any calendar year.
0 to 2 No charge
3 or more $100 per false alarm
3. Exemption. When the Chief of Police or Fire Chief determines that the
cause of false alarm was beyond the control of a permittee, that false
alarm may be exempted from this provision.
4. Multi-User EMS Alarm System Alarms. For false alarms which result in
no medical attention or transport by the Village, the Fire Department
shall assess the following fees to the alarm system owner/permit holder
during any calendar year:
0-2 No Charge
3 or more $100 per false alarm
(10) Penalty. Anyone violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a penalty as
provided in section 19.04 of this Code.
11.13 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS – LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
(1) Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this section.
(a) Food Establishment. Shall mean any restaurant, tavern, coffee shop, cafeteria,
delicatessen, sandwich stand, luncheonette, soda fountain, and all other eating or
drinking places, as businesses, bakeries, confectionaries, and any building, room,
or place where food is processed, prepared, sold, served, stored, and all places
used in connection therewith. However, the term shall not include vending
machines or kitchens of private homes for family use only.
(b) Food. Shall mean any raw, cooked, or processed edible substance, beverage, or
ingredient used or intended for use in whole, or part, as food or drink by man.
(c) Person. Shall mean person, firm, or corporation.
(d) Health Officer. Shall mean the Health Officer of the Village of Hales Corners or
authorized agent.
(e) Chief of Police. Shall mean the Chief of Police of the Village of Hales Corners
or authorized agent.
(f) Potentially Hazardous Food. Shall mean any perishable food which consists in
whole or part of milk, milk products, eggs, meat, poultry, fish, shellfish, or other
ingredients capable of supporting rapid and progressive growth of infectious or
toxigenic microorganisms.
(g) Adulterated Food. Shall mean any food that consists in whole or in part of any
filthy, putrid, or decomposed substance, or if it has been prepared, packed, or
held under unsanitary conditions whereby it may have become contaminated with
filth.
(h) Food Service Equipment. Shall mean all cutlery, tableware, kitchenware, and
other utensils, containers, slicers, hoods, ranges, refrigerators, freezers, cutting
boards, and any other auxiliary equipment used in direct conjunction with food
handling in any food establishment.
(i) Food Processing. Shall mean any operation whereby unpackaged, unwrapped, or
otherwise unprotected food comes in contact with hands, utensils, machinery, or
any other food service equipment for purposes of canning, extracting, portioning,
freezing, drying, smoking, grinding, blending, mixing, packaging, cooking,
frying, or otherwise treating or preserving the same for subsequent sales as food.
(j) Employee. Shall mean any person working in a food establishment.
(k) Wholesome. Shall mean in sound condition, clean and free from adulteration,
and otherwise suitable for use as food.
(l) Village. Shall mean the Village of Hales Corners.
(2) License Required. Unless provided in this section, no person shall operate a food
establishment who does not possess a valid food establishment license from the Village.
(3) License Exemption. Churches, schools, fraternal, charitable, social, or nonprofit
organizations holding occasional fundraising sales, such as bake sales, or school lunch
programs, both public and private, or persons selling personal property at wholesale to
dealers in such articles, shall be exempt from the licensing requirements of this section.
Occasional shall mean less than four (4) days during any 12-month period.
(4) License Fee Exemption. Churches, schools, fraternal, charitable, social, or nonprofit
organizations operated as food establishments four (4) or more days during any 12 month
period shall be required to possess a valid food establishment license but shall be exempt
from the food establishment license fee.
(5) Application. Application for a food establishment license shall be made to the Village
Clerk in writing and shall include the full name or names of the person or persons making
application, business address of such applicant, nature of business to be licensed, location
of business to be licensed, and, if a corporation, the full names and addresses of its
officers and manager or managers.
(6) Investigation. The application shall be referred to the Chief of Police who upon receipt
of each such application shall institute such investigation of the applicant’s business and
moral character as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good and shall
endorse his approval or disapproval upon said application within 72 hours after it has
been filed with him, and shall return the application to the Village Clerk with his
findings.
(7) Issuance. Such license shall be issued by the Village Clerk upon payment of the license
fee herein provided, after approval of the Chief of Police, after the Health Officer has
certified that the food establishment meets the requirements of all applicable regulations,
and that the applicant shall not have due and owing any personal property and/or real
estate taxes to the Village. Licenses shall be issued only in the name of the operator of
the food establishment and shall not be transferable from one person or place to another.
(8) Wisconsin Administrative Code Provisions Adopted. Chapter HSS 196 Restaurants,
Chapter AG 32 Retail Food Establishments, and Chapter AG 39 Bakeries and
Confectionaries, of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, are hereby adopted and made
part of this Code by reference as if fully set forth herein. Failure to comply with any of
the provisions of these chapters shall constitute a violation of this section. Copies of
these chapters shall be permanently on file and open to public inspection in the office of
the Village Clerk.
(9) Inspection. The Health Officer is hereby given the right to enter all places for which a
food establishment license has been issued, at reasonable times, for the purpose of
making inspections. If upon such inspection, the Health Officer finds that any licensed
food establishment is operated or managed in violation of the ordinances or regulations of
the Village, it shall be the Health Officer’s duty to serve an order upon the licensee, his
agent or employee in charge of the licensed premises, directing him within a reasonable
time to comply with said ordinances or regulations.
(10) Suspension of License. A food establishment license may be temporarily suspended by
the Health Officer without prior notice for violation of any of the terms of this section
where such violation has been determined by the Health Officer to be a direct and
immediate hazard to public health. A food establishment license may also be suspended
with prior notice pending correction of any violations which constitute a health hazard
which is serious, but not immediate, or recurring or repeated violations. The licensee
whose food establishment license has been suspended may at any time make application
for reinstatement of the license. Within 48 hours after the receipt of a written application
for reinstatement, including a statement signed by the applicant that the violated
provisions of this section have been corrected, the Health Officer shall make a
reinspection and thereafter as many additional reinspections as he deems necessary to
assure himself that the applicant has complied with the regulations of this section and, in
the event the inspections indicate compliance, shall reinstate the license.
(11) Revocation of License. A food establishment license may be revoked on grounds of
serious or repeated violations after an opportunity is granted the licensee has a hearing.
Such hearing shall be conducted by the Board of Appeals as set forth in Chapter I, Article
XII of this code.
(12) Posting. Food Establishment licenses must be posted at all times in a conspicuous place
on the premises of the licensed food establishment.
(13) License Fee. The annual fee for a food establishment license shall be paid to the Village
Clerk/Treasurer, due and payable before July 1 of each year. There shall be no proration
of license fees.
(a) If the food establishment is defined as a restaurant, restaurant with limited food
service, temporary service, or additional physically separate food holing, serving,
and preparation area by the HFS 196.04, Wis. Admin, Code, as amended, the fee
shall be paid as follows:
Type Annual Fee Pre-inspection Fee
Restaurant-Simple $220.00 $165.00
Restaurant-Moderate $330.00 $275.00
Restaurant-Complex $440.00 $385.00
Restaurant-Limited Food Service $110.00 $140.00
Restaurant-Temporary $110.00 none
Separate Food Holding Area $110.00 none
except that churches, fraternal, charitable, social, or nonprofit organizations shall
pay an amount equal to applicable service level restaurant permit fee pursuant to
HFS 196.04, Wis. Admin. Code., as amended.
(b) If the food establishment is not defined by paragraph (a), the fee shall be as
follows:
Type Annual Fee
Anticipated Gross Annual Sales of Less than $20,000 $33.00
Anticipated Gross Annual Sales of $20,000 or More $140.00
except that churches, fraternal, charitable, social, or nonprofit organizations shall
be exempt from the food establishment fee.
(c) Any application for renewal of a food establishment license under this section
after June 30 shall be subject to a late filing fee in an amount equal to the greater
of $75 or 50% of the license fee.
(14) Food Establishment Regulations. Any person to whom a Hales Corners food
establishment license has been issued under §11.12 of the Municipal Code of the Village,
shall maintain and operate such establishment in accordance with these regulations.
(15) Wholesomeness of Food. All food shall be clean, wholesome, free from spoilage or
adulteration, and so prepared as to be safe for human consumption. Samples of food and
other substances may be taken and examined by the Health Officer as often as may be
necessary for the detection of unwholesomeness or adulteration. The Health Officer may
condemn and forbid the sale of, or cause to be removed or destroyed, any food which is
found to be unwholesome or adulterated.
(16) Sanitarian.
(a) Floors. The floors of all rooms in which food is processed or prepared or in
which utensils are washed shall be of such constructions as to be easily cleaned,
shall be reasonably impervious to moisture and grease, shall be smooth, and shall
be kept clean and in good repair. The floors of all rooms in which food is stored
or served shall be kept clean and in good repair.
(b) Walls and Ceilings. The walls and ceilings of all rooms in which food is
prepared or processed or in which utensils are washed shall be kept clean and in
good repair. The walls and ceilings of all rooms in which food is stored or
served shall be kept clean and in good repair.
(c) Doors and Windows. Exterior doors, toilet room doors, and doors providing
ingress or egress to food preparation areas shall be self-closing. All openings to
the outside shall be effectively screened or otherwise protected to prevent the
entrance of insects and rodents.
(d) Toilet Rooms. Every food establishment shall be provided with adequate and
conveniently located toilet facilities for its employees in conformance with the
ordinances of the Village and the State of Wisconsin building and plumbing
codes. Toilet rooms shall be kept clean, in good repair, and well lighted and
ventilated. Storage therein shall be limited to those items that pertain to the
maintenance of a toilet room.
(e) Handwashing Facilities. Each food establishment shall be provided with
handwahsing facilities within or immediately adjacent to toilet rooms and within
the food preparation or processing areas. Each handwashing facility shall be
equipped with hot and cold running water, soap, and single service hand towels
or hot air dryers.
(17) Food Service Equipment Requirements.
(a) Construction and Maintenance. All food service equipment, including, but not
limited to, display cases, counters, shelves, tables, refrigerators, stoves,
ventilation hoods, and sinks, shall be so constructed as to be easily cleaned and
shall be kept clean and in good repair. Equipment and utensils not suitable for
use or not capable of being maintained in a sanitary condition, as determined by
the Health Officer, shall be removed from the premises.
(b) Installation. Equipment shall be so installed as to facilitate the cleaning thereof
and of all adjacent areas with the equipment in place, unless the equipment is
readily removable for this purpose. Fixed equipment shall be elevated at least six
(6) inches off the floor to facilitate cleaning of the floor below.
(c) Sinks. All new or replacement sinks intended for manual washing of utensils
shall have four (4) compartments and be sized to permit submersion of at least
50% of the largest utensil to be washed. Stainless steel drainboards, adequately
sized for the amount and type of utensils used, shall be provided at the soiled
utensil side and the clean utensil side of the utensil washing sinks. Each
compartment shall be provided with hot and cold running water.
(d) Single Service. All single service utensils shall be stored, handled, and dispensed
in a sanitary manner and shall be used only once.
(e) Ice Cream Scoops. Scoops used for dispensing bulk ice cream shall be kept in
running water dipper wells.
(f) All new or replacement food service equipment which meets the standards and
requirements of the National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) is approved for use in
any food establishment. All other new or replacement food service equipment
shall be subject to approval by the Health Officer.
(18) Cleaning of Food Service Equipment.
(a) Multi-use Utensils. All multi-use eating and drinking utensils shall be
thoroughly cleaned and sanitized after each usage. After sanitizing and air
drying, utensils shall be stored in a clean, dry place protected from insects, dust,
and other contamination.
(b) Food Contact Equipment. All food contact equipment, other than multi-use
eating and drinking utensils, including slicers, mixers, choppers, meat saws, can
openers, food molding and shaping equipment, cutting boards, peelers, shredders,
salad bars, trays, and any other food service equipment that comes in direct
contact with food during processing, preparation, or serving shall be thoroughly
cleaned and effectively subjected to a bactericidal process daily and at such other
times as may be necessary in order to minimize bacterial growth or
contamination between products.
(19) Food Protection.
(a) Food Storage. Unless otherwise protected, food shall not be stored under sewage
waste lines, pipes subject to condensate, or under other potential sources of
contamination. To facilitate floor cleaning, discourage insect infestations, and to
offer protection from sewage, waste water, or other seepages, all storage of food
shall be on movable pallets, skids, shelves, or racks. When permanent shelves or
racks are used, such storage shall be at least six (6) inches above the floor.
(b) Temperature. Unless otherwise indicated in these regulations, all potentially
hazardous foods, except during necessary periods of preparation, shall be kept
under refrigeration at 40 degrees Fahrenheit or colder or shall be kept heated at
150 degrees Fahrenheit or hotter. An indicating thermometer accurate to plus or
minus two (2) degrees Fahrenheit shall be provided in each cold food storage
facility. Each hot food storage facility shall be provided with an indicating
thermometer accurate to plus or minus two (2) degrees Fahrenheit. Where it is
impractical to install thermometers on equipment such as bainmaries, steam
tables, steam kettles, heat lamps, or insulated food transport carriers, a bayonet
type product thermometer shall be available and used to check the internal food
temperature.
(c) Thawing. All frozen food requiring thawing before cooking shall be thawed
under refrigeration, under cold running tap water, or by use of a microwave oven.
(d) Food Reuse. Unwrapped or otherwise unprotected food once served, dispensed,
or sold to a customer shall not be reserved, redispensed, or resold. Seasonings
and condiments such as salt, sugar, cream, relishes, mustard, ketchup, etc., may
be reserved if approved dispensers are used. Dispensers shall be kept clean, and,
if dispensing non-dry product, shall be washed and sanitized before being
refilled.
(e) Raw Food. Raw fruits and vegetables shall be washed before using.
(f) Displayed Food. Where unwrapped or otherwise unprotected food is placed on
display in all types of food service operations, including smorgasbords, buffets,
cafeterias, and any other display, whether self-service or not, it shall be protected
from contamination from customers and other sources by effective, easily
cleanable counter protection devices, display cases, coverings, or other similar
type of protective equipment. Refrigeration or heat requirements shall be met on
all potentially hazardous food items when so displayed. On self-service
operations, tongs, forks, spoons, picks, spatulas, scoops, and other suitable
utensils shall be provided for customer use. Food shall be so displayed in selfservice
operations as to prevent the necessity of reaching over unprotected food.
The requirement of counter protection devices or other permanently installed
protective devices shall not apply to catered operations unless permanently
operated and regularly scheduled at one location.
(g) Transported Food. Any food product while being transported or distributed in
vans, trucks, or other vehicles shall be protected from dust, flies, vermin, droplet
infection, and any other adulteration and shall not be handled in an unsanitary
manner.
(h) Vehicles. Every van, truck, or other vehicle operated on the street or any place
within the Village for the transportation or storage of food shall be maintained in
a clean and sanitary manner at all times.
(i) Use of Hands. The use of hands where a suitable utensil could be substituted in
the processing, preparation, serving, or dispensing of any food is prohibited.
(20) Lighting.
(a) Light Levels. Sources of artificial light shall be provided and used to the extent
necessary to provide a minimum of 20-foot candles of light on all working
surfaces of food preparation, processing, utensil washing, and hand washing
areas, and a minimum of five (5) foot candles of light at a distance of 30 inches
from the floor in all storage, dining, and nonworking surfaces of food
preparation, processing, or utensil washing areas during cleaning operations.
(b) Protective Shields. Shielding to protect against broken glass falling onto food
shall be provided for all artificial lighting fixtures located in food preparation and
storage areas.
(21) Ventilation. All rooms in which food is stored, prepared, or served shall be well
ventilated. A hood of adequate size and capacity shall be installed over each cooking
area conforming with the ordinances of the Village and the State building codes. Filters,
when used, shall be readily removable for cleaning or replacement. Toilet room
ventilation shall be installed according to State building codes. Ventilation systems shall
comply with applicable fire prevention requirements and shall discharge in such a manner
as not to create a nuisance.
(22) Personnel Hygiene.
(a) Tobacco. All employees shall refrain from using tobacco in any form while on
duty in food preparation and storage rooms, while serving food, and while
engaged in equipment or utensil washing. Smoking areas where no
contamination hazards will result may be approved by the Health Officer.
(b) Clothing. All employees shall wear clean outer garments and wear hair nets,
caps, or other suitable hair restraints while engaged in the handling of food or
food service equipment. Soiled garments shall be kept in containers provided for
that purpose.
(c) Hand Washing. Employees shall wash their hands thoroughly before starting
work, after using the toilet, after smoking, and as often as may be necessary to
remove soil and contamination.
(23) Garbage and Refuse. Garbage and refuse shall be kept in covered containers that are
durable, easily cleanable, insect-proof, rodent-proof, and watertight. Such containers
inside food establishments shall be cleaned daily or shall have leak-poof liners. Outside
refuse and garbage containers shall be emptied and cleaned often enough to prevent the
development of odor and the attraction of insects and rodents.
(24) Insect and Rodent Control.
(a) Control. Effective control measures shall be taken by the owners, operators,
managers, or agents of all food establishments to protect against the entrance and
breeding, or presence on the premises of insects and rodents. All openings to the
outside shall be effectively screened or otherwise protected to prevent the
entrance of insects and rodents.
(b) Pesticide Application. The application of any pesticide in a food establishment
shall be made according to the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide
Act label instructions.
(25) Harboring of Animals. The harboring of birds, cats, dogs, or other animals, except
seeing eye dogs, in any area where food is prepared, stored, or displayed is prohibited.
(26) New Operator. When a new operator requests a license for an existing licensed food
establishment, the acceptance by the Village of existing conditions shall cease, and the
establishment must comply as a new food establishment.
(27) Establishments Located Outside the Village. All food offered for sale, processed, or
prepared within the Village shall be from approved sources. The Health Officer may
request a certification of compliance from any food supplier offering food for sale within
the Village. Such proof of compliance may consist of a statement to that effect made by
the local, state, or federal health authority within whose jurisdiction the source is located.
(28) Approved Comparable Compliance. When strict adherence with the regulations of this
section appear to be impractical and satisfactory proof is provided, the Health Officer
may approve modifications as needed to safeguard public health, safety, and welfare.
(29) Conflicts. Whenever conflicts between these rules and regulations and other Village
ordinances or state and federal regulations occur, the most stringent rule shall apply.
(30) Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall be subject to a
penalty as provided in section 19.04 of this Code.
11.14 PUBLIC SWIMMING POOLS.
(1) Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and the
enforcement of this section.
(a) Chief of Police. Shall mean the Chief of Police of the Village of Hales Corners
or authorized agent.
(b) Health Officer. Shall mean the Health Officer of the Village of Hales Corners or
authorized agent.
(c) Operator. Shall mean the licensee of a public swimming pool or authorized
agent.
(d) Person. Shall mean a municipality, corporation, company, association, firm, or
individual owning, controlling, or operating any public swimming pool.
(e) Public Swimming Pool. Shall mean an indoor or outdoor entirely manmade pool
used for swimming, diving, or wading, including those, such as whirlpools, used
for non-recreational or therapeutic purposes, and excepting those serving less
than three (3) individual residential quarters such as homes or apartments.
Included are buildings, equipment, and appurtenances. Public swimming pools
include those serving or installed for the Village, including school districts, those
serving or installed for hotels, motels, resorts, housing developments, religious,
charitable, or youth organizations, or similar establishments, irrespective of
whether or not a fee is charged for the use thereof.
(f) Village. Shall mean the Village of Hales Corners.
(2) License Required. No person shall operate a public swimming pool who does not
possess a valid public swimming pool license from the Village.
(3) License Fee Exemption. Any public swimming pools operated by the Village shall be
required to possess a valid public swimming pool license but shall be exempt from the
public swimming pool license fee.
(4) Application. Application for a public swimming pool license shall be made to the
Village Clerk in writing and shall include the full name or names of the person making
application, the address of such applicant, the address of the public swimming pool, and,
if a corporation, the full names and addresses of its officers.
(5) Investigation. The application shall be referred to the Chief of Police who upon receipt
of each such application shall institute such investigation of the applicant’s business and
moral character as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good, and shall
endorse his approval or disapproval upon said application within 72 hours after it has
been filed with him, and shall return the application to the Village Clerk with his
findings.
(6) Issuance. Such license shall be issued by the Village Clerk upon payment of the fee
herein provided, after approval of the Chief of Police, after the Health Officer has
certified that the public swimming pool meets the requirements of all applicable
regulations, and that the applicant shall not have due or owing any personal property
and/or real estate taxes to the Village. Licenses shall be issued only in the name of the
applicant and shall not be transferable from one person or place to another.
(7) Public Swimming Pool Regulations. Any person to whom a public swimming pool
license has been issued under section 11.13 of the Municipal Code of the Village shall
maintain and operate such swimming pool in accordance with these regulations.
(8) Wisconsin Administrative Code Provisions Adopted. Chapter HSS 171 Public
Swimming Places and Chapter HSS 172 Safety Maintenance and Operation of Public
Swimming Pools, of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, are hereby adopted and made
part of this code by reference as if fully set forth herein. Failure to comply with any of
the provisions of these chapters shall constitute a violation of this section. Copies of
these chapters shall be permanently on file and open to public inspection in the office of
the Village Clerk.
(9) Operator Designated. The licensee or an authorized agent shall be designated in writing
by the licensee to the Health Officer as the individual charged with the supervision,
operation, and maintenance of the public swimming pool. The appointment of an agent
shall in no way relieve the licensee of the responsibility of maintaining and operating the
public swimming pool in accordance with the regulations of this section.
(10) Inspection. The Health Officer is hereby given the right to enter all public swimming
pools for which a license has been issued at reasonable times, for the purpose of making
inspections. If upon such inspection, the Health Officer finds that any licensed public
swimming pool is conducted, operated, or managed in violation of the ordinances and
regulations of the Village, it shall be his duty to serve an order upon the licensee, his
agent, or employee in charge of the licensed premises, directing him within a reasonable
time to comply with said ordinances or regulations.
(11) Suspension of License. A license may be temporarily suspended by the Health Officer
without prior notice for violation of any of the terms of this section where such violation
has been determined by the Health Officer to be a direct and immediate hazard to public
health. A license may also be suspended with prior notice pending correction of any
violations which constitute a health hazard which is serious, but not immediate, or
recurring or repeated violations. The licensee whose license has been suspended may at
any time make application for reinstatement of the license. Within 48 hours after the
receipt of a written application for reinstatement, including a signed statement by the
applicant that the violated provisions of this section have been corrected, the Health
Officer shall make a reinspection and thereafter as many additional reinspections as he
deems necessary to assure himself that the applicant is complying with the requirements,
and in the event findings indicate compliance, shall reinstate the license.
(12) Revocation of License. A license may be revoked on grounds of serious or repeated
violations after an opportunity is granted the license holder for a hearing. Such hearings
shall be conducted by the Board of Appeals as set forth in Chapter I, Article XII of this
Code.
(13) Posting. Public swimming pool licenses must be posted at all times in a conspicuous
place on the premises of the licensed public swimming pool.
(14) License Fee. The annual fee for a public swimming pool license shall be $200.00 paid to
the Village Clerk/Treasurer, due and payable before July 1 of each year. There shall be
no proration of license fees.
11.15 SPECIAL EVENT PARKING.
(1) Permit Required. A special event parking permit shall be required within the noparking
lanes of State Trunk Highway 24. The Village will forward to the Wisconsin
Department of Transportation no more than three (3) permit requests per year for any
applicant and in no case shall the duration of such allowed parking exceed three (3)
consecutive calendar days. Such requests shall be forwarded by the Village
Administrator with notification provided to the Board of Trustees. Permits shall only be
issued to applicants who are occupants of property abutting the old centerline or the
current centerline of the State Trunk Highway 24. The permit fee shall be $100.00,
representing reimbursement to the Village.
(2) Conditions. As a condition to receiving such permit, the applicant shall agree not to
make claim against the State of Wisconsin or the Village of Hales Corners, its agents, or
employees, by reason of the use of such parking lanes, and shall further agree to hold
harmless the said governmental entities and its duly appointed agents and employees
against any action for personal injury or property damage sustained by reason of the
exercise of such permit. The Village Clerk shall prepare an application form
incorporating such conditions.
11.16 FILING FEE FOR TAX EXEMPTION REPORT. To defray the costs to the Village
of distributing and reviewing forms and of preparing the summary forms for the
Wisconsin Department of Revenue, the owner of tax exempt property filing a Tax
Exemption Report (PC-220) with the Village Clerk pursuant to §70.09, Wis. Stats., shall
pay a filing fee of $25.00 for each parcel listed in such report. An additional fee of
$10.00 will be charged for delinquent reports.
11.17 PAYMENT OF TAXES, SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS, AND SPECIAL CHARGES.
No license or permit authorized to be issued under this Chapter shall be issued unless all
general property taxes and interest and penalties thereon, special assessments, and special
charges then due or owing as provided by law and attributable to any premises to be
subject to the license shall have been paid.
11.18 ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS.
(1) Definitions.
(a) “Adult-oriented establishment” shall include, but is not limited to, “adult
bookstores”, “adult motion picture theaters”, “adult mini-motion picture
establishments”, or “adult cabarets”. It further means any premises to which
public patrons or members are invited to admitted and which are so physically
arranged so as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments, or stalls
separate from the common areas of the premises for the purpose of viewing
adult-oriented motion pictures, or wherein an entertainer provides adult
entertainment to a member of the public, a patron, or a member, whether or not
such adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated, or maintained for a profit,
direct or indirect.
(b) “Adult bookstore” means an establishment having as a substantial or significant
portion of its stock in trade, for sale, rent, lease, inspection, or viewing, books,
films, video cassettes, magazines, or other periodicals which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or related to
“specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities” as defined below, or
an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale, rental, or display
of such material.
(c) “Adult motion picture theater” means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50
or more persons used for presenting materials distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on, matters depicting, describing, or relating to “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas”, as defined below, for observation by
patrons therein.
(d) “Adult mini-motion picture theater” means an enclosed building with a capacity
of less than 50 persons used for presenting material having as its dominant
theme, or distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on, matters depicting,
describing, or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas”, as defined below, for observation by patrons therein.
(e) “Adult cabaret” means a cabaret which features topless dancers, strippers, male
or female impersonators, or similar entertainers.
(f) “Adult entertainment” means any exhibition of any motion picture, live
performance, display, or dance of any type, which has as its dominant theme, or
is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on, any actual or simulated
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” as defined below.
(g) “Specified sexual activities” means simulated or actual:
1. Showing of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
2. Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, necrophilia,
sado-masochistic abuse, fellatio, or cunnilingus;
3. Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks,
or female breasts.
(h) “Specified anatomical areas” means:
1. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, female breasts below the point immediately above the
top of the areola;
2. Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if opaquely
covered.
(i) “Operators” means any person, partnership, or corporation operating, conducting,
maintaining, or owning any adult-oriented establishment.
(2) License.
(a) Except as provided in subsection (d) below, from and after the effective date of
this ordinance, no adult-oriented establishment shall be operated or maintained in
the Village of Hales Corners without first obtaining a license to operate issued by
the Village of Hales Corners.
(b) A license may be issued only for one (1) adult-oriented establishment located at a
fixed and certain place. Any person, partnership, or corporation which desires to
operate more than one (1) adult-oriented establishment must have a license for
each.
(c) No license or interest in a license may be transferred to any person, partnership,
or corporation.
(d) All adult-oriented establishments existing at the time of the passage of this
ordinance must submit an application for a license within 90 days of the passage
of this ordinance. If an application is not received within said 90-day period,
then such existing adult-oriented establishment shall cease operations.
(3) Application for License.
(a) Any person, partnership, or corporation desiring to secure a license shall make
application to the Village Clerk. The application shall be filed in triplicate with
and dated by the Village Clerk. A copy of the application shall be distributed
promptly to the Hales Corners Police Department and to the applicant.
(b) The application for a license shall be upon the form provided by the Village
Clerk. An applicant for a license shall furnish the following information under
oath:
1. Name and address;
2. Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age;
3. The exact nature of the adult-oriented use to be conducted and the
address of the adult-oriented establishment to be operated by the
applicant;
4. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall specify the name of
the corporation, the date and state of incorporation, the name and
addresses of the registered agent, and the name and address of any
shareholder who individually or jointly owns or controls more than 49%
of the stock in said corporation and all persons responsible for the
management and operation of the adult-oriented establishment;
5. If the applicant is a partnership or joint venture or any other type of
organization where two (2) or more persons have a financial interest, the
application shall specify the name of the entity, the name and address of
any general partner(s), and all persons responsible for the management
and operation of the adult-oriented establishment.
(c) Within 45 days of receiving an application for a license, the Village Clerk shall
notify the applicant whether the application is granted or denied.
(d) Whenever an application is denied, the Village Clerk shall advise the applicant in
writing of the reasons for such action. If the applicant requests a hearing within
10 days of receipt of notification of denial, a public hearing shall be held within
10 days thereafter before the Village Board as hereinafter provided.
(e) Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant to the
investigation of the application or his or her refusal or failure to appear at any
reasonable time and place for examination under oath regarding said application
or his or her refusal to submit to or cooperate with any investigation required by
this ordinance shall constitute an admission by the applicant that he or she is
ineligible for such license and shall be grounds for denial thereof by the Village
Clerk.
(4) Standards for Issuance of License.
(a) To receive a license to operate an adult-oriented establishment, an applicant must
meet the following standards:
1. If the applicant is an individual:
a. The applicant shall be at least 18 years of age;
b. The applicant shall not have been found to have previously
violated this ordinance within five (5) years immediately
preceding the date of the application.
2. If the applicant is a corporation:
a. All persons required to be named under Section (3)(b)4 shall be
at least 18 years of age;
b. No person required to be named under Section (3)(b)4 shall have
been found to have previously violated this ordinance within five
(5) years immediately preceding the date of the application.
3. If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture, or any other type of
organization where two (2) or more persons have a financial interest:
a. All persons required to be named under Section (3)(b)5 shall be
at least 18 years of age;
b. No person required to be named under Section (3)(b)5 shall have
been found to have violated any provision of this ordinance
within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the
application.
(5) Fees.
(a) A license fee of $600.00 shall be submitted with the application for a license. If
the application is denied, one-half (1/2) of the fee shall be returned.
(6) Display of License.
(a) The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the adult-oriented
establishment.
(7) Renewal of License.
(a) Every license issued pursuant to this ordinance will terminate at the expiration of
one (1) year from the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked, and must be
renewed before operation is allowed in the following year. Any operator desiring
to renew a license shall make application to the Village Clerk. The application
for renewal must be filed not later than 60 days before the license expires. The
application for renewal shall be field in triplicate with and dated by the Village
Clerk. A copy of the application for renewal shall be distributed promptly by the
Village Clerk to the Hales Corners Police Department and to the operator. The
application for renewal shall be upon a form provided by the Village Clerk and
shall contain such information and data, given under oath or affirmation, as is
required for an application for a new license.
(b) A license renewal fee of $600.00 shall be submitted with the application for
renewal. In addition the renewal fee, a late penalty of $100.00 shall be assessed
against the applicant who files for a renewal less than 60 days before the license
expires. If the application is denied, one-half (1/2) of the total fees collected
shall be returned.
(8) Revocation of License.
(a) The Village Board shall revoke a license for any of the following reasons:
1. Discovery of false or misleading information or data was given on any
application or material facts were omitted from the application.
2. The operator or any employee of the operator violates any provision of
this ordinance or any rule or regulation adopted by the Village Board
pursuant to this ordinance; provided, however, that in the case of a first
offense by an operator where the conduct was solely that of an employee,
the penalty shall not exceed a suspension of 30 day if the Village Board
shall find that the operator had no actual or constructive knowledge of
such violation and could not be the exercise of due diligence have had
such actual or constructive knowledge.
3. The operator becomes ineligible to obtain a license.
4. Any cost or fee required to be paid by this ordinance is not paid.
5. Any intoxicating liquor or cereal malt beverage is served or consumed on
the premises of the adult-oriented establishment.
(b) The Village Board, before revoking or suspending any license or permit, shall
give the operator at least 10 days written notice of the charges against him, and
the opportunity for a public hearing before the Village Board, as hereinafter
provided.
(c) The transfer of a license or any interest in a license shall automatically and
immediately revoke the license.
(d) Any operator whose license is revoked shall not be eligible to receive a license
for one (1) year from the date of revocation. No location or premises for which a
license has been issued shall be used as an adult-oriented establishment for six
(6) months from the date of revocation of the license.
(9) PHYSICAL LAYOUT OF ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT. Any adultoriented
establishment having available for customers, patrons, or members any booth,
room, or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult entertainment must comply with the
following requirements:
(a) Access. Each booth, room, or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from
aisles and public areas of the adult-oriented establishment and shall be
unobstructed by any door, lock, or other control-type devices.
(b) Construction. Every booth, room, or cubicle shall meet the following
construction requirements:
1. Each booth, room, or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths,
rooms, and cubicles and any non-public areas by a wall.
2. Have at least one (1) side totally open to a public lighted aisle so that
there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying same.
3. All walls shall be solid and without any openings, extended from the
floor to a height of not less than six (6) feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent,
smooth textured and easily cleanable.
4. The floor must be light colored, non-absorbent, smooth textured and
easily cleanable.
5. The lighting level of each booth, room, or cubicle, when not in use, shall
be a minimum of 10-foot candles at all times, as measured from the
floor.
(c) Occupants. Only one (1) individual shall occupy a booth, room, or cubicle at any
time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any
bodily discharge or litter while in the booth. No individuals shall damage or
deface any portion of the booth.
(10) Responsibilities of the Operator.
(a) Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the provisions
of this ordinance shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator if such act
or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge, or approval of the
operator or as a result of the operator’s negligent failure to supervise the
employee’s conduct, and the operator shall be punishable for such act or
omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or cause the
omission.
(b) Any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the provisions of
this ordinance shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator for purposes of
determining whether the operator’s license shall be revoked, suspended or
renewed.
(c) No employee of an adult-oriented establishment shall allow any minor to loiter
around or frequent an adult-oriented establishment or to allow any minor to view
adult entertainment as defined herein.
(d) The operator shall maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary manner at all
times.
(e) The operator shall maintain at least 10-foot candles of light in the public portions
of the establishment, including aisles, at all times. However, if a lesser level of
illumination in the aisles shall be necessary to enable a patron to view the adult
entertainment in a booth, room, or cubicle adjoining an aisle, a lesser amount of
illumination may be maintained in such aisles, provided, however, at no time
shall there be less than one (1) foot candle of illumination in said aisles, as
measured from the floor.
(f) The operator shall insure compliance of the establishment and its patrons with the
provisions of this ordinance.
(11) Administrative Procedure and Review. The Village of Hales Corners Municipal Code
and Wisconsin Statutes shall govern the administrative procedure and review regarding
the granting, denial, renewal, non-renewal, revocation, or suspension of a license.
(12) Exclusions. All private schools, and public schools as defined in Chapter 115, Wis.
Stats., located within the Village of Hales Corners are exempt from obtaining a license
hereunder when instructing pupils in sex education as part of its curriculum. All licensed
medical care facilities located within the Village of Hales Corners and the Hales Corners
Health Department are exempt from obtaining a license hereunder when engaged in the
providing of medical care or sex education.
(13) Penalties and Prosecution.
(a) Any person who shall violate any provision of this ordinance or who shall fail to
obtain a license or permit as required hereunder, or who shall operate after his
license is revoked, shall be subject to penalty as provided in Section 19.04 of the
Hales Corners Municipal Code.
11.19 REGISTRY OF MASSAGE THERAPISTS AND BODYWORKERS REQUIRED.
No person or entity shall engage in the practice of massage therapy or bodywork or perform
massage therapy or bodywork for gain, unless such person has previously been issued and holds a
valid license of registration under Subchapter XI of Chapter 460 of the Wisconsin Statutes, as
amended.
11.20 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
(1) Regulation. No person shall suffer, cause, or permit the operation of a massage
establishment except in strict compliance with this section.
(2) Definitions. For the purposes of this section:
Massage. The manipulation of the soft tissue of the body for therapeutic purposes and
may include, but is not limited to, effleurage, petrissage, tapotement, compression,
vibration, friction, stroking, or kneading, either by hand or with mechanical or electrical
apparatus, for the purpose of body massage. This may include the use of oil, salt glows,
hot and cold packs, or other recognized forms of massage therapy.
Massage Establishment. A location where the primary or secondary function is to offer
massage services.
Massage Room. The area where services are performed.
Waiting Area. An area adjacent to the main entrance that is separate from any other area
where massages are given.
(3) Massage Establishment License.
(a) No person shall suffer, cause, or permit the conduct of a massage establishment
without having first obtained a license therefore from the Village Board. A
separate license shall be acquired for each such establishment.
(b) Applications shall be made in writing on forms supplied by the Village Clerk’s
office.
(c) All applications shall include:
1. A nonrefundable license fee of $100.00.
2. The location and mailing address of the proposed establishment.
3. For an individual or for each person of a partnership or joint venture or
agent of a corporation:
a. Name and present address.
b. The two (2) immediately previous addresses and dates of
residence of each for the last five (5) years.
c. Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, social security number,
written proof of age and date of birth.
d. The business or occupation for the last three (3) years
immediately preceding the date of application.
e. Whether a similar license has been revoked or suspended and, if
so, a listing of the same and the locations thereof.
4. If the applicant is a corporation, the name and address of each officer and
director and of the stockholders of such corporation, together with the
extent of the ownership of each, and a statement whether such officer,
director, or stockholder holds office or stock in any other corporation
conducting a similar business in the State. Such application shall be
made by an agent registered as such who shall have been a resident of the
Village for at least 90 days.
5. All phone numbers of the proposed establishment.
6. The names, addresses, and phone numbers of all persons employed by
the applicant at the proposed establishment at the time of application.
7. Certification of compliance of the proposed premises with Chapter 8 and
all building, fire, and health codes and regulations of this Code of
Ordinances; or, in the alternative, as to building alterations, applicant
shall file a bond assuring that any work required to be done to bring the
premises into compliance therewith shall be accomplished prior to
opening of business. Compliance with such codes and the standards
contained herein shall be conditions precedent to the opening of
business.
8. The application shall contain a statement signed by the applicant and
each individual of a partnership or joint venture that all information
contained therein is true and correct.
(4) Granting of Licenses.
(a) The Village Clerk shall submit all applications for licenses hereunder to the
Village Board. Approval will be subject to clearance by all appropriate
departments.
(b) The Village Board shall not issue a license for a massage establishment if it is
shown that the operation as proposed by the applicant does not comply with all
applicable State laws and ordinances, and for all licenses that the applicant or any
partner or any officer, director, or stockholder of a corporate application has been
convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any offense under Chapter 944,
Wis. Stats.; involving substances included in Sub. II of Chapter 961, Wis. Stats.;
or of an offense against the person or property of another within the past three (3)
years, that the information required on the application is incomplete or that any
applicant has knowingly or with intent to deceive made any false, misleading, or
fraudulent statements of fact in the application or any other document required by
the Village in conjunction therewith, or that the applicant has not resided in the
Village for at least 90 days prior to date of application.
(c) In the event of denial, the applicant shall receive written notification thereof
setting forth the reason for the denial within 10 days after such denial.
(d) Licenses granted by the Village Board shall be valid from July 1 to June 30 each
calendar year.
(e) No license shall be transferred between locations or persons and no massage
establishment license shall be sold or be subject to transfer of corporate assets or
change of corporate officers or directors.
(5) Regulations of Operations and Licenses.
(a) Each establishment shall at all times maintain and comply with the following
regulations:
1. The establishment shall comply with all Village codes.
2. No establishment shall be open for business between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
3. Only a massage therapist licensed pursuant to §11.19 of this Code may
be employed as a massage therapist by the establishment.
4. No intoxicating beverages or substances included in Sub. II of Chapter
961, Wis. Stats., shall be permitted in the licensed establishment. Food
shall be permitted only when there is no charge therefore and when a
food preparation area, including a sink with hot and cold running water,
is a part of the establishment.
5. The establishment shall provide a waiting area for patrons separate from
any area wherein massages are given. There shall be direct access to this
area from the main entrance or from the hallway connected only to the
main entrance.
6. The establishment shall permit inspections of the premises at any time
during business hours by building inspectors, fire inspectors, health
inspectors, or personnel of any law enforcement agency.
7. The establishment shall keep current records of the names and addresses
of its massage therapist and employees and the date of employment and
termination of each. Such records shall be open to inspection by any of
the personnel listed in subparagraph 6 above.
8. The establishment shall report any changes of fact required on the
application form and all personnel changes in the Village Clerk’s office
within 10 days after the change.
9. Rooms in which massage is to be practiced or administered shall have at
least 70 square feet of clear floor area and shall maintain a light level of
no less than 40-foot candles as measured three (3) feet above the floor.
Lighting in colors other than white shall be prohibited. Such rooms shall
not be locked during business hours or during massage therapy sessions.
10. Such rooms shall be equipped with massage tables having a surface
impervious to liquids. The surface of such tables shall be positions at
least two feet form the surface of the floor.
11. Massage establishments shall prominently and publicly display on the
premises their licenses and permits during all hours of operation.
12. Massage equipment shall at all times be covered with an adequate supply
of clean sanitary towels, coverings, and linens. Clean towels, coverings,
and linens shall be stored in cabinets or other appropriate facilities.
Towels and linens shall not be used on more than one (1) patron, unless
they have first been laundered and disinfected. Soiled linens and paper
towels shall be deposited in approved receptacles.
13. Instruments utilized in performing massage shall not be used on more
than one (1) patron unless they have first been sterilized using
disinfecting agents or sterilizing equipment approved by the Health
Department. Massage table pads and reusable table coverings shall be
disinfected between each massage.
(6) Revocation or Suspension of License.
(a) Cause for Revocation or Suspension. The license granted herein may be revoked
or suspended for up to six (6) months by the Village Board:
1. If the applicant has made or recorded any statement by this section
knowing it to be false or fraudulent or intentionally deceptive.
2. For the violation of any provision of this section, except for
establishment license matters involving violations of Village codes, in
which case the license shall be revoked after the second conviction
thereof in any license year.
3. After any one conviction of any establishment personnel of an offense
under Chapter 944, Wis. Stats.; an offense against the person or property
of a patron; or of an offense involving substances in Sub. II of Chapter
961, Wis. Stats, where there is shown the participation or knowledge of
any other establishment personnel or of any individual within the
business structure of the applicant; and whether any such offense
occurred on or off the premises of the establishment.
(b) Notice and Hearing.
1. No license shall be revoked or suspended by the Village Board, except
upon due notice and a hearing to determine whether grounds for such
action exist. The notice shall be in writing and shall state the grounds of
the compliant against the licensee.
2. The notice shall be served upon the licensee at least 15 days prior to the
date of the hearing and shall state the time and place thereof. The
licensee shall be entitled to be heard, to be represented, to cross-examine
opposing witnesses and to present witnesses in his own behalf under the
subpoena of the Village Board, if such is required. The hearing shall be
recorded and a copy of the transcript shall be available to the licensee at
the expense of the licensee. The Village Board shall decide the matter
and shall prepare a written decision which shall be filed with the Village
Clerk and a copy thereof mailed to the licensee within 20 days after the
hearing.
(7) Exceptions. This section does not apply to the following businesses or professional
establishments:
(a) Office, clinics, or establishments of physicians, surgeons, chiropractors,
osteopaths, registered nurses, or physical therapists existing for the provisions of
such occupational services.
(b) Barbershops and beauty parlors existing for the provision of such occupational
services.
(8) Operation Without a License. A Public Nuisance. The operation of a massage
establishment without a license is deemed a public nuisance and may be enjoined by the
Village.
11.23 ADMINISTRATIVE CODES ADOPTED. The following enumerated sections of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code pertaining to health are hereby and by reference made a
part of this code as if fully set forth herein. Any further amendments, revisions, or
modifications of administrative codes incorporated herein are intended to be made part of
this Chapter.
(a) HFS 172 Safety, Maintenance, and Operation of Public Swimming Pools.
(b) HFS 175 Recreational and Education Camps.
(c) HFS 178 Campgrounds.
(d) HFS 195 Hotels, Motels, and Tourist Rooming Houses.
(e) HFS 196 Restaurants.
(f) HFS 197 Bed and Breakfast Establishments.
(g) HFS 198 Vending of Food
11.24 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES REGULATIONS
(1) Regulations Adopted. The statutory provisions of Chapter 98, Wis. Stats., and
Wisconsin Administrative Code, ATCP 92, Weighing and Measuring Devices, are hereby
adopted and by reference made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Any act
required to be performed or prohibited by any statute or code incorporated herein by
reference is required or prohibited by this section. Any further amendments, revisions or
modifications of the statutes incorporated herein or Wis. Adm. Code provisions
incorporated herein are intended to be made a part of this section. This section is adopted
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 98, Wis. Stats.
(2) Appointment of Inspectors. In order to assure compliance with this section, the Village
hereby grants the authority and duties of sealers and inspectors required by this section to
the State of Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection.
(3) Definitions.
(a) Commercial Weighing or Measuring Devices. Devices used or employed in
establishing the size, quantity, extent, area or measurement of quantities, items,
produce or articles for sale, hire or award, or in computing any basic charge or
payment for services rendered on the basis of weight or measure.
(b) Weights and Measures Program. The program that includes administration and
enforcement of this section, Chapter 98, Wis. Stats., and applicable Wis. Adm.
Code provisions, and any related actions.
(4) Weights and Measures License Required.
(a) License Requirements. Except as provided in subsection B., no person shall
operate or maintain any commercial weighing or measuring devices or any other
weights and measures or systems and accessories related thereto which are used
commercially within the Village of Hales Corners for determining the weight,
measure or count unless each such device is licensed by an annual weights and
measures license issued pursuant to the provisions of this section.
(b) Exemptions. Sales permitted at any farmers’ market or other similar event in the
Village which has been otherwise lawfully permitted, licensed or approved as
required by the Village Code or sales permitted by direct seller, transient
merchants and solicitors are exempt from licensing under this section.
(5) Application for License. An application for a weights and measures license shall be
made in writing on a form provided for such purpose by the Village Clerk and shall be
signed by the owner of the commercial business or by its authorized agent. Such
applications shall state the type and number of weighing and measuring devices to be
licensed, location of the devices, the applicant’s full name and post office address, and
whether such applicant is an individual, partnership, limited liability company,
corporation or other entity. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall state the
names and addresses of each partner. If the applicant is a corporation of limited liability
company, the application shall state the name and address of all officers and agents of the
applicant, including name and address of all officers and agents of the applicant,
including the registered agent thereof.
(6) Weights and Measures License Fee. Upon compliance of this section, the Village
Clerk shall issue a license to the applicant upon payment of the license fee of $10. Each
store or business location shall require a separate license. The license fee shall not be
prorated for a partial year.
(7) License Term. A license issued under this section shall expire on June 30 of each year.
(8) Fees Assessment and Per Scale and Per Meter Fees. Pursuant to §98.04(2), Stats., the
Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection enforces this chapter within
the Village of Hales Corners and charges the costs thereof to the Village of Hales Corners
upon an itemized service fee assessment per licensee basis following the expiration of
each license year on June 30. In order to defray such costs to the Village, each license
applicant, in addition to the license fee of $10, shall pay to the Village, together with the
license fee as a condition of obtaining such license, a per scale fee of $18 and a per meter
fee of $6.
(9) Penalty. Any person or entity who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to the penalties and remedial actions as provided in §19.04 of this Code and in
addition thereto, the penalties and remedial actions available under §98.26, Stats.
CHAPTER 12
Streets and Sidewalks
12.01 Street Openings
12.02 Digging up Streets, Etc., Without Permit
12.03 Interfering with Public Improvements Prohibited
12.04 Grades
12.05 Permits for Sidewalk Construction, Openings, Etc.
12.06 Culverts for Driveways and Walks
12.07 Snow and Ice Removal
12.08
12.09 Watercourses
12.10 Erection of Poles in Streets; Permit Required
12.11 Selling Within Streets Prohibited
12.12 Penalty
12.13 Forestry Planting and Maintenance
12.01 STREET OPENINGS.
(1) Permit Required. No person shall make any excavation or opening in any street
(between curb lines), alley, or public place unless he shall first have secured a permit
therefore from the Plumbing Inspector or the Superintendent of Public Works.
(2) Granting of Permits.
(a) For Other than Public Utilities. To any person other than a public utility, upon
application and payment of a fee of $150.00 for under 50% of the road width or
$200.00 for over 50% of road width, and upon showing that an emergency or
need exists, the Plumbing Inspector or the Superintendent of Public Works may
issue a permit to excavate or disturb the surface of any street, alley, or public
place between curb lines. The permit shall state the name of the applicant, the
nature, purpose, and extent of the excavation or disturbance of the street surface,
the location thereof, and the kind or kinds of pavement to be disturbed, and the
number of days for which the permit shall be good.
(b) For Public Utilities.
1. Excavation on County or State Trunk Highways. Upon application and
payment by a public utility of the fee of $1.00, and upon showing that the
Milwaukee County Highway Department of the Wisconsin Highway
Commission has granted prior approval, the Plumbing Inspector or the
Superintendent of Public Works shall issue a permit to excavate or
disturb the surface of any street, or public place between curb lines on
County or State Trunk Highways. The permit shall state the name of the
applicant, the nature, purpose, and extent of the evacuation or
disturbance of the street surface, the location thereof, and the kind or
kinds of pavement to be disturbed, and the number of days for which the
permit shall be good.
2. Excavation on Village Streets. Upon application and payment by a
public utility of the permit fee of $1.00 and of the inspection fee of $4.00
for each separate excavation, and upon showing that an emergency or
need exists, the Plumbing Inspector or the Superintendent of the Public
Works shall issue a permit to excavate or disturb the surface of any
Village street, alley, or public place between curb lines; provided that if
the excavation or disturbance of the surface to be made is not more than
four (4) square feet and is for the purpose only of placing any post or
pole, no fee shall be required. The permit shall state the name of he
applicant, the nature, purpose, and extent of the excavation or
disturbance of the street surface, the location thereof, and the kind or
kinds of pavement to be disturbed, and the number of days for which the
permit shall be good.
The following are conditions required of public utilities for permission to
work within the Village right-of-way: the applicant agrees to indemnify
and hold harmless the Village, its employees, agents, and officers from
any liability due to the issuance of the permits. Any pavement, turfed
areas, or other elements within the Village right-of-way disturbed by the
permitted work shall be restored, including proper backfilling, by the
applicant in kind to the quality, grade, and condition, at least equal to as
it existed prior to being disturbed. Pavement restored must be
maintained for a period of three (3) years from the date of such
restoration by the application. Should it become necessary, for future
improvements in the right-of-way, permitted facilities will be adjusted,
altered, or relocated by the applicant at no cost to the Village.
(c) Disposition of Permit and Inspection Fees. The Plumbing Inspector and the
Superintendent of Public Works, upon receipt of any license or inspection fee
shall forthwith transmit said money to the Village Treasurer, who shall deposit it
in the general funds of the Village.
(3) Excavating and Opening; Replacing Surface; Removal of Refuse.
(a) All excavating and opening in any street, alley, or public place shall be done in
compliance with such reasonable rules and requirements as may be laid down
therefor by the Plumbing Inspector and Superintendent of Public Works.
(b) Replacing Street Surface.
1. When opening any street surface or other public way, all material for
paving and ballasting must be removed with the least possible loss of
surfacing material and such material, together with the excavated
material from the trenches, or otherwise, must be placed where it will
cause the least inconvenience to the public. All such materials must be
so placed to they will permit free passage of water along the gutters or
ditches, and the road or street must be at all times kept open for traffic.
No more than the necessary amount of trench may be dug. The
backfilling must be puddle and the paving and ballast must be replaced in
as nearly the original condition as possible, and to the satisfaction of the
Plumbing Inspector or Superintendent of Public Works. All excavations
shall be adequately shored or braced to prevent the side walls from
caving. When caving occurs, all the street surface thus disturbed must be
restored in the same careful manner as though it were any excavation or
trench. When any excavation is made in the graveled or paved surface of
the road or street, and the shoulder thereof, the clay excavated must be
removed and the excavation entirely backfilled with sand or gravel
thoroughly wet and consolidated. Any tunnels dug in gravel roads or
pavements shall be backfilled with concrete, subject to the approval of
the Plumbing Inspector or Superintendent of Public Works.
2. The permit issued hereunder shall be issued upon the express condition
that the licensee shall restore the pavement to its former condition and
shall use new material in restoring the surface of the pavement. If such
replacing of the surface shall be done at Village expense at a cost in
excess of the fee for the permit, the licensee shall reimburse the Village
for such extra cost.
3. All refuse and excess dirt and material shall be removed from the street
surface as the work progresses or immediately upon its completion.
(4) Protection of the Public. Every person making an excavation hereunder must enclose
each opening which he may make in the roads, streets, or public ways, with sufficient
barriers. Red lights must be kept burning from sunset to sunrise, one red light to be
placed at each end of openings in streets, and other lights to be placed at intervals of 10
feet. All necessary precautions shall be taken to guard the public effectually from
accident or damage to persons or property from the beginning to the end of the work.
Persons making excavations will be held liable for all damages, including costs incurred
by the District and of any appeal thereon that may result form the neglect of servants,
agents, or employees of such person or owner, or the cost of any necessary precautions
which such person or owner has failed to take to prevent injury or damage to persons,
livestock, vehicles, or property of any kind. Prior to the issuing of a permit hereunder,
the Plumbing Inspector or Superintendent of Public Works shall require satisfactory
evidence, in the form of certificates, that the person applying for such permit carries
public liability insurance in a solvent insurance company, licensed to do business in
Wisconsin, in the sum of at least $25,000 for injury to one person, and $50,000 for one
accident, or a certificate of insurance from a plumbing association recognized by the
Department of Public Works.
12.02 DIGGING UP STREET, ETC., WITHOUT PERMIT. No person shall injure or tear
up any pavement, crosswalk, drain, or sewer or any part thereof, or shall dig any hold,
ditch, or drain in any street or pavement without a permit.
12.03 INTERFERING WITH PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS PROHIBITED. No persons
hall hinder or obstruct the making or repairing of any pavement or crosswalk which may
be under construction under direction of the Village Board, nor shall hinder or obstruct
any person employed by the Village Board or persons employed by them, in making or
repairing any public improvement or in any work ordered by the Village.
12.04 GRADES.
(1) Altering Prohibited. No person shall alter the grades of any street, alley, sidewalk, or
public ground in the Village, unless authorized or directed so to do by the Village Board
or Building Inspector.
(2) Removal of Grading Material Prohibited. Whenever any street, sidewalk, alley, or
public ground shall be ordered to be graded by filling, and any material shall be deposited
on such street, sidewalk, alley, or public ground for the purpose of raising the same to the
grade ordered, all persons, contractors, as well as others, so grading such streets,
sidewalks, alleys, or public grounds and all other persons are prohibited from removing
from such streets, sidewalks, alleys, or public grounds any such material placed here
without written consent of the Building Inspector.
12.05 SIDEWALKS.
(1) Construction. No person shall construct, excavate, open, remove, or cut into any public
sidewalk, or part or portion of any public sidewalk within the Village, unless authorized
or directed to do so by the Village Board or Director of Public Works. No fee shall be
required for such authorization.
(2) Maintenance. The owner, occupant, or person in charge of every building, structure, or
unoccupied lot fronting or abutting on any street shall keep the sidewalks clean of any
dirt, dust, cinders, mud, oil, or other similar substances.
(3) Specifications.
(a) General. Pursuant to §66.615(3)(a), Wis. Stats., as amended from time to time,
unless a different method is otherwise hereafter prescribed by the Village Board
for specific projects, concrete sidewalk construction shall meet the specifications
and provisions set forth in this Section and shall be constructed in locations and
to line and grade as established by the Director of Public Works.
(b) Grading. Prior to construction, ground on which sidewalks are to be placed shall
be brought to subgrade by the contractor.
(c) Subgrade. Subgrade shall be solid and all places due below shall be brought to
grade with sand fill, thoroughly and uniformly compacted and brought to correct
grade and thoroughly wet down immediately before concrete is placed. Soft and
unsuitable subgrade material shall be removed and replaced with sand or other
satisfactory material, and the subgrade shall be thoroughly and uniformly
compacted and moistened immediately before the concrete is placed.
(d) Concrete. The minimum quantity of cement per cubic yard shall be six (6) 94-
pound sacks. Gravel shall be of good quality and washed. Concrete shall test
3,000 pounds compressed in 28 days.
(e) Jointing. Expansion joints one-half (1/2) inch thick the width of the walk shall
be placed at 50-foot maximum intervals. At all places where a walk intersects
another walk or curb line, a one-half (1/2) inch expansion joint shall be placed.
(f) Slope. To provide adequate drainage, the sidewalk shall slope toward the
roadside swale or curb at a rate of one-fourth (1/4) inch per foot of width of
sidewalk. All joints and edges shall be finished with a one-fourth (1/4) inch
radius edging tool. Sidewalks shall be constructed within the limits of the street,
and unless otherwise specifically indicated, there shall be a one (1) foot strip of
street property left between the property line and the edge of the sidewalk.
(g) Width and Thickness. Residential walks shall be four (4) feet in width and not
less than four (4) inches thick except within driveway approaches where the
minimum thickness shall be six (6) inches, provided that walks in residential
areas may be repaired or replaced to a width not less than the existing width on
the effective date of this Section. Sidewalks in front of commercial or industrial
establishments shall be not less than five (5) feet in width and five (5) inches in
thickness, except within driveway approaches where the minimum thickness
shall be seven (7) inches. Sidewalks shall be located one (1) foot from the
property line. One-half (1/2) inch reinforcement rod shall be used when
replacing or repairing sidewalks over alley entrances.
(h) Finishing. The concrete shall be struck off true to grade, finished smooth, and
given a broom finish. All edges shall be rounded. No tool marks shall be left on
exposed surfaces. In case of rain, the walk shall be covered to protect the surface
from being damaged. Walks shall be kept free from all traffic at normal
temperatures for 48 hours and in cold weather (below 50 degrees F.) for 96
hours. No concrete shall be poured when the temperature may be expected to fall
below 35 degrees F. in any 72-hour period or upon frozen subgrade.
(i) Curing. Concrete shall be kept moist by sprinkling, covering, or a combination
of both for a minimum of five (5) days, or a curing compound may be used in
place of a curing procedure.
(j) Higher Standards. Where deemed necessary, higher sidewalk standards may be
required by the Director of Public Works.
(4) Repair and Replacement. Pursuant to §66.615(3)(b), Wis. Stats., as amended from time
to time, the Commission of Public Works may order any sidewalk which is unsafe,
defective, or insufficient to be repaired or removed and replaced with a sidewalk in
accordance with the specifications set forth under Subsection (3) above.
12.06 CULVERTS FOR DRIVEWAYS AND WALKS.
(1) Permit Required. No person shall construct a private driveway, road, or walkway
providing ingress or egress to any public street or highway within the Village where there
is a drainage ditch along such street or highway through which natural surface water
drains, without obtaining a permit as hereinafter provided. Such culvert permit shall be a
condition precedent to the issuance of a building permit, and shall be issued by the
Village Clerk.
(2) Permit. Anyone desiring ingress and egress to the public street aforesaid shall make
application for a permit stating:
(a) The name of the applicant.
(b) The address of the applicant.
(c) The Hales Corners address where ingress and egress to the public street is sought.
(d) A sketch of the premises showing the exact location where such ingress and
egress is sought.
(3) Culvert Specifications. The Superintendent of Public Works shall determine the type
and size of culvert necessary to assure proper drainage, provided, however, that a straight
culvert for a sidewalk shall not be less than six (6) feet in length and 12 inches in
diameter, and for a driveway shall not be less than 20 feet in length and 12 inches in
diameter. In cases where a larger diameter culvert pipe is required than hereinafter
specified, the Superintendent shall determine the permit fee in proportion to the fees
herein specified for the indicated diameters.
(4) Permit Fees. The permit fee shall be as follows:
(a) For a straight culvert for a driveway 20 feet in length shall be $350.00.
(b) For a culvert for a driveway in excess of 20 feet in length, the fee prescribed for
20 feet of pipe plus $7.00 for each additional foot.
(c) For a sidewalk culvert at a rate of $6.30 per foot.
(5) Installation. Upon receipt of the executed application together with the permit fee, the
Village Clerk shall forthwith notify the Superintendent of Public Works to install at
Village expense the culvert specified by the Superintendent.
(6) Culverts for Public Works Projects. For all Village public works projects, where the
installation of a culvert is necessary, no permit and no fee shall be required in event the
abutting owner has a satisfactory culvert in place at the time of such construction or
improvement and in further event the Village replaces such culvert with one of like or
smaller size. “Satisfactory culvert” means a culvert which would be approved by the
State Highway Commission. In all other instances for Village public works projects
wherever a culvert is necessary or wherever a larger culvert is necessary, a permit shall
be required in accordance with Subsections (1) through (5) of Section 12.06; wherever a
larger culvert is necessary, a credit for a small “satisfactory culvert” shall be given.
12.07 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL.
(1) Duty to Clean. The owner, occupant, or person in charge of every building, structure,
occupied or unoccupied lot in the Village fronting upon or abutting any street, shall clean
the sidewalk in front of or adjoining such building, occupied or unoccupied lot, of snow
or ice to the width of such sidewalk by 12:00 noon of each day, and cause the same to be
kept clear from snow or ice; provided, that when ice has so formed on any sidewalk that
it cannot be removed, then the person herein referred to shall keep the same sprinkled
with ashes, sawdust, or sand and other suitable substances; provided, also that in case
now shall continue to fall for some time, then, and in that case, it shall be removed
immediately after the same shall cease to fall.
(2) Dumping Snow in Streets or Public Ways. No person shall plow, shovel, or dump
snow or cause snow to be plowed, shoveled, or dumped from any sidewalk, driveway, or
parkway onto a public street or alley; no person shall plow, shovel, or dump snow or
cause snow to be plowed, shoveled, or dumped from any driveway, parkway, public
street, or alley onto any sidewalk.
(3) Village May Cause Removal. If the owner or person in charge of any occupied or
unoccupied building or lot fronting upon or adjoining any street shall fail to clean the
sidewalks as provided in subsection (1) hereof, the Superintendent of Public Works shall
proceed to clean the said sidewalks and he shall keep an account of the actual cost of said
work of removing said snow and ice, and the same shall be by him delivered to the
Village Clerk to be charged against the property fronting upon or adjoining any such
street or entered on the tax roll of the Village and collected in the same manner as all
other Village taxes are collected.
12.09 WATERCOURSES.
(1) Removal of Obstructions. Whenever any natural drainage watercourse becomes
obstructed so that the natural flow of water along the same is retarded by the negligent
action of the owner, occupant, or person in charge of the land wherever such obstruction
is located, the owner or occupant of any lands affected and damaged by such obstruction
may request the removal thereof by giving notice in writing to such owner, occupant, or
person of the land wherever such obstruction is located. If such removal is not made
within six (6) days after receipt of such notice, the owner or occupant of the lands so
affected may make complaint to the Village Board filing at the same time a copy of said
written notice, and the Village Board, upon being satisfied that the complaint is just after
viewing the watercourse, shall make recommendations in writing to the owner or
occupant of the lands where the obstruction is, of the removal of such obstruction, and if
such recommendations are not followed within a reasonable time, shall order the
obstruction removed. The cost of removal and the cost, if any, for professional services
necessitated by the Village Board in the formulation of its recommendations shall be
charged and assessed against the lands from which the obstruction was removed and
collected as other special assessments are collected.
(2) Obstructing of Ditches Prohibited. No person, without the written consent of the
Village Board, shall place any dam, sluice, bulkhead, log, timber, pole, lumber, brush,
stone, earth, or other obstruction of any kind to the free flow of water in any ditch
constructed or maintained by the Village.
12.10 ERECTION OF POLES IN STREETS; PERMITS REQUIRED. Before any person
shall erect any telegraph, telephone, electric, railroad, or light poles or posts upon any
street or alley, he shall submit to the Commission of Public Works the route of their
proposed line or lines, or any extensions thereof, showing as afar as practicable the
location of each pole or post and the number and location of the wires. No such pole or
post shall be erected until permission shall first be obtained from the Commission of
Public Works.
12.11 SELLING WITHIN STREETS PROHIBITED. No person shall sell or offer for sale
any goods, wares, merchandise, or product within the dedicated portion of any street
within the Village.
12.12 PENALTY. Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in section 19.04 of this Code.
12.13 FORESTRY PLANTING AND MAINTENANCE
(1) Definitions.
(a) Street Trees: Street trees are herein defined as trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other
woody vegetation on land lying between and within right-of-way lines and on
either side of all streets, avenues, or ways within the Village.
(b) Park Trees: Park trees are herein defined as trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other
woody vegetation in public parks and all areas owned by the Village or to which
the public has free access as a park and over which the Village has jurisdiction.
(c) Forester: Person and/or Village employee designated by the Village Board as
authorized to carry out provisions of this ordinance.
(2) Duties and Responsibilities of Ecology Committee. It shall be the responsibility of the
Ecology Committee to study, investigate, and develop and update a written plan for the
care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal, and disposition of trees and
shrubs in parks, along streets, and in other public areas. Such plan shall be presented to
the Village Board and upon its acceptance and approval shall constitute the official
comprehensive Village forestry plan for the Village of Hales Corners. The Ecology
Committee as directed by the Village Board shall consider, investigate, make findings,
report and recommend upon any special matter or question pertaining to forestry planting
or maintenance. The Ecology Committee shall view all tree trimming policies of utilities
operating within the Village and report to the Village Board as to any provisions of such
policies which conflict with the purpose and provisions of this ordinance.
(3) Tree Species to be Planted. The Ecology Committee shall develop and maintain a list
of desirable trees for planting and replacement along streets, listing trees I three (3) size
classes based upon mature height: small (under 20 feet), medium (20 to 40 feet), and
large (over 40 feet). A list of trees not suitable for planting shall also be developed and
maintained by the Ecology Committee.
(4) Spacing. The spacing of street trees shall be subject to the three (3) species size classes
listed in subsection (3) of this ordinance, and no trees may be planted closer together than
the following: small trees, 30 feet; medium trees, 40 feet; large trees, 50 feet; except in
special plantings designed or approved by a landscape architect and the Village Forester
for aesthetic, safety, or layout practical difficulty alleviation purposes.
(5) Distance from Street Corners and Fire Hydrants. No street tree shall be planted
within 35 feet of any street corner, measured from the point of the nearest intersecting
curb or curbline. No street tree shall be planted within 10 feet of any fire hydrant.
(6) Utilities. No street trees other than those species listed as small trees in subsection (3) of
this ordinance may be planted under or within 10 feet of any overhead utility wire.
(7) Public Tree Care. The Village shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain, and remove
trees, plants, and shrubs within the public right-of-way of all streets, alleys, avenues,
lanes, squares, and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public safety or to
preserve or enhance the aesthetic symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.
No person except under order of the Village Forester or under emergency circumstances
when necessary to protect persons or property shall plant or remove, prune, cut, or alter
any street tree or park tree or cause such act to be done by others without first obtaining
signed permission for such work from the Village Forester as herein provided. The
permittee shall comply with the planting standards of subsection (3) through (6) of this
ordinance.
(8) Tree Topping. No person or entity shall top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on
public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger
than three (3) inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such degree so as to remove
the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other
causes, or trees under and potentially interfering with utility wires, or other obstructions
where other pruning practices are impractical, shall be exempt from this subsection upon
the written permission of the Village Forester.
(9) Pruning, Corner Clearance. Every owner of any tree on private property which
overhangs any street or right-of-way within the Village shall prune the branches so that
such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street light so as to substantially
reduce its intended illumination or obstruct the view of any street or intersection and so
that there shall be a clear space of 13 feet above street surface or eight (8) feet above
sidewalk surface. The Village shall have the right to prune or remove that portion
overhanging or existing above any public right-of-way of any tree or shrub rooted on
private property. Tree limbs that grow near high voltage electrical conductors shall be
maintained clear of such conductors by the electric utility company in compliance with
any applicable existing franchise, easement, or other agreement.
(10) Dead or Diseased Tree Removal on Private Property. The owner of any tree upon
private property shall remove and the Village shall have the right to cause the removal of
any dead or diseased tree or limb on private property within the Village, when such tree
or limb constitutes a danger to persons or property or constitutes a potential threat by way
of disease to other trees within the Village. The Village Forester shall order and notify
such property owner(s) in writing of the requirement to remove or thin any such tree.
Removal or trimming shall be done by said owner at the owner’s expense within 30 days
after the date of mailing of notice and order. In the event of the failure of such owner(s)
to comply with such notice and order, the Village may remove or trim such trees and
charge the cost of removal to the property owner(s) as a special charge pursuant to
§66.60(16)(a), Wis. Stats., pursuant to the procedures for sidewalk repair specified
thereunder. Any such tree existing upon joint private property lines shall be the joint and
several responsibility of the adjoining property owners.
(11) Removal of Stumps. Stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface
of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the
ground. Stumps in close clusters or on strip banks may remain if permitted and
determined to be safe and aesthetically pleasing by the Village Forester.
(12) Protection of Trees on Public Property. All trees on any street or other publicly owned
property near any excavation or construction of any building, structure, or street work,
shall be guarded with a substantial structurally sound fence, frame, or box not less than
four (4) feet high and eight (8) feet square, or at a distance in feet from the tree equal to
the diameter of the trunk in inches D.B.H., whichever is greater, and all building material,
dirt, or other debris shall be kept outside the barrier. No person shall excavate any
ditches, tunnels, trenches, or lay any drive within a radius of 10 feet from any public tree
without first obtaining a written permit from the Village Forester, who shall determine
whether such activity may be done without unnecessary harm to any tree and shall
condition any permit granted to prevent such harm.
(13) Protection of Existing Trees During Development. A tree preservation plan submitted
in accordance with Section 8-2-10 Zoning Code is required for the protection of existing
trees during development. See also §8-8-1 of the Zoning Code and §12.13(5) and (9) of
the Municipal Code for traffic visibility requirements.
(14) Interference with Village Forest and/or Ecology Committee. It shall be unlawful for
any person to prevent, delay, or interfere with the Village Forester and/or Ecology
Committee or any of their agents while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating,
mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street trees, park trees, or the removal or
trimming of trees on private grounds pursuant to subsections (9) and (10) above, as
authorized in this ordinance.
(15) Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be, upon conviction
or a plea of guilty, subject to a fine as provided under §19.04 of this Code. Any violation
of subsections (8), (9), or (10) of this ordinance shall be considered a public nuisance,
which may be enforced by way of injunctive or other equitable relief, in addition to all
other penalties provided hereunder.
(16) Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals by any aggrieved person
where it is alleged that there is error in any order, decision, or determination made by the
Village Forester in administering this ordinance, pursuant to Article V(2) of this Code.
Upon appeal, the Board of Appeals may authorize variances from the provisions of this
ordinance which are not contrary to the public interest and were due to special conditions,
a literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance will result in unnecessary
hardship.
CHAPTER 13
Sewerage Service Charges, Water Main and Lateral Assessments
13.01 Purpose
13.02 Charges
13.03 Metropolitan Sewer Rate
13.04 Amending Charges
13.05 Subsequent Connections
13.06 Allocation of Revenues
13.07 Special Assessments
13.08 Adopt Milwaukee Regulations
13.09 Ambulance Fee
13.10 Brush Pickup and Disposal Fee
13.11 Storm Sewer and Street Construction: Special Assessment Policy
13.12 Storm Water Management Utility
13.01 PURPOSE. It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the
protection of the public health, safety, welfare, and convenience of the sewage disposal
system of the Village of Hales Corners to levy and collect charges, rentals, or rates of
service upon all lands, lots, and premises served by having connections with said sewage
disposal system. The proceeds of such charges, rentals, or rates of service so derived
shall be used first for the necessary maintenance and operation, second to provide for
adequate depreciation, third to payment of the principal and interest of the outstanding
mortgage revenue bonds, and fourth to replace funds advanced by or paid from the
general funds of the Village on behalf of the sewage disposal system.
13.02 CHARGES.
(1) Effective January 1, 1987, there is hereby levied an assessed upon each lot, parcel of
land, or premises having any sewer connection with the Village sanitary system a local
sewerage service charge, rental, or rate of service in a sum per unit as established by
resolution as follows:
(a) Residential User. A residential user is defined as a residential utilizer of the
system up to a maximum of four (4) units. The sum determined by resolution
shall be payable for the current year payable with the current real estate taxes.
Said special charge shall not be payable in installments, and if it is not paid in
full on or before the last day of January, such delinquent special charge shall
become a lien as provided in §66.069(1)(b), Wis. Stats.
(b) Non-residential User. Any utilizer of the system not falling within the definition
of a Residential User shall be considered a non-residential user. The sum
determined by resolution shall be payable quarterly on or before the 30th day of
March, June, September, and December of each year. In addition to the said
charge and lien as provided by §66.069(1)(b) and 66.076(7), Wis. Stats., a further
charge and lien shall be added thereto in each case of failure to make prompt
payment, and the total thus obtained shall be the sewerage service charge, rental,
or rate of service in each case.
(2) For each lot, parcel of land, or premises for which sewage disposal facilities have been
made available, but for which no special assessment has been determined, prior to
connection with the main public sewer, there shall be levied, assessed, and collected a
connection charge in an amount equal to the original front footage assessment or the
original unit cost, whichever is applicable of the sanitary sewer main to which the
connection is being made, together with a simple interest thereon at a rate of 6% per
annum computed for a five (5) year period, provided, however, that such connection
charge in no event shall be less than $500.00
(3) All charges shall be collected by the Village Treasurer.
13.03 WASTEWATER SYSTEM AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT.
(1) Purpose. The wastewater of this municipality is collected and treated in whole or in part
by the wastewater system operated by Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewerage District (the
“District”). The purpose of this ordinance is to enable the Village to establish and collect
from users within the Village those charges which represent the proportionate
contribution by such users both (a) to the cost of operating and maintaining the system
and (b) that part of the cost of past and future capital improvements in the system not
defrayed by an ad valorem tax on real property. Such charges are required to enable the
District and the Village to become and remain eligible for federal grants for wastewater
facility capital improvements.
(2) Incorporation of District Rules and Regulations, Chapter 17. The following sections
and related appendices of District Rules and Regulations, Chapter 17 promulgated by the
District, as now in effect and as the same may be amended from time to time hereafter,
are hereby incorporated by reference and shall be of full force and effect as though set
froth in their entirety herein, except to the extent limited by order of the Public Service
Commission of Wisconsin:
17.102 Definitions
17.104(1) Municipal Transfer of Data
17.104(2) Estimated Volume of Discharge
17.104(4) Collection Terms
17.105(1) User Transfer of Data
17.105(2) Discharge Factor Certification
17.105(3) Wastestrength Certification
17.105(4) Certification Process
17.105(5) Verification
17.105(6) Audit Control of User Connection
17.105(7) Appeal Provisions
17.201 Purpose of the User Charge System
17.202 User Charge Billing Basis
17.203 Wholesale User Charge Billing Basis
17.204 Unit Costs of Treatment
17.301 Purpose of the Local Capital Recovery (LCR) System
17.302 LCR Billing Basis
17.304 Unit Costs of LCR
17.401 Purpose of the Industrial Cost Recovery (ICR) System
17.402 ICR Billing Basis
17.403 Wholesale ICR Billing Basis
17.404 Unit Costs of ICR
For purposes hereof “Residential Structure” as defined in §17.102(14), MMSD Rules,
shall mean any building accommodating exclusively one (1), two (2), three (3), or four
(4) residential units.
(3) Sewer Charges.
(a) User Charges. There is hereby imposed a charge on each user in the Village who
discharges wastewater, directly or indirectly, into the wastewater system operated
by the District. Such charge shall be in the amount specified below for the
various classes of users.
1. Residential Users. The residential user charge shall be based on a
volumetric charge, as follows: The volumetric charge shall be calculated
by dividing the wholesale residential user charge (i.e., the charge by the
District to the Village), excluding connection charges, by the total
volume of residential water consumption as approved by the Public
Service Commission. Individual residential user charges shall be
calculated by multiplying the user’s volume of water consumption times
this volumetric charge plus the user’s number of residential sewer
connections times the connection charge.
2. Non-certified Commercial Users. The retail non-certified commercial
user charge shall be based on a volumetric charge, as follows: The
volumetric charge shall be calculated by dividing the wholesale noncertified
commercial user charge (i.e. the charge by the District to the
Village), excluding connection charges, by the total volume of noncertified
commercial water consumption. Individual non-certified
commercial user charges shall be calculated by multiplying the user’s
volume of water consumption times this volumetric charge plus the
user’s number of service connections times the connection charge as
approved by the Public Service Commission.
3. Discharge Certified Commercial Users. Each retail discharge certified
commercial user charge shall be equal to each wholesale discharge
certified commercial user charge submitted to the Village pursuant to
Chapter 17, MMSD Rules.
4. Wastestrength Certified Commercial Users. Each retail wastestrength
certified commercial user charge shall be equal to each wholesale
wastestrength certified commercial user charge submitted to the Village
pursuant to Chapter 17, MMSD Rules.
5. Non-certified Industrial Users. Each retail non-certified industrial user
charge shall be equal to each wholesale non-certified industrial user
charge submitted to the Village pursuant to Chapter 17, MMSD Rules.
6. Discharge Certified Industrial Users. Each retail discharge certified
industrial user charge shall be equal to each wholesale discharge certified
industrial user charge submitted to the Village pursuant to Chapter 17,
MMSD Rules.
7. Wastestrength Certified Industrial Users. Each retail wastestrength
certified industrial user charge shall be equal to each wholesale
wastestrength certified industrial user charge submitted to the Village
pursuant to Chapter 17, MMSD Rules.
(b) Local Capital Recovery Charges – Industrial Users. There is hereby imposed a
local capital recover (LCR) charge on each industrial user in the Village whose
function is described by the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) division D
(“LCR user”). The LCR charge shall be in the amount specified below for the
various classes of LCR users:
1. Non-certified Industrial Users. Each retail non-certified industrial LCR
charge shall be equal to each wholesale non-certified industrial LCR
charge submitted the Village pursuant to Chapter 17, MMSD Rules.
2. Discharge Certified Industrial Users. Each retail discharge certified
industrial LCR charge shall be equal to each wholesale discharge
certified industrial LCR charge submitted the Village pursuant to
Chapter 17, MMSD Rules.
3. Wastestrength Certified Industrial Users. Each retail wastestrength
certified industrial LCR charge shall be equal to each wholesale
wastestrength certified industrial LCR charge submitted the Village
pursuant to Chapter 17, MMSD Rules.
(c) Industrial Cost Recovery Charges. There is hereby imposed an industrial cost
review (ICR) charge on each ICR user (as defined in Chapter 17, MMSD Rules)
in the Village. The ICR charge shall be in the amount specified below for the
various classes of ICR users.
1. Non-certified Industrial Users. Each retail non-certified industrial ICR
charge shall be equal to each wholesale non-certified industrial ICR
charge submitted the Village pursuant to Chapter 17, MMSD Rules.
2. Discharge Certified Industrial Users. Each retail discharge certified
industrial ICR charge shall be equal to each wholesale discharge certified
industrial ICR charge submitted the Village pursuant to Chapter 17,
MMSD Rules.
3. Wastestrength Certified Industrial Users. Each retail wastestrength
certified industrial ICR charge shall be equal to each wholesale
wastestrength certified industrial ICR charge submitted the Village
pursuant to Chapter 17, MMSD Rules.
(d) Local Sewage Charges. In addition to the charge imposed pursuant to Section 1
to 3 above with respect to the usage of the wastewater system of the District, the
Village is also empowered pursuant to §66.076(4), Wis. Stats., to establish and
impose sewer charges necessary to meet the capital and operating and
maintenance expenses of its local sewer system. Such charges are imposed and
governed by a separate ordinance, §13.02, Village Code, and to the extent
applicable this Section. This ordinance shall not replace and repeal any other
ordinance except to the extent of direct conflict therewith.
1. Definitions.
a. Operation and Maintenance shall mean all expenditures during
the useful life of the sewer collection system for materials, labor,
and other items necessary for managing and maintaining the
collection system to achieve the capacity and performance for
which said system was designed and constructed.
b. Replacement shall mean expenditures for obtaining equipment,
tools, vehicles, or appurtenances which are necessary to maintain
the collection system. The term “Operation and Maintenance”
includes replacement.
c. Local User Charge shall mean that portion of the total
wastewater service charge which is levied in a proportional and
adequate manner for the cost of operation, maintenance, and
replacement of the collection system.
2. Replacement Fund. There is hereby established a Replacement Fund to
be incorporated in the financial records of the Village. This fund shall be
financed by revenue obtained from the local user charge, for pumping
equipment, sewer system cleaning equipment, associated tools, vehicles,
and miscellaneous equipment.
3. User Charge Review. The Village will review the local user charge
system at least every two (2) years, and revise local user charge rates as
necessary to ensure that the system generates adequate revenues to pay
the costs of operation and maintenance including replacement and that
this system continues to provide for the proportional distribution of
operation and maintenance including replacement costs among users and
user classes.
4. Rate Notification. The Village will notify each user at least annually, in
conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate being charged for operation,
maintenance including replacement of the collection system. This
notification will display separately, MMSD treatment charges and local
operation, maintenance, and replacement rates.
(4) Water and Sewer Billing.
(a) A residential user of the system up to a maximum of four (4) units shall pay for
the current year payable with the current real estate taxes. Such special charge
shall not be payable in installments, and if it is not paid in full on or before the
last day of February, such delinquent special charge shall become a lien as
provided in §66.60(16), Wis. Stats., and such delinquency shall be treated in the
same manner as delinquent water charges as provided in §66.069(1)(b), Wis.
Stats., exclusive of the 10% penalty provided therein.
All other user, LCR, and ICR charges shall be billed on a quarterly basis.
Payment of such bills shall be made within 20 days after mailing by the Village.
In the event that such bill is not paid when due, a penalty of 2% per month shall
be added thereto.
(b) All bills shall be payable to the Village Treasurer at the Village Hall, 5635 S.
New Berlin Road, Hales Corners, WI 53130
(c) In the event a user fails to certify data or in the event a user’s certification is
materially inaccurate or in the event there has been a substantial change in data
since the date of the user’s last certification, the District shall notify the user that
the verification data determined by the District pursuant to §17.105(5), MMSD
Rules, shall be used to determine the charge due for the current billing period and
all future billing periods until the user submits a new certified statement.
(d) Should inspection or verification by the District reveal that any statement
certified by a user is materially inaccurate, the District shall re-determine the
proper charge due and forward the new computation to the Village in order that a
bill for the deficiency may be sent. This deficiency billing shall be retroactive to
the date or dates when the bills based upon the inaccurate certification were
originally due and interest charges shall be applied to each deficiency as provided
in paragraph (a) above.
(e) Unpaid User, LCR, and ICR charges shall be a lien upon the property served and
shall be enforced as provided in Wis. Stats. §66.076(7).
13.04 AMENDING CHARGES. The charge, rental, or rate of service and the determination
of the allocated units herein fixed shall be subject to amendment or change from time to
time through passage of a resolution by the Village Board with respect to such changes,
orders, or rates of service.
13.05 SUBSEQUENT CONNECTIONS. For any lot, land, or premises from which
connections are made with the sanitary sewerage system of the Village after the same to
be per diem, pro-rata amount based upon the quarterly rate from the time such sewerage
connection is made until the following quarter.
13.06 ALLOCATION OF REVENUE.
(1) The revenue derived from the charge, rental, or rate of service herein fixed attributable to
the Hales Corners portion of such charge shall be used or administered as follows in
accordance with understandings achieved with the State Public Service Commission:
(a) Payment of the direct costs of labor, fringe benefits, materials, energy, and
outside services necessary to the operation of the Hales Corners Sewerage
System excluding the Sewage Treatment Plant.
(b) Payment for all general and administrative burden in support of the direct costs
of operation of the Hales Corners Sewerage System excluding the Sewage
Treatment Plant.
(c) Depreciation of only that portion of the sewerage system originally construction
and paid for by special assessment against all properties connected to the system.
(d) Generation of an entitled Return on Investment of 7% of plant value as
depreciated to the current year.
(e) No portion of the Sewer Service Charge shall be allocated to the payment of debt
for that portion of the Sewerage System whose construction was paid for by
special assessment against the properties connected to the system. Debt payment
for non-assessable portions of the Sewerage System, the original construction
cost of which was a Village contribution out of its General Fund shall continue to
be covered with the general property tax levy.
(2) Income in excess of the requirements herein determined may be paid into the general
fund of the Village.
13.07 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
(1) State Statutes Adopted. Except as otherwise provided herein, Sections:
66.54 Special improvement bonds; certificates.
66.60 Special assessments and charges.
66.604 Lien of special assessment.
66.605 Special assessments.
66.615 Sidewalks.
66.62 Special Assessments.
66.625 Laterals and service pipe.
66.63 Assessment of condemnation benefits.
66.635 Reassessment of invalid condemnation and public improvement
assessments.
66.64 Special assessments for local improvements.
66.645 Duty of officers; action to collect tax.
66.65 Assessment against city, village, or town property abutting on
improvement.
66.694 Special assessments against railroads for street improvement.
66.695 Action to recover assessment.
66.696 Improvement of streets by abutting railroad company.
66.697 Notice to railroad company; time for construction.
66.698 Construction by municipality; assessment of cost.
66.699 Effect of sections 66.694 to 66.698, inclusive.
of the Wisconsin Statues and all subsequent revisions thereof, shall be followed in
levying special assessments and imposing special charges for the cost of installing or
constructing any water improvement by the Village, and such statues are adopted by
reference and made a part of this section.
(2) Levy of Assessments. The cost of installing or constructing any water improvement by
the Village may be charged under this section in whole or in part to the property
benefited by such work or improvement and the Village Board may make an assessment
against such benefited property in the manner provided herein.
(3) Cost of Work or Improvement that may be Included. The cost of any work or
improvement to be paid in whole or in part by special assessments on property may
include the direct and indirect cost thereof, the damages occasioned thereby, the interest
on bonds or notes issued in anticipation of the collection of the assessments, a reasonable
charge for the service of the administrative staff of the Village and the cost of any
architectural, engineering, and legal services, and any other items of director indirect cost
which may reasonably be attributed to the proposed work or improvement. The amount
to be assessed against all property for any such proposed work or improvement shall be
apportioned among the individual parcels in the manner designated by the Village Board.
(4) Lots Already Served by a Water Main.
(a) No assessment for water main shall be levied against a parcel of land already
served with a publicly owned water main, unless such parcel of land may be
divided or subdivided in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 8) or
the Subdividing and Platting Ordinance (Chapter 9) in which case the assessment
shall be computed according to the assessable footage of the new lots which may
be created.
(5) Water Main Extensions. Assessments for water main extensions shall be levied as
follows:
(a) Assessments for water main extensions not exceeding eight (8) inches in
diameter shall be levied upon properties benefited by such improvements.
1. Annually the Village Board for the calendar year shall establish by
resolution front foot assessment rates based on the recommendation of
the Commission of Public Works.
2. There shall be a separate front foot assessment rate for residential
properties and commercial properties with the commercial rate being
40% over the residential rate. “Commercial” properties shall include
property used and/or zoned for B-1, B-2, M-1, and R-4 purposes,
providing the R-4 property actually contains four (4) or more family
units.
(b) Where water main extensions are larger than eight (8) inches in diameter, the
Village of Hales Corners will assume the difference between the estimated cost
of installing an eight (8) inch water main and the actual cost of installing water
main extensions greater than eight (8) inches, and the properties benefited by
such improvement shall be assessed on the basis of the estimated cost of
installing an eight (8) inch water main.
(6) Dual Systems. Where water mains are located along one side of a street and the mains
are so located to service only that side of the street, assessments shall be levied upon
properties benefited by such improvements and each parcel may be entitled to such
deduction or exemption, if any, as the Village Board may determine to be reasonable and
just under the circumstances in each case and consistent with the policy adopted by the
Village Board.
(7) Corner Parcels.
(a) Water Mains. All corner lots shall have an assessment formula as follows:
1. Regularly Shaped.
a. For Undividable Residential Corner Lots. The actual front
footage on the short side of the lot, or the minimum lot width
required by the zoning for the individual parcel, whichever is
higher.
b. For Undividable Commercial and Light Manufacturing Corner
Lots. The full length of the short side plus the full length of the
long side minus a credit equal to 1½ times the minimum lot
width required by the zoning for the individual parcels. For
commercially and light manufacturing zoned parcels where there
is no required minimum lot width under the Zoning Code, the
minimum lot width as applied to the credit shall be the zoning in
R-1 zoning (75 feet).
c. For Dividable Corner Lots. The actual front footage on the short
side of the lot, plus the actual footage of the long side, minus a
credit of the minimum zoning depth for the zoning district of the
corner lot. For commercially and light manufacturing zoned
parcels, where there is no required minimum lot dept under the
Zoning Code, the minimum lot depth as applied to the foregoing
formula shall be the zoning in R-1 zoning (133 feet).
2. Unusually Shaped.
a. For Undividable Corner Lots. For residentially zoned parcels,
the setback line on the short side, or the minimum lot width
required for the individual parcel, whichever is higher. “Setback
line” shall be determined pursuant to the Water Main Addendum
to Section 13.07(10). For commercially and light manufacturing
zoned parcels, where there is no required minimum lot width
under the zoning code, the minimum lot width as applied to the
foregoing formula shall be the zoning in R-1 zoning (75 feet).
b. For Dividable Corner Lots. For residentially, commercially, and
light manufacturing zoned parcels, the assessment shall be
determined by the Commission of Public Works consistent with
the spirit of this assessment ordinance, subject to final approval
by the Village Board.
(8) Laterals and Service Pipes.
(a) Special Assessments. Assessments for water laterals (including all time and
material costs from the main line to or near the lot line) shall be levied upon
properties benefited by such improvements, and shall provide for the payment of
all of the cost of the work or improvements.
(b) Construction and Size. Water laterals shall be constructed from the lot line or
near the lot line to the main. No water lateral shall be less than one (1) inch in
diameter.
(c) Laterals Not Charged on Per Foot Basis. Assessments for all water laterals shall
be determined by dividing the total cost of lateral installation by the number of
properties receiving laterals without regard to individual footage of each lateral.
(9) Payment of Assessments.
(a) Assessment Notice. Upon completion of the work or improvement for which a
special assessment is levied and upon certification by the Village Engineer that
such work or improvement has been completed, the Village Clerk shall bill the
property owner by invoice for the full amount of the assessment. Such invoice
shall notify the owner that he may elect within 30 days of the date of the invoice
to pay same in full without interest or to pay by installments with interest as
hereinafter provided.
(b) Cash Payment. Payment of the assessment shall be made to the Village Clerk on
or before the expiration of 30 days from the date of the Assessment Notice,
without interest. If the said amount is not paid within 30 days, it shall be placed
on the tax roll for the current year together with the interest commencing with the
date shown on the Assessment Notice, and shall be collected with the regular
taxes.
(c) Installment Payment. If the property owner should so elect, payment of the full
assessment may be made in installment on a three (3) year plan, on a five (5) year
plan, or on a seven (7) year plan as provided herein.
1. Three-Year Plan. On the three (3) year plan, the full amount of the
assessment shall be paid in three (3) equal annual installments with real
estate taxes, one-third each year plus the interest on the unpaid balance.
The first installment shall be due and payable with real estate taxes for
the current year, which installment shall include the interest commencing
with the date shown on the Assessment Notice; the second installment
shall be due and payable with real estate taxes for the following year,
which installment shall include the interest on the unpaid balance; and
the final installment shall be due and payable with real estate taxes for
the third year, which final installment shall include the interest on the
unpaid balance.
2. Five-Year Plan. On the five (5) year plan, the full amount of the
assessment shall be paid in five (5) equal annual installments with real
estate taxes, one-fifth each year plus the interest on the unpaid balance.
The first installment shall be due and payable with real estate taxes for
the current year, which installment shall include the interest commencing
with the date shown on the Assessment Notice; and the remaining annual
installments shall be due and payable with real estate taxes for each
successive year thereafter, which installments shall include the interest
on the unpaid balance to the year of payment.
3. Seven-Year Plan. One the seven (7) year plan, the full amount of the
assessment shall be paid in seven (7) equal annual installments with real
estate taxes, one-seventh each year, plus the interest on the unpaid
balance. The first installment shall be due and payable with real estate
taxes for the current year, which installment shall include the interest
commencing with the date shown on the Assessment Notice; and the
remaining annual installments shall be due and payable with real estate
taxes for each successive year thereafter, which installments shall include
the interest on the unpaid balance to the year of payment.
4. Ten-Year Plan. On the 10-year plan, the full amount of the assessment
shall be paid in 10 equal annual installments with real estate taxes, onetenth
each year plus the interest on the unpaid balance. The first
installment shall be due and payable with real estate taxes for the current
year, which installment shall include the interest commencing with the
date shown on the Assessment Notice; and the remaining annual
installments shall be due and payable with real estate taxes for each
successive year thereafter, which installments shall include the interest
on the unpaid balance to the year of payment.
5. Prepayment. If the property owner should so elect, payment in full of the
unpaid balance with interest to date of payment, may be paid at any time
before the final installment becomes due.
(d) Interest. Interest at an annual rate shall be determined for each project by the
Village Board.
(10) Service to Previously Unassessed Parcels. When an unassessable parcel abuts or
adjoins a water main available for connection, the Village Board may permit a connection
for such parcel providing payment is made by the owner thereof for an equivalent full
assessment pursuant to the provisions of this section.
Assessments for water main shall be on an assessable footage basis and the assessable
footage for each parcel of land shall be the total number of feet measured along the street
or alley right-of-way between the intersection of the side lot lines and the street or alley
right-of-way line. This length is the frontal footage of the property. The frontal footage
of the property shall be used in determining special assessments except in special cases
where special procedures are necessary to determine the length to be used. These special
cases and the method to be used are enumerated in the following paragraphs and
diagrams.
The assessable footage for parcels of land that warrant special consideration in
determining assessments for water main extensions shall be approved by the Village
Board upon the recommendation of the Commission of Public Works and the Village
Engineer. Parcels which may warrant special consideration are as follows:
(a) Corner Parcels.
(b) Parcels with an excessively long frontage and little or no width at the rear of the
lot.
(c) Parcels with an excessively long frontage and encompassing a small area.
(d) Parcels with a comparatively short frontage and a large width at the rear of the
lot.
(e) Parcels with a comparatively short frontage and encompassing a large area.
(f) Parcels of unusual shape or size.
(g) Parcels where zoning may prohibit satisfactory development to warrant the
benefits listed. (Example: Wetland zoning.)
(h) Parcels where zoning may substantially increase the benefits listed. (Example:
Parcels that are dividable by zoning but existing development does not permit
division at the time of utility construction.)
The diagrams contained herein are intended for use when determining the amount of
assessable footage per parcel of land for special assessments. These are to be used as
guides and the final approval for methods used will rest with the Village Board.
Although these diagrams are usable in the majority of cases there will be special
situations that could vary the proposed standard procedures.
Where special and/or different procedures are required, the Engineer and the committee
in charge will submit their recommendation to the Village Board for its approval.
The Engineer’s Report on Estimated Costs, Allocations, and Special Assessments will be
approved by the Village Board before the public hearing.
Corner Parcels
Corner Parcels shall be assessed in accordance with Section 13.07(7) of the Village Code.
See diagrams relating to corner parcels in Part I of these policies for examples.
Unusually Shaped Lots
The assessable footage for parcels of land that are unusually shaped and warrant special
consideration for assessment purposes will be determined in the following manner:
1. The total number of feet abutting the public work or improvement will be
measured along the street or alley right-of-way between the intersection
of the side lot lines and the street or alley right-of-way line. This length
is the frontal footage of the property.
2. The length of the line 100 feet back of and parallel to the property
frontage will be determined.
3. When the difference in length of the frontal footage of the property
(paragraph 1) and the line 100 feet back of the property frontage
(paragraph 2) is less than 30%, the actual frontal footage of the property
will be used as the assessable footage of the property.
4. When the difference in length of the frontal footage of the property
(paragraph 1) and the line 1—feet back of the property frontage is greater
than 30%, the average of the two lengths will be used as the assessable
footage of the property.
5. Each project must be completely analyzed individually. If in the opinion
of the Village Board, the 30% factor specified above should be adjusted
to increase or decrease the deduction or exemption as the Village Board
may determine to be reasonable and just under the circumstances of each
case, then the adjustment will be made in accordance with the Board’s
decision.
6. See Diagrams relating to Unusually Shaped Parcels in Part I of these
policies for examples.
Village
The Village may pay assessments for water mains in the following situations:
1. Village owned property.
2. Property previously assessed for the same type of municipal
improvement providing that parcel of land cannot be divided or
subdivided.
(11) Situations Not Covered. Situations not covered by this section in levying special
assessments and situations requiring individual determinations at variance with this
section for the installation and construction of public improvement in the Village of
Hales Corners shall be resolved by the Village Board after receipt of the
recommendations of the Commission of Public Works. The Village Board shall use these
Special Assessment Policies as guidelines.
(12) Other Authority Retained. It is not intended by the enactment of this ordinance to
deprive the Village Board of any power conferred by Chapter 66, Wis. Stats., or any
other chapter or home-ruled power vested in said board.
13.08 ADOPT MILWAUKEE REGULATIONS.
(1) Adopt Milwaukee Regulations. There hereby is incorporated by reference the rules and
regulations promulgated by the City of Milwaukee for retail water service, which shall be
binding upon all persons receiving retail water service from the City of Milwaukee.
(2) Meters. Meters measuring and controlling the individual supply of water from the retail
water service supplied by the City of Milwaukee shall be remote and outside registers of
such type as shall be satisfactory to and approved by the City of Milwaukee.
(3) Access to City of Milwaukee Representative. The Village of Hales Corners delegates
to representatives of the City of Milwaukee the right of access upon private property
being served under the retail water agreement with the City of Milwaukee for the
purposes of inspection, meter reading, individual shut-off service in default of payment,
and re-establishing service.
(4) Protection of Utility Facilities. No person shall alter, remove, damage, reconstruct,
destroy, or disturb the structures of any public water main serving the occupants of the
Village under the retail water agreement with the City of Milwaukee without the prior
approval of the Plumbing Inspector of the Village and the Engineering Department of the
Milwaukee Water Works.
(5) Delinquent Payments to be a Lien on Property. In the event the Village is required to
make payment of delinquent charges for retail water service to the City of Milwaukee,
pursuant to the guarantee agreement contained in the retail water service contract, on
October 15 in each year notice shall be given to the owner or occupant of all lots or
parcels of real estate to which water has been furnished prior to October 1, and payment
for which is owing and in arrears at the time of giving such notice. The Clerk shall
furnish the Treasurer with a list of all such lots or parcels of real estate, and the notice
shall be given by the Treasurer. Such notices shall be in writing and shall state the
amount of such arrears, and that unless the same is paid by November 1 thereafter a
penalty of 10 percent of the amount of such arrears will be added thereto; and that unless
such arrears, with any such added penalty, shall be paid by November 15 thereafter, the
same will be levied as a tax against the lot or parcel of real estate to which water was
furnished and for which payment is delinquent as above specified. Such notice may be
served by deliver to either such owner or occupant personally, or by letter addressed to
such owner or occupant at the post office address of such lot or parcel of real estate. On
November 16 the Treasurer shall certify and file with the Clerk a list of all lots or parcels
of real estate, give the legal description thereof, to the owners or occupants of which
notice of arrears in payment were give as above specified and which arrears still remain
unpaid, an stating the amount of such arrears together with the added penalty thereon as
herein provided. Each such delinquent amount, including such penalty shall thereupon
become a lien upon the lot or parcel of real estate to which the water was furnished and
payment for which is delinquent, and the Clerk shall insert the same as a tax against such
lot or parcel of real estate. All proceedings in relation to the collection of general
property taxes and to the return and sale of property for delinquent taxes shall apply to
said tax if the same is not paid within the time required by the law for payment of taxes
upon real estate.
13.09 AMBULANCE FEE. The Village Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to collect
fees for ambulance services performed by the rescue squad of the Fire Department as
follows:
Run Charges: $350 – Residents of the Village of Hales Corners
$400 – Non-residents of the Village of Hales Corners
Disposables: $ 35 – Oxygen Administration
$ 15 – Cervical Collar
Mileage: $9.50
All monies received shall represent reimbursement to the Village and shall be paid into
the Village treasury as part of the general Village revenue.
13.10 BRUSH PICKUP AND DISPOSAL FEE. The Village Clerk is hereby authorized and
directed to collect a fee for the pickup and disposal of brush and tree trimmings by the
Department of Public Works according to the following subsections. All moneys
received shall represent reimbursement to the Village and shall be paid into the Village
treasury as part of the general Village revenue.
(1) The flat charge for each property pickup will be $55.00.
(2) When more than one-half hour is required at any single property site an extra $55.00 will
be charged for each additional one-half hour or fraction thereof.
(3) The service will be at the convenience of the Village but will normally be scheduled for
the periods April 1 to May 15 and October 1 to November 15.
(4) Brush and trimmings to be picked up must be piled with reasonable symmetry at one
location on the property which is accessible and within five (5) feet of the edge of the
pavement of the principal roadway serving the property. This provision is subject to any
non-conflicting further regulations as may be set forth by the Public Works Commission.
(5) Brush and trimmings located as in Subsection (4) will be presumed with intent for pickup
and subject thereto without further notice.
(6) A notice of service and charge will be left with the resident or appropriately on the
property on completion of the service. Such notice will form the basis for subsequent
billing. Delinquent payments will be taxed. Elimination of the presence of the material
on the property will be considered prima facie evidence of the service having been
performed.
(7) The intent of the ordinance is within the provisions of Wis. Stats. 66.60(16) with respect
to both authority and notice. No further notice will be given beyond that required by law
for the publication of ordinances.
13.11 STORM SEWER AND STREET CONSTRUCTION: SPECIAL ASSESSMENT
POLICY.
(1) Purpose. In accordance with §66.60 and 66.62, Wis. Stats., the purpose of this section is
to create a policy and procedure by which special assessments may be levied against
properties benefited from the installation of storm drainage facilities and certain street
improvements caused to be installed/constructed by the Village. Nothing herein shall
prohibit the Village from levying and imposing special assessments under alternative
procedures, nor shall negotiated development agreements be required to conform with the
guidelines herein contained.
(2) Levy of Assessments. The cost of installing or constructing any storm drainage facilities
or street improvements by the Village may be charged under this section in whole or in
part to the property benefited by such work or improvement and the Village Board may
make an assessment against such benefited property in the manner provided herein.
The Village Board may, after duly conducting a public hearing on the proposed
assessments, elect to reduce the assessments on any or all affected parcels where said
Board deems the assessments to be in excess of the benefits to be received by the
improvements.
Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the financial participation of a benefited property
owner in a project where such owner and the Village Board mutually agree to the
participation.
(3) Indirect Costs Included. In addition to the direct costs of the work, as hereinafter
enumerated, such indirect costs as the damages occasioned thereby, the interest on bonds
or notes issued in anticipation of the collection of the assessments, a reasonable charge
for the service of the administrative staff of the Village, the cost of any architectural,
engineering, and legal service, and any other items of indirect cost, which may
reasonably be attributed to the proposed work or improvement, may be included in the
assessment.
The amount to be assessed against all property for any such proposed work or
improvement shall be apportioned among the individual parcels in the manner designated
by the Village Board.
(4) Storm Drainage System Assessments.
(a) Definable Area.
1. Nothing herein shall prohibit proceedings under Chapter 88 to provide
for the drainage of lands within a drainage district.
2. In levying special assessments for storm drainage improvements, the
Village Board must find that special benefits are conferred upon property
in a limited and determinable area.
(b) Previous Assessments. No assessment for storm drainage facilities shall be
levied where:
-Existing developed land has been previously assessed or charged for storm
improvements, not including driveway or roadway culverts; or
-Undeveloped lands that will not be served by the system directly (i.e. having the
system pass through or abut such parcel in a street or easement).
-In the opinion of the Village Board, the improvements will replace existing
deficient drainage systems and will not uniformly benefit the affected properties.
(c) Direct Costs Included. Construction costs included in the assessments may
include: All labor and materials as necessary to install main sewers of all sizes,
inlets, inlet leads, culverts, ditching, swaling, manholes, junction chambers,
excavation, backfilling, and restoration.
(d) Assessment Determination. The storm sewer special assessment shall be
determined as follows:
-Storm sewer mains included in the determination of the assessment rate shall not
exceed the cost of a 12-inch sewer or equivalent thereof.
-The assessment rate shall be determined by actual cost of constructing the main
sewer per lineal foot, including related appurtenances, and direct and indirect
costs.
-The assessment rate shall be applied to the frontage of the property, determined
in the same manner as established for water main assessments, to compute the
total assessment for the property.
(5) Street Pavement Improvements.
(a) Previous Improvements. No assessment for street improvements, other than curb
and gutter, shall be levied where:
-Existing developed land has been previously assessed or charged for street
improvements within 25 years prior to the proposed levy, or
-Where a parcel is served by an existing hard surface pavement (i.e. concrete,
bituminous concrete, or surface treated macadam) and such parcel is zoned for
single-family residential use.
(b) Direct Costs Included. Construction costs included in the assessments may
include: full-depth pavement up to 32 feet of total width, curb, and gutter if
integrally constructed with the pavement, rough, and fine grading, base course,
shoulders, parkway restoration, topsoiling, seeding and sodding, including all
labor and materials.
(c) Assessment Determination. The pavement special assessment shall be
determined as follows:
-The assessment rate shall be determined by actual cost of constructing the
pavement per lineal foot, including direct and indirect costs.
-The assessment rate shall be applied to the frontage of the property being
assessed, determined in the same manner as established for water main
assessments, to compute the total assessment for the property.
(d) The front foot assessment rate shall be determined by dividing the total cost of
the pavement to be installed under the proposed project, including intersections,
by the total assessable front footage.
(6) Curb and Gutter Improvements. Assessments for curb and gutter construction shall be
levied as follows:
(a) Direct Costs Included. Construction costs included in the assessments for such
improvements may include the curb and gutter, restoration, rough and backfill
grading, and gravel sub-base.
(b) Assessment Determination. The curb and gutter special assessment shall be
determined as follows:
-The assessment rate shall be determined by actual cost of constructing the main
sewer per lineal foot, including direct and indirect costs.
-The assessment rate shall be applied to the frontage of the property being
assessed, determined in the same manner as established for water main
assessments, to compute the total assessment for the property.
(c) The front foot assessment rate shall be determined by dividing the total cost of
the curb and gutter to be installed under the proposed project, including
intersections, by the total assessable front footage.
(7) Situations Not Covered. The Village Engineer shall recommend procedures in levying
special assessments for public improvements not covered by this section.
Suggested Procedure for Determining the Assessable Footage –Water Main. – Part I
1. Assessable Footage = a
2. Can be divided.
Assessable Footage = a
Assessable Footage = b
3. Can be divided.
Assessable Footage = a
4. Can be subdivided.
Assessable Footage = a
5. Corner Lot – Cannot be divided
a = short side
Larger of the actual frontage on
the short side or the maximum frontage
for the zoning district.
6. Corner Lot – Cannot be
divided
Larger of the actual
frontage on the short side or
the maximum frontage for
the zoning district.
a
b
a
7. Corner Lot – Cannot be divided
Larger of the actual frontage on
the short side or the maximum
frontage for the zoning district.
8. Corner Lot
b = long side
Can be divided
b – x
x = the zoning depth for the
district on the corner lot
5a. Corner Lot – Cannot be divided
Commercial and light manufacturing
a = short side
Assessable footage = a plus that part of
b in excess of 1.5 x the minimum allowable
R-1 zoning frontage of 75 feet
(1.5 x 75 = 112.50)
b
a
6a. Corner Lot – Cannot be divided
Commercial and light manufacturing
a = short side
Assessable footage = a plus that part of b in
excess of 1.5 x the minimum allowable R-1
zoning frontage of 75 feet (1.5 x 75 =
112.50)
7a. Corner Lot – Cannot be divided
Commercial and light manufacturing
b = long side
Assessable footage = a plus that part of b in
excess of 1.5 x the minimum allowable R-1
zoning frontage of 75 feet (1.5 x 75 =
112.50)
8a. Corner Lot – Can be divided
a = short side
b = long side
Assessed footage
8b. Corner Lot – no future main on short
side
Can be divided
b = long side
x = minimum zoning depth for district
Assessable Footage = a + b – z
9. Corner Lot
a = short side
Large Parcel that can be divided or
subdivided.
a + b – the zoning depth for the district
on the corner lot
R-1 zoning depth will be 133 feet;
R-2 zoning depth will be 167 feet;
R-3 zoning depth will be 200 feet;
R-4 zoning depth will be 125 feet;
Commercial & light manufacturing – no
zoning – will be 133 feet.
10. Corner Lot – Cannot be subdivided
a = short side
Larger of the actual frontage on the short
side or the minimum frontage for the
zoning district
11. Corner Lot – Cannot be divided
Short side = x
Long side = y
Larger of the actual frontage on the short
side or the minimum frontage for the
zoning district.
Sanitary Sewer, Water Main, Storm Sewer
12. Unusual Shaped Lot
Assessable Footage = a + x
2
(When a – x is greater than 30% of “a”)
13. Unusual Shaped Lot
Assessable Footage = a + x
2
(When a – x is greater than 30% of “a”)
14. Unusual Shaped Lot
Assessable Footage = a + x
2
(When a – x is greater than 30% of “a”)
15. Unusual Shaped Lot
Assessable Footage = a + x
2
(When a – x is greater than 30% of “a”)
16. Unusual Shaped Lots
Assessable Footage =
(a +b + c) + (d + e + f)
2
17. Unusual Shaped Lots
Very large parcels that can be subdivided
Assessable Footage = a + x
2
Assessable Footage = b
(When a – x is greater than 30% of “a”)
18. Unusual Shaped Lots
Lot is to be served from new main.
Cannot be divided.
“a” is short side.
Assessable Footage = a
Assessable Footage = b
19. Unusual Shaped Lots
Lot is to be served from new main.
Cannot be divided.
“a” is short side.
Assessable Footage = a
Assessable Footage = b
13.12 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY.
(1) Findings.
(a) The management of storm water and other surface water discharges within and
beyond its border is a matter that affects the public health, safety, and welfare of
the Village, its citizens and businesses, and others in the surrounding area.
(b) Failure to effectively manage storm water and other surface water discharge from
already developed and vacant property may create, among other things, erosion
of lands, threaten businesses and residences with water damage, and create
sedimentation and other environmental damage.
(c) The Village’s Storm Water Management System, which provides for the
regulation, collection, and disposal of storm and surface water discharge, is of
benefit and provides services to all real property within the incorporated Village
limits.
(d) The costs of operating and maintaining the Village’s Storm Water Management
System, ensuring regulatory compliance and financing necessary plans, studies,
repairs, replacement, improvements, and extension thereof should, to the extent
practicable, be allocated among property classes in proportion to the contribution
to the System from each property class.
(e) The final report entitled “Stormwater Utility Feasiblity Report” prepared by
Earth Tech, Inc., is hereby declared to constitute the study and description of the
analytical determinations that demonstrate a rationale basis for the enactment of
this ordinance.
(2) Establishment of Storm Water Management Utility. In order to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the public, there is hereby established the Village of Hales Corners
Storm Water Management Utility.
(3) Definitions.
(a) Administrative Costs. The costs of general management and administration of
the Storm Water Management Utility, development plan and erosion control plan
review, and compliance with the requirements of Wisconsin Administrative Code
Chapter NR 216, include, but are not limited to the following:
1. Wages, salaries, and related employee expenses for management and
administration of the Utility together with fringe benefits and premiums
paid on such wages and salaries for the State Worker’s Compensation
coverage.
2. Utility billing and accounting expenses.
3. Office supplies.
4. Permit fees.
5. Consultant and legal fees.
(b) Board. The Village Board of the Village of Hales Corners.
(c) Capital Cost. The cost of acquiring, purchasing, leasing, planning, designing,
constructing, extending, and improving all or any part of the Storm Water
Management System and any principal, interest, or premiums on any
indebtedness incurred for these purposes.
(d) Debt Retirement. All annual principal and interest requirements and obligations
of the Village that relate to storm water management system improvements.
(e) Equivalent Runoff Unit (ERU). An amount of impervious surface area on a lot
or parcel that is equivalent to the amount of impervious surface on a typical
developed single family residential lot. The square feet of impervious surface
area per ERU shall be as established by the Village Board from time to time by
resolution and set forth in a Storm Water Utility Rate Schedule.
(f) Impervious Area or Impervious Surface. A horizontal surface which has been
compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to
infiltration by rainwater. It includes, but is not limited to, asphalt, concrete,
streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots, and other similar surfaces.
(g) Operation and Maintenance Costs (O&M). All direct and indirect costs,
excluding debt service and other capital costs, necessary to ensure adequate
drainage and control of storm and surface waters on a continuing basis and assure
optimal long term function of storm water management system facilities. O&M
costs may include expenses for, but not limited to, the following purposes.
1. Wages and salaries and related employee expenses for operating and
maintenance of the Storm Water Management System, and supervisory
personnel, together with fringe benefits and premiums paid on such
wages and salaries for the State Worker’s Compensation coverage.
2. Fuel and other operating supplies.
3. Repairs to and maintenance of the equipment associated therewith.
4. Premiums for hazard insurance.
5. Premiums for insurance providing coverage against liability for the
injury to persons and/or property.
6. Rents and leasing costs.
7. Operation, licensing, and maintenance costs for trucks and heavy
equipment.
8. Consultant and legal fees.
9. Replacement costs.
(h) Replacement Fund. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, and appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
Storm Water Management System to maintain the performance for which such
system was designed and constructed.
(i) Storm Sewer. A sewer that carries storm and surface drainage but excludes
domestic wastewater and industrial waste.
(j) Storm Water Management Program. Any activities undertaken by the Village of
Hales Corners for the collection, transportation, storage, treatment, and disposal
of storm and surface water and for the reduction or elimination of pollutants in
storm and surface water, including, but not limited to, administration, operation,
and maintenance of the Storm Water Management System and Utility,
constructing storm water sewerage facilities, and complying with the
requirements of the Wisconsin Statutes and Administrative Code.
(k) Storm Water Management System. Any plant, facilities, fixtures, or equipment
owned or leased by the Village for the collection, transportation, storage,
treatment, and disposal of storm water and surface water. Such facilities may
include, without limitation by enumeration, surface and underground drainage
conduits of any type, storm sewers, watercourses, retaining walls and ponds, and
such other facilities as will support a storm water management system.
(l) Storm Water Service Charges. Charges imposed on properties in the Village to
recover the administrative, operating, maintenance, and capital costs relating to
storm water management facilities benefiting properties in the Village. Storm
Water Service Charges may include user charges or any other special fees and
charges that may be required to provide for an equitable sharing of Utility costs
by properties in the Village.
(m) Utility. The Storm Water Management Utility of the Village of Hales Corners.
(n) Village. The Village of Hales Corners.
(4) Application. The application of this section, its rules, regulations, and rates shall apply
to all real property within the incorporated limits of the Village.
(5) Powers and Duties of the Utility.
(a) Facilities. The Village through the Storm Water Management Utility may
acquire, construct, lease, own, operate, maintain, extend, expand, replace, clean,
dredge, repair, conduct, manage, and finance such facilities as are deemed by the
Village to be proper and reasonably necessary for a system of storm and surface
water management. These facilities may include, without limitation by
enumeration, surface and underground drainage facilities, storm sewers,
watercourses, retaining walls and ponds, and such other facilities that will
support a Storm Water Management System.
(b) Rates and Charges. The Village through the Storm Water Management Utility
may establish such rates and charges as are necessary to finance planning, design,
construction, maintenance, and operation of the facilities, regulatory compliance,
and administration of the Utility in accordance with the procedures set forth in
this ordinance.
(c) Budgeting. The Village through the Storm Water Management Utility shall
prepare an annual budget, which is to include all administrative, regulatory
compliance, operation, and maintenance costs, debt service, and other costs
related to the operation of the Storm Water Management Utility. All costs shall
be allocated amongst users of the Storm Water Management System as
recommended by the Public Works Commission and determined by the Village
Board.
(d) The Village may utilize the full authority provided in §66.0821, Wis. Stats., with
respect to financing methods, user charges, and other matters therein dealt with
and shall have all legal authority permitted for municipal utilities to impose
reasonable charges for service.
(6) Management of Utility.
(a) The oversight of the Storm Water Management Utility is hereby vested in the
Village Board. The Board shall direct and delegate the management and
operation of the Storm Water Management Utility to Village staff and shall
prescribe the functions thereof as may be necessary to operate and manage the
Storm Water Management Utility.
(b) The Public Works Commission, appointed in accordance with Village of Hales
Corners Article VIII, Section (2), shall make recommendations to the Village
Board concerning the operation of the Utility.
(c) The Committee of the Whole of the Village Board, in consultation with the
Public Works Commission, shall make recommendations to the Village Board
concerning the Utility budget, service charge rates, and expenditures.
(d) The Village Board shall establish a Storm Water Management Fund, which shall
be used for collection of revenues and payments of expenses relating to the
Utility. Any excess of revenues over expenditures in a year shall be retained by
the fund for subsequent years’ needs.
(e) All utility receipts shall be collected and accounted for by the Village Treasurer.
(f) The Village Board shall cause an annual audit of the financial records of the
Storm Water Management Utility to be made and shall make the records relating
to the Utility available for inspection during regular business hours.
(7) Purpose. There is hereby established a uniform system of storm water service charges
that shall apply to each and every lot or parcel within the Village. It shall be the policy to
establish storm water service charges in such amount in order to pay for all or a part of
the following costs related to the Utility:
(a) Administrative,
(b) Operation and maintenance (O&M),
(c) Contributions to a replacement and capital improvements fund, and
(d) Debt service, including debt retirement, debt service reserves, and coverage
requirements.
The Board may establish and modify storm water service charges as necessary so as to
assure that the charges generate adequate revenues to pay the costs of the storm water
management program and that costs are allocated fairly and proportionately to all parcels
in the Village.
(8) Charges. Storm water service charges may include the following components.
(a) User Charge. A user charge may be imposed on all property that has impervious
surface area. The charge to each parcel shall be based upon the number of
ERU’s assigned to the parcel. The user charge for each parcel shall be equal to
the product of the user charge rate in terms of dollars per ERU and the number of
ERU’s assigned to the parcel.
(b) Special Charges. A special charge may be imposed on property that is in an area
specially benefited by a particular storm water management facility. This charge
will be developed to reflect the benefits in a particular area that may not be
appropriate to allocate to property throughout the Village.
(c) All storm water service charge rates shall be established from time to time by
resolution of the Village Board and set forth in a Storm Water Utility Rate
Schedule attached thereto.
(9) Customer Classification.
(a) For purposes of imposing the user charges, all lots and parcels in the Village
shall be classified into the following four customer classifications:
1. Single Family and Two-Four Family Residential.
2. Condominium and Multi-family Residential.
3. Nonresidential.
4. Undeveloped.
(b) ERU’s shall be calculated for each classification as follows:
1. Single Family and Two-Four Family Residential. One (1) ERU per
dwelling unit.
2. Condominium and Multi-family Residential. The Village Public Works
Director shall be responsible for determining the impervious area of each
multi-family residential parcel based on the best available information
including, but not limited to, data supplied by the Village Engineer,
Village Assessor, Building Inspector, or Planning and Zoning
Administrator, aerial photography, the property owner, tenant, or
developer, or actual on-site measurement. The total impervious area of
the parcel shall be divided by the number of square feet per ERU as
established by the Village Board and set forth in a Storm Water Utility
Rate Table to determine the number of ERU’s, except that in no case
shall a multi-family parcel be assigned less than 0.50 ERU’s per dwelling
unit. The number of ERU’s shall be rounded to the nearest 0.50 ERU’s.
3. Nonresidential Property. The Village Public Works Director shall be
responsible for determining the impervious area of each nonresidential
parcel based on the best available information, including, but not limited
to, data supplied by the Village Engineer, Village Assessor, Building
Inspector, or Planning and Zoning Administrator, aerial photography, the
property owner, tenant, or developer, or actual on-site measurement. The
total impervious area of the parcel shall be divided by the number of
square feet per ERU as established by the Village Board and set forth in
a Storm Water Utility Rate Table to determine the number of ERU’s to
assign to a parcel. The number of ERU’s per parcel shall be rounded to
the nearest 0.50 ERU’s.
4. Undeveloped Property. For any lot or parcel that has no impervious
surface area, no ERU’s shall be assigned for purposes of imposing user
charges under this ordinance.
(c) New Construction. For all classifications other than single family and two-four
family residential, the construction of new or expanded buildings, driveways, or
other structures shall be subject to an increase in the number of ERU’s assigned
to a lot or parcel. The Village shall recalculate the number of ERU’s upon
completion of new construction.
(10) Determination of Storm Water Service Charges. The amount of the charge to be
imposed for each classification shall be made by resolution of the Village Board. The
current rates will be set forth in a Storm Water Utility Rate Schedule and kept on file in
the office of the Village Clerk. The rates shall be reviewed by the Village Board on an
annual basis and adjusted as necessary.
(11) Adjustment.
(a) The Village Board shall adopt, by separate resolution, criteria recommended by
the Director of Public Works for providing adjustments.
(b) Adjustments may be considered for customers who own and properly maintain
storm water management facilities, such as a retention or detention basin. In
considering such a request, the Director of Public Works shall consider whether
and to what extent the Village cost of providing service is or making service
available to a property has been lessened by the retention or detention basin. If
the Village’s cost of providing service or making service available to a property
has not been lessened by the retention or detention basin, the request for the
lowered adjustment multiplier shall be denied. If the Village’s cost of providing
service or making service available to a property has been lessened by the
retention or detention basin, the adjustment multiplier shall be reduced to reflect
the approximate reduction in the Village’s costs. The Village’s debt service costs
and extension and replacement costs shall not be considered to be reduced unless
the existence of a retention or detention basin results in a reduction of the size or
scope of the Village’s storm water collection system.
(c) If all of the storm water from a nonresidential property discharges directly into a
qualifying receiving stream without crossing the property of another and the
discharge does not result in the exceedance of Federal, State, or local water
quality standards, the customer is eligible for an adjustment multiplier less than
one (1) but equal to or greater than the percentage equal to that portion of the
Village’s User Fee Revenue budgeted towards administrative and capital
expenditures for the current year.
(d) If all of the storm water from a nonresidential property discharges directly into a
qualifying receiving stream without crossing the property of another and the
nonresidential customer is a holder of or has filed a proper and complete
application for a Municipal Storm Water Discharge Permit, as provided in
§283.33, Wis. Stats., and as further detailed in Department of Natural Resources
(NR) 216.01 through 216.11 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, the customer
is eligible for a lowered adjustment multiplier less than one (1) but equal to or
greater than the percentage equal to that portion of the Village’s User Fee
Revenue budgeted toward administrative and capital expenditures for the current
year.
(e) If all the storm water from a nonresidential property discharges directly into a
storm water collection system constructed and maintained by the Milwaukee
Metropolitan Sewerage District (MMSD) without crossing the property of
another, the customer is eligible for a lowered adjustment multiplier less than one
(1) but equal to or greater than the percentage equal to that portion of the
Village’s User Fee Revenue budgeted toward administrative and capital
expenditures for the current year.
(f) If all the storm water from a nonresidential property discharges directly into a
storm sewer constructed and maintained by the Village on the nonresidential
customer’s property pursuant to an easement and if, after the storm water travels
through the easement area, it is discharged as provided in (c) or (d), the customer
is eligible for a lowered adjustment multiplier less than one (1) but equal to or
greater than the percentage equal to that portion of the Village’s User Fee
Revenue budgeted toward administrative and capital expenditures for the current
year.
(g) In considering a request for an adjustment, the Director of Public Works may, in
his or her discretion, separately examine multiple drainage areas on one piece of
property and may recommend allowing an adjustment multiplier for a portion of
the property if the characteristics of one or more drainage areas meet the criteria
set forth in this section.
(h) The Director of Public Works, at his or her discretion, may recommend allowing
a lowered adjustment multiplier which may be as low as zero (0) for a
nonresidential property for reasons other than as specifically set forth in this
section, provided that the adjustment is reasonable and not unjustly
discriminatory.
(i) No adjustments shall be considered for structural or nonstructural Best
Management Practices that are required in order to comply with any local, State,
or Federal regulation, such as the Village of Hales Corners Storm Water
Management Ordinance, MMSD Chapter 13, Wis. Stats. Chapter 30, and
Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapters NR-103 and NR-216.
(j) No adjustments shall be considered for any “natural” features, such as, but not
limited to, wetlands, lakes and floodplains, or water impoundment of any kind in
existence prior to passage of this ordinance.
(k) Director of Public Works Review Procedure.
1. The Director of Public Works shall issue a written determination as to
whether a written request for adjustment will be granted, denied, or
granted in part within 30 days of receipt of all materials and reports
required by the Director of Public Works on the request for an
adjustment. The determination shall be sent to the customer requesting
the adjustment.
2. A customer may appeal a determination under subsection (12)(b) within
30 days of receipt of the Director’s determination by submitting a written
request to the Public Works Commission asking to review the
determination.
3. If no timely written request for appeal is received pursuant to subsection
(12)(d), the determination of the Director of Public Works shall be final.
4. The Public Works Commission review of the appeal to the determination
shall be completed within 45 days of the receipt of the written request for
appeal. The Public Works Commission shall review the appeal and
determine whether the Director’s determination should be approved,
modified, or rejected. The determination of the Public Works
Commission shall be in writing and set forth in detail the reason or
reasons for its decision and shall inform the customer.
(l) Application of Adjustment. Any adjustment or adjustment multiplier granted
shall thereafter be used to calculate the customer’s user charges. The reduction
shall only apply for the period of time subsequent the granting of the request for
adjustment. There shall be no retroactive adjustment for user charges imposed
prior to the granting of the request.
(m) Recertification. Recipients of adjustment shall, every five (5) years, file a
recertification of the conditions under which the adjustment was granted. Failure
to do so may result in revocation of the adjustment.
(12) Method of Review.
(a) As a condition precedent to challenging any storm water utility charge, the
charge must be paid under protest to the Village.
(b) Within 30 days of payment, a written challenge to the storm water charge must
be filed with the Village Clerk on behalf of the customer, specifying all bases for
the challenge and the amount of the storm water charge the customer asserts is
appropriate. Failure to file a challenge within 30 days of payment waives all
right to later challenge the charge.
(c) The Public Works Commission will determine whether the storm water charge is
fair and reasonable or whether a refund is due to the customer. The Public
Works Commission may act with or without a hearing and will inform the
customer in writing of its decision.
(d) The customer has 30 days from the decision of the Public Works Commission to
file a written appeal to the Village Board.
(e) If the Village Board determines that a refund is due to the customer, the refund
will be applied as a credit on the customer’s next storm water bill.
(13) Special Charge and Assessment Authority. In addition to any other method for
collection of the charges established pursuant to this ordinance for storm water utility
costs, the Village Board finds that these charges may be levied on property by special
charge pursuant to §66.0627, Wis. Stats. The charges established by the special charge
must reasonably reflect the benefits conferred on property. The mailing of the bill for
such charges to the owner will serve as notice to the owner that failure to pay the charges
when due may result in them being charged pursuant to the authority of §66.0627, Wis.
Stats. In addition, the Village may provide notice each October of any unpaid charges to
the storm water utility, which charges, if not paid by November 15, may be placed upon
the tax roll under §66.0627, Wis. Stats. In addition to the foregoing special charge
authority, charges may be established and collected under this ordinance by way of
special assessment pursuant to §66.0701 or §66.0703, Wis. Stats.
(14) Billing and Payment.
(a) User charges for residential users shall be billed in advance on an annual basis as
a special charge on the annual property tax bill. All other users shall be billed on
a quarterly basis. Payment of quarterly bills shall be made within 25 days of
mailing by the Village. In the event that such bill is not paid when due, a penalty
of 1.5% per month on the unpaid balance shall be added thereto. All bills shall
be payable to the office of the Village Treasurer, 5635 S. New Berlin Road,
Hales Corners, Wisconsin 53130.
(b) The property owner is held responsible for all storm water service charges on real
property that he or she or it owns. All storm water bills and notices of any nature
relative to the storm water management program will be addressed to the owner
and delivered to the addressee by first class mail.
(c) Reasonable care will be exercised in the delivery of Storm Water Service
Charges bills. A failure to receive a Storm Water Service Charges bill, however,
shall not relieve any person of the responsibility for payment of Storm Water
Service Charges within the prescribed period nor exempt any party from any
penalty imposed for delinquency in the payment thereof.
(d) Unpaid storm water service charges shall be a lien upon the property served and
shall be enforced as provided in §66.0809(3), Wis. Stats.
CHAPTER 14
Orderly Conduct
14.01 Dangerous and Concealed Weapons
14.02 Discharge of Firearms and Weapons
14.03 Regulation Fireworks
14.04 Abandoned or unattended Refrigerators, Etc.
14.05 Loud and Unnecessary Noise Prohibited
14.06 Obedience to Officers
14.07 Prohibited Acts
14.08
14.09 Gambling, Lotteries, Fraudulent Devices, and Practices Prohibited
14.10 Disorderly Houses Prohibited
14.11 Loitering Prohibited
14.12 No Loitering by Minors
14.13 Emergency Powers for the Protection of Persons and Property
14.14 Fair Housing
14.15 Issue of Worthless Checks
14.16 Shoplifting
14.17 Failure to Return Library Books and Property
14.18 Trespass under Potential Dangerous Conditions
14.19 Misuse of 911 Emergency Dialing
14.20 Discharge and Cleanup of Hazardous Materials
14.21 Penalty
14.22 Tattoo and Body Piercing Establishments
14.23 Recycling of Waste Material
14.24 Graffiti Vandalism Prohibited
14.25 Distribution of Viewer Discretion Labeled Materials to Minors Prohibited
14.26 Throwing of Objects During Parades Prohibited
14.01 DANGEROUS AND CONCEALED WEAPONS.
(1) Definitions.
(a) Dangerous Weapon. The term “dangerous weapon” shall include any instrument
which by its capabilities of use is liable to produce death or great bodily harm.
The following are dangerous per se: black jack, billy, sandclub, sandbag,
bludgeon, sling shot, slung shot, pistol, revolver, any instrument which impels a
missile by compressed air, spring, or other means, any weapon upon which
loaded or blank cartridges are used, cross-knuckles of any metal, barbed, or blade
type arrowhead, bowie knife, dirk knife, dirk, dagger, switch blade knife, or any
knife which has a blade that may be drawn without the necessity of contact with
the blade itself but is instead automatically opened by slight pressure on the
handle or some other part of the knife and is commonly known as a switch blade
knife, straight-edge razor, or any other knife having a blade three (3) inches or
longer. Instruments not herein specifically enumerated are nonetheless
dangerous weapons when the fall within the terms of the above definition.
(b) Concealed Weapon. The term “concealed weapon” shall include any dangerous
weapon which is hidden from ordinary observation. Absolute invisibility is not
necessary to constitute a weapon as being concealed. Any weapon which is
carried within a case is not to be construed as a concealed weapon if the case is
plainly visible.
(2) Carrying Dangerous or Concealed Weapons Prohibited. No person, except
policemen or any officer authorized to serve process, shall wear concealed about his
person, any dangerous weapon. The carrying of any instrument necessary to certain
trades, crafts, sports, or professions during the usual course of such endeavor is exempt
from the terms of this section.
(3) License for Sale of Weapons.
(a) No person shall engage in the business of buying or selling, or shall sell or give
away to any person, or buy or receive of any person, within the Village, any
weapon listed or defined as dangerous, except rifles or shotguns used for hunting
purposes, air rifles, weapons used solely for target practice purposes, straightedge
razors, household purpose knives, any knife having a blade less than three
(3) inches, or instruments necessary to certain trades, crafts, professions, or
sports, without securing a license to do so, and no person having such license
shall sell or give away any such weapon to any person within the Village who
has not secured a permit from the Chief of Police to purchase such weapon. It is
the intent of this section that no permit to purchase and no license to sell shall be
required for the purchase or sale of sporting goods, which are defined as any of
these items that further interest in the commonly accepted fields of sport.
(b) Any person desiring a license authorizing the sale of any weapon listed or
defined as dangerous, except rifles or shotguns used for hunting purposes, target
practice weapons, or any sporting goods as defined in paragraph (a) hereof,
straight-edge razors, household purpose knives, any knife having a blade less
than three(3) inches, or instruments necessary to certain trades, crafts,
professions, or sports, shall make application to the Village Board in writing,
setting out in such application the full name of the residence of the applicant, if
an individuals, and if a firm or corporation, the name and residence of each of its
members or officers. Such applicant shall also set out the location at which it is
intended or desired to conduct such business. Upon the receipt of such
application the Village Board may issue such license to the applicant upon his
payment to the Village Treasurer of an annual license fee of $5.00. The date of
expiration of such license shall be June 30 of each year.
(4) Selling Weapons to Minors Prohibited. No person shall engage in the business of
buying or selling or shall sell or give away to any minor under the age of 21, any weapon
listed or defined as dangerous, except household purpose knives or knives having blades
less than three (3) inches.
(5) Weekly Report on Sale of Dangerous Weapons. Every person who is licensed to deal
in the sale of dangerous weapons shall make out and deliver to the Chief of Police every
Tuesday before 12:00 p.m. a legible and correct report of every sale or gift made under
authority of said license during the preceding week, which report shall contain the date of
such sale or gift, the name of the purchaser or donee, with his or her address and age, the
number, the kind, description, and price of such weapon, the number of the purchaser’s
permit, and the purpose for the purchase of such weapon; provided, however, that it shall
not be necessary for any person engaged in the buying and selling of such dangerous
weapons, in wholesale or job-lots, to make the above mentioned report, but such person
shall permit the Chief of Police to examine the books of such person at any time he may
deem it advisable. Said report shall not be required on the sale of the following: rifles or
shotguns used for hunting purposes; air rifles; weapons used for target practice purposes;
straight-edge razors; household purpose knives; any knife having a blade of less than
three (3) inches; or instrument necessary to certain trades, crafts, professions, or sports.
(6) Permit Required for Purchase of Dangerous Weapons. No person shall purchase or
obtain by gift or otherwise without first securing from the Chief of Police a permit, any
dangerous weapon, except a rifle or shotgun used for hunting purposes, air rifle, weapon
used solely for target practice purposes, sporting goods, as hereinbefore defined, straightedge
razors, household purpose knives, any knife having a blade less than three (3)
inches, or instruments necessary to certain trades, crafts, professions, or sports. Before
any such permit is granted, an application in writing shall be made therefore, setting forth
in such application the name, address, age, height, weight, complexion, nationality, and
other elements of identification of any person desiring such permit.
Such application shall also contain a recommendation from two (2) persons who shall be
residents of the State, that the permit should be issued. No such permit shall be granted
to a person having been convicted of a felony or to minors. Such permit shall be
delivered to the person or agent thereof from whom such instrument or weapon is
purchased and shall be filed with the Village Clerk within three (3) months from the date
of the issuance of the same. No person shall mutilate a shotgun or rifle or destroy the
identification marks on any firearm. No shotgun or rifle shall be shortened to barrel
length of less than 18 inches nor shall anyone remove the serial number from any
weapon.
14.02 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS AND WEAPONS. No person shall discharge any air
rifle, instrument which compels a missile, shot, or other projectile by compressed air,
spring, or other means, firearm, or arrow from a bow within the Village except:
(1) Upon a duly established revolver, rifle, or archery range, the construction of which has
been approved by the Village Board.
(2) In self defense.
(3) By any peace officer in the lawful discharge of his duties.
(4) As authorized in advance by the Chief of Police for compliance with this subsection and
which involves only the discharge of blank cartridges; during a public organized athletic
event (starter pistol) or for community or school educational purposes or public ceremony
or celebration purposes.
14.03 REGULATION OF FIREWORKS.
(1) Definition. In this section, “fireworks” means anything manufactured, processed, or
packaged for exploding, emitting sparks, or combustion which does not have another
common use, but does not include the following:
(a) Fuel or a lubricant.
(b) A firearm cartridge or shotgun shell.
(c) A flare used or possessed or sol for use as a signal in an emergency or in the
operation of a railway, aircraft, watercraft, or motor vehicle.
(d) A match, cigarette lighter, stove, furnace, candle, lantern, or space heater.
(e) Tobacco and a tobacco product.
(f) A cap containing not more than one-quarter grain of explosive mixture, if the cap
is used or possessed or sold for use in a device which prevents direct bodily
contact with a cap when it is in place for explosion.
(g) A toy snake which contains no mercury.
(h) A model rocket engine.
(i) A sparkler on a wire or wood stick not exceeding 36 inches in length or 0.25 inch
in outside diameter which does not contain magnesium, chlorate, or perchlorate.
(j) A device designed to spray out paper confetti or streamers and which contains
less than one quarter grain of explosive mixture.
(k) A device deigned to produce an audible sound but not explode, spark, move, or
emit an external flame after ignition and which does not exceed three (3) grams
in total weight.
(l) A device that emits smoke with no external flame and does not leave the ground.
(m) A cylindrical fountain not exceeding 100 grams in total weight with an inside
tube diameter not exceeding 0.75 inch designed to sit on the ground and emit
only sparks and smoke.
(n) A cone fountain not exceeding 75 grams in total weight designed to sit on the
ground and emit only sparks and smoke.
(2) Sale and Use.
(a) Sale and Use. No person may sell or possess with intent to sell any fireworks,
including those devices described in (1)(f) through (n) within the Village limits.
No person may possess or use fireworks without a user’s permit from the Clerk
of the Village following approval of the chiefs of the fire and police departments.
A user’s permit may be issued to a person listed under subsection (2)(b)1 to 6.
(b) A permit under this section may be issued only to the following:
1. A public authority.
2. A fair association.
3. An amusement park.
4. A park board.
5. A civic organization.
6. An agricultural producer for the protection of crops from predatory birds
and animals.
(c) A person issued a permit for crop protection shall erect appropriate warning signs
disclosing the use of fireworks for crop protection.
(d) No person may use a device listed under subsection (1)(f) to (n) within the
Village of Hales Corners except upon private property with the owner’s consent.
(e) No person may possess or use fireworks or any device listed under subsection
(1)(f) to (n) while attending any permitted fireworks display.
(f) The Village Clerk or designee, if the Clerk is unavailable, issuing a permit under
this subsection shall require an indemnity bond with good and sufficient sureties
or policy of liability insurance for the payment of all claims that may arise by
reason of injuries to person or property from the handling, use, or discharge of
fireworks under the permit. The bond or policy shall be taken in the name of the
Village, and any person injured thereby may bring an action on the bond or
policy n the person’s own name to recover the damage the person has sustained,
but the aggregate liability of surety or insurer to all persons shall not exceed the
amount of the bond or policy. The bond or policy, if required, together with a
copy of the permit shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk.
(g) A permit under this subsection shall specify all of the following:
1. The name and address of the permit holder.
2. The kind and quantity of fireworks which will be used.
3. The date and location of permitted use.
4. Other special conditions prescribed by Ordinance.
(h) A copy of a permit under this subsection shall be given to municipal fire and law
enforcement officials at least two (2) days before the date of authorized use.
(i) A permit under this subsection may not be issued to a minor.
(j) Permit applications must be filed with the Village Clerk no later than 5:00 p.m.,
June 27.
(k) No person may use any devise listed under subsection (1)(f) to (n) within the
Village of Hales Corners during a period of fire hazard conditions upon the
declaration of an emergency by the Village President after consultation with the
Fire Chief.
(3) Enforcement. Fireworks stored, handled, sold, possessed, or used by a person in
violation of this section except as defined in (2)(d) shall be seized. The fireworks shall
be destroyed after conviction for a violation, or otherwise, returned to the owner.
(4) Penalties. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 14.18, a person who violates this
section shall forfeit not more than $1,000.00. A parent or legal guardian of a minor who
consents to the use of fireworks by the minor shall forfeit not more than $1,000.00.
14.04 ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS, ETC. No person shall
leave outside any building, dwelling, or at a place accessible to children, any unattended
or discarded ice box, refrigerator, or other container which has an airtight door which
may not be opened from the inside.
14.05 LOUD AND UNNECESSARY NOISE PROHIBITED. No person shall make or
cause to be made any loud, disturbing, or unnecessary sounds or noises such as may tend
to annoy or disturb another in or about any public street, alley, or park of any private
residence.
14.06 OBEDIENCE TO OFFICERS.
(1) No person shall, without reasonable excuse or justification, resist or in any way interfere
with any officer of the Village while such officer is doing any act in his official capacity
and with lawful authority.
(2) Obstructing Firemen or Policemen. No person shall willfully hinder, obstruct, or
otherwise interfere with the Fire or Police Departments, or any member thereof, or its
auxiliaries, while engaged in fighting a fire, or in traveling thereto or therefrom, or while
otherwise engaged in the performance of its duty, or any official function, or shall
willfully damage or destroy property belonging to the Fire or Police Departments, or any
member thereof, while so engaged, nor shall any person commit an assault, battery, or
throw any object which could inflict bodily harm upon a member of the Fire or Police
Department
14.07 PROHIBITED ACTS. No person within the Village shall:
(1) Language. Use any profane, vulgar, or obscene language or loud, boisterous, insulting,
or abusive language tending to excite a breach of the peace, or tending to destroy good
order within the Village.
(2) Gamblers, Vagrants, Etc. Be on the street as a gambler, common prostitute, vagrant,
mendicant street beggar, organ grinder, or street musician playing on any instrument for
the purpose of begging.
(3) Explosives. Recklessly or willfully discharge any explosive, or in any other manner
create any noise or disturbance.
(4) Violence. Make any threat of violence, or resort to violence.
(5) Use of Weapons. Flourish or use any weapon, tending to disturb the peace and good
order, or to frighten any persons in said Village.
(6) Riots, Etc. Participate in, or being present, aid, abet, or encourage any assault, affray,
riot, dog fight, disorderly assemblage.
(7) Assault. Commit any assault upon another.
(8) Indecent Exposure. Make any indecent, immodest, or immoral exhibition or exposure
of his or her person, or cause or procure any other person to do so.
(9) Intoxication. Be found intoxicated in such a place or under such circumstances as to
disturb the peace and good order.
(10) Spooning. Spoon, caress, or fondle a person of the opposite sex or of the same sex in,
upon, or about any street, highway, alley, or other public or exposed places, or in any
motor vehicle, or in any place where any other person or persons passing or being in or
upon any public street or other public place might see the same, or in any way, manner,
or place, so as to annoy any other person exercising his or her lawful rights.
(11) False Reports. Intentionally and falsely report in any manner, directly, to the sheriff,
coroner, or any police officer that a violation of a State law or a Village ordinance has
been or is being committed at any place within said Village, or that an accident has
occurred for the purpose of causing any such officer to investigate such report, or mislead
any such officer in any manner.
(12) False Fire Alarms. Intentionally and falsely report in any manner, directly or indirectly,
to any officer or employee of any Fire Department located within said Village, or any
officer or employee of said Village, that there is any fire in said Village for the purpose of
misleading.
(13) Trespass. Recklessly or willfully commit any trespass upon the property of another.
(14) Destruction of Property. Willfully injure or intentionally deface, destroy, or unlawfully
remove, take, or meddle with any property belonging to the Village or its departments or
to any private person without the consent of the owner or proper authority.
(15) Dumping. No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited, dump, sort, scatter, or leave
any rubbish, stones, wire, earth, ashes, cinders, sawdust, hay, glass, manure, filth, snow,
ice, dirt, grass, leaves, twigs, shrubs, construction waste, cans, bottles, garbage, or other
offensive or nauseous material in any public street, alley, or upon any public property of
any nature nor upon any vacant private property except upon approved private or public
dumps and except where certain of these materials, are used in a normal manner for
improving property by grading, fertilizing, or resurfacing.
(16) Littering. No person shall scatter old newspapers, old bills, waste paper, floor
sweepings, cans, paper cartons, bottles, or any other litter of any description whatsoever
upon public or private property. Such materials shall be deposited in sufficient public or
private receptacles.
(17)
(18) Outdoor and Refuse Burning.
(a) Purpose. This Subsection (18) is intended to promote the public health, safety,
and welfare and to safeguard the health, comfort, living conditions, safety, and
welfare of the citizens of the Village of Hales Corners due to the air pollution and
fire hazards of open burning, outdoor burning, and refuse burning.
(b) Applicability. This Subsection (18) applies to all outdoor burning and refuse
burning within the Village of Hales Corners.
1. This Subsection (18) does not apply to grilling or cooking using
charcoal, wood, propane, or natural gas in cooking or grilling appliances.
2. This Subsection (18) does not apply to burning in a stove, furnace,
fireplace, or other heating device within a building used for human or
animal habitation unless the material being burned includes reuse as
defined in Subsection (d) of this Subsection (18).
3. This Subsection (18) does not apply to the use of propane, acetylene,
natural gas, gasoline, or kerosene in a device intended for heating,
construction, or maintenance activities.
(c) Severability. Should any portion of this Subsection (18) be declared
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of
this Subsection (18) shall not be affected.
(d) Definitions.
1. “Campfire” means a small outdoor fire intended for recreation or
cooking using only clean dry wood and sticks, and newspaper or paper to
ignite the same, but not including a fire intended for disposal of other
yard waste or refuse.
2. “Clean Wood” means natural wood which has not been painted,
varnished, or coated with a similar material, has not been pressure treated
with preservatives, and does not contain resins or glues as in plywood or
other composite wood products.
3. “Fire Chief” means the Chief of the Hales Corners Fire Department or
other person authorized by the Fire Chief.
4. “Outdoor Burning” means open burning or burning in an outdoor woodfired
furnace.
5. “Open Burning” means kindling or maintaining a fire where the products
of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing
through a stack or a chimney.
6. “Outdoor Wood-fired Furnace” means a wood-fired furnace, stove, or
boiler that is not located within a building intended for habitation by
humans or domestic animals.
7. “Refuse” means any waste material except clean wood.
8. “Yard Waste’ means leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris and
brush, including clean woody vegetative material no greater than six (6)
inches in diameter.
(e) General Prohibition on Outdoor Burning and Refuse Burning. Open burning,
outdoor burning, and refuse burning are prohibited in the Village of Hales
Corners unless the burning is specifically permitted by this Subsection (18).
(f) Materials that may not be Burned.
1. Unless a specific written approval has been obtained from the
Department of Natural Resources, the following materials may not be
burned in an open fire, incinerator, burn barrel, furnace, stove, or any
other indoor or outdoor incinerator or heating device. The Village of
Hales Corners will not issue a permit for burning any of the following
materials without air pollution control devices and a written copy of an
approval by the Department of Natural Resources.
2. Rubbish or garbage including, but not limited to, food wastes, food
wraps, packaging, animal carcasses, paint or painted materials, furniture,
composite shingles, construction or demolition debris, or other household
or business wastes.
3. Waste oil or other oily wastes except used oil burning in a heating device
for energy recovery subject to the restrictions in Chapter NR 590,
Wisconsin Administrative Code.
4. Asphalt and products containing asphalt.
5. Treated or painted wood including, but not limited to, plywood,
composite wood products or other wood products that are painted,
varnished, or treated with preservatives.
6. Any plastic material including, but not limited to, nylon, PVC, ABS,
polystyrene or urethane foam, and synthetic fabrics, plastic films, and
plastic containers.
7. Rubber including tires and synthetic rubber-like products.
8. Newspaper, corrugated cardboard, container board, office paper, and
other materials that must be recycled in accordance with the recycling
ordinance except as provided in Subsection (k) of this Subsection (18).
(g) Burning Leaves, Brush, Clean Wood, and Other Vegetative Debris. Open
burning of dry leaves, weeds, brush, stumps, clean wood, and other vegetative
debris is allowed only in accordance with the following provisions.
1. Open burning under this Subsection shall be conducted only following
the issuance of and in accordance with a permit issued under Subsection
(l) of this Subsection (18), except where noted in Subsections (10) and
(11) below.
2. Open burning under this Subsection and conducted under a permit issued
under this Subsection (18) may only be conducted between on and after
April 15 and through May 15 and between on and after October 15 and
through November 30, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. and
on Saturdays only.
3. All allowed open burning shall be conducted in a safe nuisance free
manner, when wind velocity is nine (9) miles per hour or less as
determined by the National Weather Service and weather conditions are
such as to minimize adverse effects and not create a health hazard or a
visibility hazard on roadways, railroads, airfields, sidewalks, and ditches.
4. Open burning shall be conducted only on the property on which the
materials were generated.
5. Open burning shall be constantly attended and supervised by a competent
person of at least 18 years of age until the fire is extinguished and cold.
The person shall have readily available for use of fire extinguishing
equipment as may be necessary for the total control of the fire.
6. No materials may be burned, or any ash residue disposed of, upon any
street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, alley, parkway, drainage ditch, public
place, or public right-of-way.
7. No burning shall be undertaken within 30 feet from any building or
structure, combustible material, combustible wall or partition, exterior
window opening, building or structure exit access, or building or
structure exit, unless authorized by the Fire Chief.
8. Except for barbeque, gas, and charcoal grills, no open burning shall be
undertaken during periods when either the Fire Chief or the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources has issued a burning ban applicable to
the area.
9. No open burning may be conducted on days when the Department of
Natural Resources has declared an ozone action day applicable to the
Village of Hales Corners.
10. Fires set for the ecological management of native plan species are
allowed, without obtaining a permit, on property at least one (1) acre in
size and zoned P-1 (Parks and Institutional), provided that prior approval
is obtained from the Fire Chief, who shall consider climatological
conditions, the ground, flora, and structure conditions upon the subject
property and adjoining property, in light of public safety.
11. Burning of trees, limbs, stumps, brush, or weeds for clearing or
maintenance of rights-of-way, performed or authorized by the Village
Department of Public Works, is allowed, without obtaining a permit, if
approved by the Fire chief and in accordance with other provisions of
this Subsection (18).
(h) Small outdoor campfires (as defined in Subsection (d)(1)) for cooking,
ceremonies, or recreation are allowed, without obtaining a permit, provided that
the fire is confined by a control device or structure such as a fire ring or fire pit.
A small outdoor campfire does not require a permit, provided that the fire
complies with all other applicable provisions of this Subsection (18).
1. Small outdoor campfires are subject to the provisions of Subsections
(g)(3), (5), (6), (8), and (9) of this Subsection (18).
(i) Burn Barrels. No person shall use or maintain a burn barrel in the Village of
Hales Corners.
(j) Outdoor Wood-fired Furnaces. No person shall install, use, or maintain an
outdoor wood-fired furnace in the Village of Hales Corners.
(k) Fire Department Practice Burns. Notwithstanding Subsections (e) and (f) of this
Subsection (18), the Village of Hales Corners may burn a standing building if
necessary for fire fighting practice and if the practice burn complies with the
requirements of the Department of Natural Resources.
(l) Permits. Unless specifically exempted elsewhere in this Subsection (18), no
person shall start or maintain any open burning without a permit issued by the
Village.
1. The annual permit fee is $25.00, which fee amount may be changed by
the resolution of the Village Board from time to time and kept on file in
the Office of the Village Clerk. The term of a burning permit shall be
annual, from January 1 through November 30 of each year. The permit
shall be displayed on the property at all times while permitted burning is
occurring on the property, so that the permit is visible and conspicuous to
view by persons from the public street right-of-way adjoining the
property.
2. Sunset Provision. Open burning will be permitted until January 1, 2009,
when all open burning permitted by a permit under this Subsection (18)
shall be prohibited.
3. A burning permit issued under this Subsection shall require compliance
with all applicable provisions of this Subsection (18) and any additional
special restrictions deemed necessary to protect public health and safety.
4. Any violation of the conditions of a burning permit or failure to obtain a
burning permit shall be deemed a violation of this Subsection (18). Any
violation of this Subsection (18) or the burning permit shall void the
permit and subject the violator to the penalty provisions of Subsection
(o) of this Subsection (18).
(m) Liability. A person utilizing or maintaining an outdoor fire shall be responsible
for all fire suppression costs and any other liability resulting from damage caused
by the fire.
(n) Right of Entry. The Fire Chief, Zoning Administrator, Village Administrator,
Police Chief, Health Administrator, Sanitarian, Building Inspector, or their
respective designees of the Village of Hales Corners may inspect any property
for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this Subsection
(18). [Note: If the owner or occupant of the premises denies access to the
property for this purpose, a special inspection warrant may be obtained in
accordance with Section 66.0119, Wis. Stats.]
(o) Enforcement and Penalties.
1. The Fire Chief, Zoning Administrator, Village Administrator, Police
Chief, Health Administrator, Sanitarian, Building Inspector, and any
agents designated by these individuals are authorized to enforce the
provisions of this Subsection (18)
2. The penalty for a first offense shall be double the permit fee. Any
subsequent violation of this Subsection (18) shall subject the violator to
the penalty provisions of Section 19.04 of the Municipal Code.
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22) Bribery. With intent to influence the conduct of any public officer or public employee in
relation to any matter which by law is pending or might come before him in his capacity.
As such officer or employee or with intent to induce him to do or omit to do any act in
violation of his lawful duty, transfer, or promise to him or on his behalf any property or
any personal advantage which he is not authorized to receive.
(23) Crimes and Misdemeanors. Participate in any crime or misdemeanor as defined in the
Wisconsin Statutes.
(24) Non-resident Dumping. As a non-resident of the Village, dump any matter in any
dumpster, bin, box, barrel, or other receptacle provided by the Village for the use of
Village residents.
(25) Orderly Conduct at or Near Licensed Premises. Possess an open or unsealed
container of fermented malt beverage or intoxicating liquor, or disturb the peace, or
engage in an altercation, or be loud or boisterous, or use any controlled substance, or act
in a disorderly or riotous or indecent manner, or loiter, outside the confines of any Class
“A” or Class “B” fermented malt beverage or intoxicating liquor licensed premises within
a distance of 300 feet from the main entrance of such licensed premises.
(26) By means of telephone calls originating within or received within the limits of the Village
of Hales Corners:
(a) Make any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal which is obscene, lewd,
lascivious, filthy, or indecent;
(b) Make a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues, with the intent to
abuse, threaten, or harass any person at the called number or numbers;
(c) Make or cause the telephone of another repeatedly or continuously to ring, with
intent to harass any person at the called number or numbers;
(d) Make repeated telephone calls, during which conversation ensues, solely to
harass any person at the called number or numbers;
(e) Knowingly permit any telephone under his control to be sued for any purpose
prohibited by this section;
(f) In conspiracy or concerted action with other persons, make repeated calls or
simultaneous calls solely to harass any person at the called number or numbers.
(27) Sell, expose, or offer for sale, use, keep, discharge, or explode any fireworks as defined
and excepted in §167.10, Wis. Stats., which is herein adopted by reference. Any
violation of said §167.10, Wis. Stats., shall be a violation of this ordinance.
(28) Harassment.
(a) Strike, shove, kick, or otherwise subject another person to physical contact or
attempt or threaten to do the same.
(b) Engage in a course of conduct or repeatedly commit acts which harass or
intimidate the person and which serve no legitimate purpose.
(c) This subsection does not prohibit any person from participating in lawful conduct
in labor disputes under §103.53, Wis. Stats.
(d) §813.125 and 947.013, Wis. Stats., are herein adopted by reference, and the
municipal court of Hales Corners is specifically granted concurrent jurisdiction in
the commencement of an action, the issuance of a temporary restraining order,
and the granting of an injunction as provided in §813.125, Wis. Stats.
(29)
(30) Drug Paraphernalia.
(a) Definition. In this section “drug paraphernalia” means all equipment, products,
and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, designed for use, or
marketed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a
controlled substance, as defined in Chapter 161, Wis. Stats., in violation of this
section. It includes, but is not limited to:
1. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, or harvesting of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be
derived.
2. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled
substances.
3. Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in
increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance.
4. Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of
controlled substances.
5. Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances.
6. Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose, and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for
use in cutting controlled substances.
7. Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in
removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining
marijuana.
8. Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices used, intended
for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances.
9. Capsules, balloons, envelopes, or other containers used, intended for use,
or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances.
10. Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use
in storing or concealing controlled substances.
11. Hypodermic syringes, needles, and other objects used, intended for use,
or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into
the human body.
12. Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling,
or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into
the human body, including, but not limited to:
a. Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or
punctured metal bowls.
b. Water pipes.
c. Carburetion tubes and devices.
d. Smoking and carburetion masks.
e. Objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana
cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the
hand.
f. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials.
g. Chamber pipes.
h. Carburetor pipes.
i. Electric pipes.
j. Air-driven pipes.
k. Chillums.
l. Bongs.
m. Ice pipes or chillers.
(b) Determination of Drug Paraphernalia. In determining whether an object is drug
paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, but is not limited to, the
following factors:
1. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning
its use.
2. Prior convictions, if any, of an owner and/or anyone in control of the
object, under any federal or state law, or any ordinance, rule, or
regulation of any political subdivision, relating to any controlled
substance, as defined in Chapter 161, Wis. Stats., or any drug
paraphernalia offense.
3. The proximity of the object in time and space to a direct violation of this
section.
4. The proximity of object to controlled substances.
5. The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object.
6. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or of anyone
in control of the object to deliver it to persons whom the person knows
intend to use the object in violation of this section. The innocence of an
owner or of anyone in control of the object as to a direct violation of this
section shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use,
designed for use, or marketed for use as drug paraphernalia.
7. Oral or written instructions provided with the object concerning its use.
8. Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict
its use.
9. National and local advertising concerning its use.
10. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
11. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object(s) to
the total sales of the business enterprise.
12. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community.
13. Expert testimony concerning its use.
(c) Prohibited Activities.
1. Possession of Drug Paraphernalia. No person may use, or possess with
intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow,
harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare,
test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale,
or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in
violation of this section.
2. Manufacture, Sale, or Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia. No person may
sell, deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent to
deliver drug paraphernalia, knowing that it will be used to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human
body a controlled substance in violation of this section.
3. Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia to a Minor. Any person 18 years of age
or over who violates paragraph (c)2, by delivering drug paraphernalia to
a person under 18 years of age is guilty of a special offense.
4. Advertisement of Drug Paraphernalia. No person may place in any
newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication or upon any outdoor
billboard or sign, any advertisement, knowing that the purpose of the
advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects
designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.
5. Exemption. Subsection (c) does not apply to manufacturers,
practitioners, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, and other persons
whose conduct is in accordance with Chapter 161, Wis. Stats. This
section does not prohibit the possession, manufacture, or use of
hypodermics, in accordance with Chapter 161, Wis. Stats.
14.08
14.09 GAMBLING, LOTTERIES, FRAUDULENT DEVICES, AND PRACTICES
PROHIBITED. All forms of gambling, lotteries, and fraudulent devices and practices
are prohibited within the Village. Any peace officer or policeman of the Village may
seize anything devised solely for gambling or found in actual use for gambling within the
Village and to dispose thereof after a judicial determination that said device was used
solely for gambling or found in actual use for gambling. This section shall not apply to
such lotteries permitted under Article 4, Section 23, Wisconsin Constitution, and such
exceptions thereto provided by the Wisconsin Legislature.
14.10 DISORDERLY HOUSES PROHIBITED. No person shall keep a disorderly house or
house of prostitution within the Village.
14.11 LOITERING PROHIBITED.
(1) Public Places. It shall be unlawful for any person not in official attendance or on official
business, to enter into, congregate, loiter, wander, stroll, stand, or play in public places
within the Village between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and sunrise.
(2) In Buildings. No person shall remain in a building or structure, without lawful cause,
after being asked to leave by the owner or by the person entitled to possession or in
control thereof. No person shall lodge in any building or structure without the permission
of the owner or the person entitled to possession or in control thereof.
(3) On Posted Private Property. It shall be unlawful for any person to congregate, loiter,
wander, stroll, or stand upon any private property in the Village which has been posted
with a notice stating “No Loitering”, “Patrons Only”, or other notice indicating that the
said property is not thoroughfare for the use of the general public. Such notice shall be at
least 8½ X11 inches in size, or of comparable area, and plainly posted, at least one to
each property intended to be so posted. This section shall include loitering in parked
motor vehicles.
(4) On Roadways.
(a) Purpose. It is hereby found and determined by the Village Board that cruising
during the evening hours on South 108th Street creates a hazardous traffic
situation, which could result in death, personal injury, and property damage, as
well as numerous traffic and public safety violations; that loitering in and around
parked vehicles on South 108th Street hinders and obstructs safe traffic movement
and otherwise contributes to the cruising problem; and, that there is a need to
prohibit such loitering during specific hours to promote safe traffic movement on
south 108th Street and otherwise protect and preserve the public health, safety,
and welfare.
(b) Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to congregate, loiter, wander, or stand
beside or among any parked cars on the roadway on south 108th Street between
the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. from the North Village limits to the South
Village limits.
14.12 NO LOITERING BY MINORS.
(1) No Loitering by Minors. No person under the age of 17 shall loiter away from home
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., nor shall any parent or guardian of such
minor knowingly permit such minor to loiter away from home during such hours, unless
such minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian, or some person 21 years of age or older
standing in loco parentis, or unless performing an errand or duty if directed by such
parent or guardian, or of urgent necessity, or unless pursuing the duties of employment in
an expeditious and orderly manner, or unless going directly home from places of
business or amusement or private homes.
(2) Truancy and School Dropouts Prohibited. No person under 18 years of age shall be a
truant, habitual truant, or dropout. The definitions set forth under §118.63(1), Wis. Stats.,
are incorporated herein by reference. Upon any violation of this subsection, all
applicable penalties and dispositions as set forth under §118.63(lm), (2), and (2m), Wis.
Stats., respectively, may be ordered and entered by the Municipal Court. The Court may
suspend the operating privilege of a person who is at least 16 years of age but less than 18
years of age and is a dropout and the Court may suspend such person’s operating
privilege until the person reaches the age of 18.
14.13 EMERGENCY POWERS FOR THE PROTECTION OF PERSONS AND
PROPERTY.
(1) The Village Board is empowered to declare by ordinance or resolution an emergency
existing within the Village whenever conditions arise, either within the Village or within
other municipalities or areas, by reason of war, conflagration, flood, heavy snow storm,
blizzard, catastrophe, disaster, riot or civil commotion, acts of God, and including
conditions, without limitation or restriction because of enumeration, which impair
transportation, food, or fuel supplies, medical care, fire, health, or police protection, or
other vital facilities of the Village, or endanger the health, welfare, or safety of persons or
property in the Village. The period of such emergency shall be limited by such ordinance
or resolution to the time during which such emergency conditions exist or are likely to
exist. Even though none of the conditions exist which authorize a declaration of an
emergency under this provision, an emergency may be declared if there are reasonable
grounds for belief that any one or more of said conditions is impending or threatened.
(2) The emergency power of the Village Board herewith conferred shall include such general
authority to order, by ordinance or resolution, whatever is necessary and expedient for the
health, safety, welfare, and good order of the Village in such emergency, and shall
include each authority as is necessary and expedient without limitation or restriction
because of enumeration and shall include the power to bar, restrict, or remove all
unnecessary traffic, both vehicular and pedestrian, form the streets and highways in the
Village, notwithstanding any provisions of Chapter 341 to 349, Wis. Stats., or any other
provisions of law, or ordinance of this Village, and shall further include the power to
declare a reasonable curfew during the period of emergency and to limit the sale of
fermented malt beverages and intoxicating liquors, notwithstanding the provisions of
Chapter 10 of the Village Code.
(3) The President or acting President shall exercise by proclamation all of the powers
herewith conferred upon the Village Board which within the discretion of the President or
acting President are necessary and expedient for the purpose herein set forth wherever,
because of such emergency conditions, the Village Board shall be unable to meet with
promptness or because of the existence or threat of such conditions the action is
reasonably necessary prior to a meeting of the Village Board. Any such proclamation by
the President or acting President shall be subject to ratification, alteration, modification,
or repeal by the Village Board shall not affect the validity or force or effect of any such
prior proclamation by the President or acting President.
(4) Public notice of the adoption of any ordinance or resolution or the issuance of any
proclamation pursuant to the authority above given shall be given promptly in a manner
which reasonably can be considered will advise the residents of the Village of such
resolution, ordinance, or issuance of such a proclamation, such as, but not limited to,
news accounts or advertisements in the press, on television, or over radio stations.
14.14 FAIR HOUSING.
(1) It is the intent of this ordinance to render unlawful discrimination in housing. It is the
declared policy of this state that all persons shall have an equal opportunity for housing,
regardless of sex, race, color, sexual orientation, disability, religion, national origin,
marital status, family status, lawful source of income, age, or ancestry, and it is the duty
of the political subdivisions to assist in the orderly prevention or removal of all
discrimination in housing through the powers granted under §66.432 and 66.433, Wis.
Stats. This ordinance shall be deemed an exercise of the police powers of the Village for
the protection of the welfare, health, peace, dignity, and human rights of the people of
this Village.
(2) The provisions of §101.22(1m), (2), (2m), (2r)(a), and (2r)(b), Wis. Stats., relating to fair
housing, except provisions therein relating to penalties to be imposed, are hereby adopted
by reference and made a part of this ordinance as if fully set forth herein. Any act
required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is
required or prohibited by this ordinance. Any future amendment, revisions, or
modifications of the statues incorporated herein are intended to be made a part of this
ordinance.
(3) The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Village Attorney, upon receipt of a
verified complaint, may issue a summons or warrant if, in his judgment, an act of
discrimination is sustainable in court.
14.15 ISSUE OF WORTHLESS CHECKS.
(1) No person shall, within the Village of Hales Corners, issue any check or other order for
payment of money which, at the time of issuance, he intends shall not be paid.
(2) Any of the following is pram facia evidence that the person as the time he issued the
check, or other order, for the payment of money, intended it should not be paid:
(a) Proof that, at the time of issuance, he did not have an account with the drawee; or
(b) Proof that, at the time of issuance, he did not have sufficient funds or credit with
the drawee, and that he failed within five (5) days after receiving notice of
nonpayment or dishonor to pay the check, or other order; or
(c) Proof that, when presentment was made within a reasonable time, the issuer did
not have sufficient funds or credit with the drawee, and he failed within five (5)
days after receiving notice of nonpayment or dishonor to pay the check, or other
order.
(3) This ordinance does not apply to a post-dated check.
14.16 SHOPLIFTING.
(1) Whoever intentionally alters indicia of price or value of merchandise, or who takes and
carries away, transfers, conceals, or retains possession of merchandise held for resale by a
merchant without his consent and with intent to deprive the merchant permanently of
possession, or the full purchase price, of such merchandise, may be penalized as provided
in Section (2) below.
(2) The concealment of unpurchased merchandise which continues from one floor to another,
or beyond the last station for receiving payment in a merchant’s store, is evidence of
intent to deprive the merchant permanently of possession of such merchandise without
paying the purchase price thereof.
(3) A merchant or merchant’s adult employee who has probable cause for believing that a
person has violated this ordinance may detain such person in a reasonable manner for a
reasonable length of time to deliver him to a peace officer, or to his parent or guardian in
the case of a minor. The detained person must be promptly informed of the purpose for
the detention and be permitted to make phone calls, but he shall not be interrogated or
searched against his will before the arrival of a peace officer who may conduct a lawful
interrogation and search of the accused person. Compliance with this subsection entitles
the merchant or his employee effecting the detention to the same defense in any action as
is available to a peace officer making an arrest in the line of duty.
14.17 FAILURE TO RETURN LIBRARY BOOKS AND PROPERTY. No person shall
take or borrow any materials or property from the Hales Corners Public Library except
under the rules and regulations prescribed by the Hales corners Library Board. No
person shall fail to return any book, periodical, pamphlet, audiovisual materials, or other
property belonging to or in charge of the Hales Corners Public Library. Any person who
borrows or takes any such property from said Public Library shall be deemed to have
violated this section when he fails to return such property on or before the due date as
shown on the borrowing card, and after the Hales Corners Library Board or its agent,
shall mail, by ordinary mail, to the person at the address at which he is registered with the
Library, a notice, by regular mail, indicating that such failure constitutes a violation of
this ordinance. The penalty for violation of this section shall be in addition to any fines
or charges imposed under any rules and policies established by the Hales Corners Library
Board.
14.18 TRESPASS UNDER POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS CONDITIONS. No person
shall trespass within Village-owned lands posted to prohibit entry thereon. When the
Village Board Safety Committee has ascertained any are of Village-owned lands which
may constitute a dangerous condition, it shall cause to post such notice to prohibit entry
thereon and to fence or otherwise protect the area as it deems necessary.
14.19 MISUSE OF 911 EMERGENCY DIALING. No person shall intentionally dial the
telephone number “911” to report an emergency in the Village of Hales Corners,
knowing that the fact situation which he or she reports does not exist.
14.20 DISCHARGE AND CLEANUP OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
(1) Prohibited Discharge. No person, firm, or corporation shall discharge or cause to be
discharge, leak, leach, or spill upon or into any public street, alley, or public property or
onto the ground, surface water, subsurface waters, or aquifers, or n ay private property
except those areas specifically licensed for waste disposal or landfill activities in the
Village any hazardous material as defined in subsection (7).
(a) Exceptions. This section shall not apply to an induction well for which the
owner or lessee has a valid permit from the United States Environmental
Protection Agency. Likewise, this section shall not apply to any activity
expressly licensed or permitted by the United State Atomic Energy Commission
or the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(2) Containment, Cleanup, and Restoration. Any person, firm, or corporation in violation
of this section must, upon the direction of any Police/Fire officer or Public Health official
of the Village, begin immediate actions to contain, clean up, and remove to an approved
depository the offending material(s) and restore the site to its original condition. Should
any person, firm, or corporation fail to engage or complete the requirement of this
section, the Police/Fire or Health Department may order the owner or lessee to take the
required action or, in default thereof, may, in behalf of the Village, without the taking of
bids, do the necessary work with all costs incurred by the Village to be reimbursed by
anyone violating this section.
(3) Access. The owner or lessee of any site, public or private, where a prohibited discharge
is occurring or where there is probably cause to believe that such discharge is occurring
shall provide access to personnel of the Police/Fire or Health Department of the Village
for the purpose of allowing them to evaluate the threat to public health and safety or to
monitor the containment, cleanup, or restoration activity needed for the protection of
public health or safety. In the event voluntary access is not granted by the owner or
lessee, the appropriate officer or employee of the Police/Fire or Health Department may
obtain an administrative search warrant and after receiving the same may enter the
premises.
(4) Public Protection. Should any prohibited discharge occur that reasonably causes a
threat to the life, safety, welfare, or health of the public, a Police/Fire or Health
Department officer or employee on the scene may order an evacuation of the area or take
other appropriate protective steps for such period of time as needed until the Village
Administrator and Emergency Government officials can act.
(5) Enforcement. A Police/Fire officer shall have the authority to make complaints and
issue citations and summonses under this section.
(6) Civil Liability. Any person, firm, or corporation in violation of this section shall be
liable to the Village for any and all expenses incurred by the Village and loss or damage
sustained by the Village by reason of such violation, including the pro rata wage cost of
Village personnel for cleanup or removal services.
(7) Definitions. Hazardous material is defined as either:
(a) Any material or combination of materials of a solid, liquid, or contained gaseous
or semi-solid form which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly contribute to an
increase in mortality or an increase in serous irreversible or incapacitating
reversible illness or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health
or the environment. Such material includes, but is not limited to, material which
is toxic, carcinogenic, or flammable. Such material also includes irritants and
strong sensitizers and materials which generate pressure because of
decomposition or heat. Likewise, toxic material also includes containers and
receptacles previously used in transportation, storage, use, or application or
material described herein as hazardous material.
(b) Hazardous waste as described in Wisconsin Administrative Code, NR 181.12.
(8) Penalty. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter, any of the provisions of
this ordnance shall be subject to a forfeiture of not more than $100.00 for the first offense
and not more than $500.00 for each subsequent offense, together with the costs of
prosecution in each instance; and in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned in
the County Jail or the House of Correction of Milwaukee County until said forfeiture and
costs together with subsequent costs are paid, but in any event not to exceed 30 days.
(9) Separate Offense. Each day that a violation is permitted or continues to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
14.21 PENALTY. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in Section 19.04 of this code.
14.22 TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS.
(1) State Regulations Adopted. §252.23 to 252.245 of the Wisconsin Statutes and
Wisconsin Administrative Code HFS Chapter 173 as amended from time to time are
adopted by reference and incorporated herein. Subject to §252.245(6), Wis. Stats., the
Village intending that certain provisions herein be stricter than the aforesaid statutes and
code, should any term or provision of this section conflict with the aforesaid statutes or
code, the provisions of the latter shall prevail.
(2) Licenses.
(a) No tattoo or body piercing establishment shall be operated or maintained in the
Village without first obtaining a license from the Village.
(b) Any operator desiring to operate more than one (1) tattoo or body piercing
establishment in the Village must have a license for each such establishment,
except that a combination tattoo/body piercing establishment license may be
issued for one (1) location.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any tattooist, body piercer, or operator to knowingly
perform any service directly related to the operation of a tattoo or body piercing
establishment which does not have a valid license pursuant to this section.
(3) Application for License.
(a) Any person, partnership, corporation, or entity desiring to secure a license for a
tattoo establishment, body piercing establishment, or combination tattoo/body
piercing establishment shall make application to the State of Wisconsin
Department of Health and Family Services.
(b) The application shall be on a form provided by the Health Department and shall
provide the following information:
1. The name(s) (including aliases), addresses, and dates of birth of the
applicant, any partner or limited partner in a partnership application, any
shareholder holding more than 10% of the stock of a corporate applicant,
and each corporate officer and director.
2. Written proof that each person required to be identified in subsection
(3)(b)1. is at least 18 years of age.
3. The address of the establishment to be licensed.
4. Whether the applicant or any person required to be identified in
subsection (3)(b)1. is currently operating or has previously operated, in
this or any other municipality or state, under a tattoo or body piercing
establishment license, whether the applicant or person required to be
named in subsection (3)(b)1. has ever had such a license or permit
suspended or revoked, the reason therefore, and the business entity or
trade name under which the applicant operated that was subject to the
suspension or revocation.
5. If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation, the date and
state of incorporation, and the name and address of the registered agent.
6. Proof of ownership, lease, or other legally enforceable right to possess,
use, and control premises where the licensed establishment is to be
located.
(c) Failure or refusal of the applicant to completely and truthfully provide responses
to the application questions, to give any information relevant to the investigation
of the application, or refusal to appear at any reasonable time and place for
examination regarding said application shall constitute an admission by the
applicant that the applicant is ineligible for such license and shall be grounds for
denial thereof.
(4) Investigation. Upon receipt of an application and fee, the Village Clerk shall refer the
application to the Health Department, Police Department, Fire Department, and Building
Inspection Department. The Health Department and each other department, except the
Police Department, shall make an investigation of the premises to ensure that it complies
with applicable state and local laws. The Police Department shall make an investigation
of the statements made in the application. Each department shall notify the Village Clerk
as to the results of its investigation.
(5) Standards for Granting of a License. The Village Board or its designee may grant a
license if all of the following conditions are met:
(a) That the business operation as proposed by the applicant will comply with the
provisions of this section and all other applicable rules, regulations, ordinances,
and State law.
(b) That, subject to §111.321, 111.322, and 111.335, Wis. Stats., the applicant, or
any of the officers, directors, or persons holding more than 10% of the
corporation stock or any of the partners have not, within the five (5) years
immediately preceding the date of the application been convicted of violating this
ordinance, or of any other offense substantially related to tattooing or body
piercing.
(c) That the applicant, if an individual, partners, or the officers, directors, or persons
holding more than 10% of the corporate stock if the applicant is a corporation,
are at least 18 years of age on the date of application.
(d) That the applicant has not knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent
statement of fact or omission in the license application or other information
required in conjunction therewith.
(e) That the applicant, if a corporation, is licensed to do business and is in good
standing in the State of Wisconsin.
(f) That the applicant has substantially complied with all building, zoning,
plumbing, electrical, fire, and health codes.
(6) Fees. The following fees shall be assessed all applicants:
(a) A nonrefundable license fee of $100.00, plus the State of Wisconsin
administrative fee shall be submitted with the application for a tattoo
establishment license.
(b) A nonrefundable license fee of $100.00, plus the State of Wisconsin
administrative fee shall be submitted with the application for a body piercing
establishment license.
(c) A nonrefundable license fee of $150.00, plus the State of Wisconsin
administrative fee shall be submitted with the application for a combination
tattoo/body piercing establishment license.
(d) A one-time $100.00 pre-inspection fee for each original tattoo, body piercing, or
tattoo/body piercing establishment license.
(7) License Year.
(a) All licenses granted under this chapter shall expire on June 30 and must be
renewed.
(b) There shall be no proration of license fees.
(c) An annual nonrefundable renewal fee in the amount of $100.00 as well as any
and all State of Wisconsin administrative fees shall be paid by the renewal
applicant.
(d) Application for renewal shall be made no later than June 1.
(8) Sterilization Procedures, Sharps, and Infectious Waste Disposal and Care
Instructions.
(a) Each operator shall submit written procedures to the Hales Corners Health
Department setting forth each step to be taken by a tattooist, body piercer, or
other employee in sterilizing equipment that is not single use.
(b) Each operator shall submit written procedures to the Hales Corners Health
Department setting forth each step to be taken by a tattooist or body piercer in
cleaning, preparing, and applying antiseptic to the skin of the patron.
(c) Each operator shall submit to the Hales Corners Health Department written care
instructions which shall be required to be provided to each patron after
completion of the tattoo or body piercing procedure.
(d) Each operator shall submit written proof to the Hales Corners Health Department
of the establishment’s ability to properly dispose of sharps and infectious waste
as provided in Wisconsin Administrative Code §NR 526.
(e) Each operator shall require employees to sign a statement acknowledging
awareness of the written procedures set froth in this subsection and an agreement
to comply with these procedures and shall submit a copy of that
acknowledgement and agreement to the Hales Corners Health Department.
(9) Insurance. All tattoo and body piercing establishment licensees shall submit to the
Hales Corners Health Department proof of workers’ compensation and comprehensive
general liability insurance in minimum amounts of $500,000 per occurrence and $1
million aggregate, covering all potential personal injury to patrons and all operations and
procedures conducted on the licensed premises, including, but not limited to the tattooing
and piercing of a person’s skin and any complications arising therefrom. All licensees
shall also deliver a certificate of insurance to the Village requiring 30 days prior notice to
the Village of any change or cancellation of the policy. Such insurance shall be
maintained at all times the tattoo or body piercing establishment is open for business.
(10) Display of License. No tattooist or body piercer may perform tattooing or body piercing
procedures unless a current and valid license issued by the Village is posted in the
establishment in a public and conspicuous place. Such license shall be displayed to any
member of the Hales Corners Health Department, Hales Corners Police Department, or
Department of Health and Family Services employee upon request. Any person
performing such procedures shall also maintain any non-establishment personal license in
their possession at all times for such display, accordingly.
(11) Hours of Operation. Tattoo or body piercing establishments shall be allowed to be open
only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday and 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Sunday.
(12) Temporary Establishments. No temporary establishment may be operated in the
Village of Hales Corners without first obtaining a license from the Village. A temporary
tattoo or body piercing establishment shall comply with all regulations for regular
establishments as well as those set forth in Wisconsin Administrative Code HFS 173.11.
(13) Single Use Needles for Tattooing. Tattoo needles shall be disposable, sterile, and for
single patron use only.
(14) Piercing Gun Use. No body piercer may use a piercing gun or similar device for body
piercing a patron unless such piercing gun is disposable, sterile, and for single patron use
only or is sterilized between each use as set forth in Wisconsin Administrative Code HFS
173.03(20).
(15) 24-Hour Waiting Period for Tattoos and Body Piercings. Due to the permanent
nature of tattoos and body piercing, no tattooist, tattoo establishment, body piercer, or
body piercing establishment may apply a tattoo or perform body piercing to a patron until
24 hours have passed since the patron first requested the tattoo or body piercing. The
patron’s record shall note that the patron was advised of the 24-hour waiting period in
writing, with the patron’s signed acknowledgement thereon. No tattooist, tattoo
establishment, body piercer, or body piercing establishment may bind or attempt to bind a
patron to committing to obtaining a tattoo or body piercing or paying for such services by
signing the 24-hour waiting period acknowledgement.
(16) Lead in Solder Prohibited. No tattooist shall use and no tattoo establishment shall
suffer or permit the use of solder which contains lead to be used to fasten needles.
(17) Aprons. All tattooists and body piercers shall wear single use aprons which shall be
disposed of after completing the procedure on a patron.
(18) Prohibited Practices. It shall be unlawful to do any of the following:
(a) Use, cause, or promote the use of false, misleading, or deceptive advertising,
promotional literature, warranty, label, or insignia.
(b) Knowingly deceive a patron or the public by acting in a manner so as to mislead
the patron or the public as to the person’s professional or license status.
(c) Knowingly employ, directly or indirectly, any suspended, revoked, or unlicensed
person to perform tattooing or body piercing.
(d) Knowingly permit another person to use the license issued under this section.
(e) Practice tattooing or body piercing under a false, misleading, or deceptive name.
(f) To sexually harass, as the term “sexual harassment” is defined in §111.32(13),
Wis. Stats., a patron.
(19) Loitering Prohibited. No operator or employee of a tattoo or body piercing
establishment shall allow, suffer, or permit loitering on the business premises. For
purposes of this section, “business premises” shall include the licensed premises,
property owned or leased by the tattoo or body piercing establishment and contiguous
with the licensed premises, and parking lots, alleys, and sidewalks contiguous with the
licensed premises.
(20) Implanting, Branding, and Scarification Prohibited.
(a) Definitions. As used in this section:
1. “Branding” means the burning of skin with a hot tool, cauterizing laser,
or dry ice, so that a mark is imbedded in the deep tissues.
2. “Implantation” means the insertion of an object under the skin, so that it
remains under the skin, in whole or in part, after the procedure. This
definition shall not apply to the post used in body piercing to keep the
perforation from closing.
3. “Scarification” means the cutting of the skin so that when it heals, scar
tissue remains.
(b) No person shall intentionally engage in the practice of implanting, branding, or
scarification in the Village of Hales Corners, except as set forth herein.
(c) Exceptions. The prohibition set forth in subsection (b) shall not apply to
Wisconsin licensed physicians, or procedures or orders delegated by a licensed
Wisconsin physician.
(21) Responsibility of the Operator. Every act or omission by an employee constituting a
violation of the provisions of this ordinance shall in addition be deemed the act or
omission of the operator and the operator shall be liable for all purposes for such act or
omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or caused the omission.
(22) Enforcement and Inspection.
(a) The Hales Corners Police Department and Hales Corners Health Department
shall have the authority to enter any tattoo or body piercing establishment at all
reasonable times to inspect the premises and enforce this ordinance. The Health
Department shall inspect each tattoo and body piercing establishment at least
twice annually to ensure compliance with the provisions of this ordinance.
(b) If upon inspection of a tattoo or body piercing establishment, the authorized
employee or agent of the department finds that the tattoo or body piercing
establishment is not planned, equipped, or operated as required by this chapter,
the employee or agent shall notify the operator in writing. The notice shall
include an order that directs the operator to make specified changes that will
bring the establishment into compliance with standards established in this chapter
and that stipulates the time period within which compliance is to take place.
(23) Suspension, Revocation, and Non-renewal.
(a) A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this section is subject to
suspension, revocation, or non-renewal by written order of the Village Board or
its designee. Any person aggrieved by such order may request a hearing to
challenge the order. A request for a hearing under this subsection shall be
submitted to the Village Board within 15 days of issuance of the order. The
hearing shall be held before the Village Board. Procedures for the hearing shall
be in accordance with Wis. Stats., §68.11 and 68.12 and the decision shall be
appealable by either party under procedures set forth at Wis. Stats., §68.13.
(b) The Village Board or its designee may suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew a
tattoo or body piercing license for any of the following reasons:
1. Violation of this section or any other ordinance, administrative rule, or
statute related to the practice of tattooing or body piercing.
2. Failure to correct violations noted in an order issued under subsection
(23)(b) by the expiration of the time period stated in the order or any
reasonable extension of that time period.
3. Knowingly misrepresenting, misstating, or failing to disclose information
requested on the application form(s) or requested by the License
Committee.
4. Using, causing, or promoting the use of false, misleading, or deceptive
advertising; promotional literature; warranty; label; or insignia.
5. Knowingly deceiving a patron or the public by acting in a manner as to
mislead the patron or the public as to the person’s professional or license
status.
6. Knowingly employing, directly or indirectly, any suspended, revoked, or
unlicensed person to perform tattooing or body piercing.
7. Knowingly permitting another person to use the license issued under this
section.
8. Practicing tattooing or body piercing under a false, misleading, or
deceptive name.
9. “Sexual harassment”, as that term as defined in §111.32(13), Wis. Stats.,
of a patron.
(c) An operator whose license has been revoked or not renewed shall not be eligible
for licensure under this ordinance for a period of one (1) year from the date the
revocation or non-renewal takes effect.
(d) Except for emergency suspensions for the public health and safety, a suspension
shall be not for less than 10 days nor more than 90 days.
(24) Summary Suspension.
(a) The provisions of subsection (23) notwithstanding, whenever the Health Officer
or designee has reasonable cause to believe that the sanitary condition, operation,
method of operation of the premises, or equipment used on the premises creates
an immediate danger to health or safety or whenever the Health Officer or
designee has reasonable cause to believe that the insurance required in subsection
(9) has been changed or canceled so as not to provide the required insurance, the
Health Officer or designee may issue a temporary order suspending the operation
of a tattoo or body piercing establishment.
(b) The order may be made orally but must be followed within 24 hours by a written
order personally delivered to the licensed establishment.
(c) The order may require cessation of all operations authorized by the license or
prohibit a particular operation or condition which creates the immediate danger.
(d) The order shall be effective for up to 14 days unless sooner rescinded, but may be
extended for one (1) additional 14-day period if the condition still exists or to
complete analysis of samples or specimens.
(e) No person may operate a tattoo or body piercing establishment or operate as a
tattooist or body piercer at an establishment that has been suspended pursuant to
this subsection.
(f) Any order issued under this section shall be accompanied by a notice of hearing
as required by Wis. Stats., §66.124(3) and 68.11(1). The hearing must be held
within 15 days of the service of the notice unless both parties agree to a later
date. A final decision must be issued within 10 days of the hearing. The hearing
shall be held before the Village Board.
(25) Penalties and Prosecution. Any person, partnership, entity, or corporation who is found
to have violated any provision of this ordinance shall forfeit the sum of not less than
$50.00 nor more than $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of such forfeiture and costs, by imprisonment in the Milwaukee County House
of Correction until the forfeiture and costs are paid, but not in excess of the number of
days set forth in §800.095(4), Wis. Stats. Each violation of this ordinance shall be
considered a separate offense, and each and every day an offense continues shall be
considered a separate offense. Notwithstanding the above minimum forfeiture of $50.00
and specifically pertaining only to a violation of this ordinance in the Village by a
“practitioner”, as defined in HFS 173.03(16), the minimum forfeiture for a first offense
shall be $100.00, for a second offense shall be $250.00, and for a third offense shall be
$500.00. In addition to the monetary penalty imposed, violation of this section may
further result in the suspension, revocation, or non-renewal of any license issued under
this section and may also be enforced by way of all other legal and equitable actions and
remedies available under law.
14.23 RECYCLING OF WASTE MATERIALS.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to promote recycling, composting, and
resource recovery through the administration of an effective recycling program, as
provided in §159.11, Wis. Stats. And Chapter NR 544, Wis. Admin. Code.
(2) Statutory Authority. This ordinance is adopted as authorized under §159.09(3)(b) and
61.34(1), Wis. Stats.
(3) Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. It is not intended by this ordinance to repeal,
abrogate, annul, impair, or interfere with any existing rules, regulations, ordinances, or
permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, whenever this ordinance
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this ordinance shall apply.
(4) Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance
shall be held to be the minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or
repeal of any other power granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. Where any terms or
requirements of this ordnance may be inconsistent or conflicting, the more restrictive
requirements or interpretation shall apply. Where a provision of this ordinance is
required by Wisconsin Statutes, or by a standard in Chapter NR 544, Wis. Admin. Code,
and where the ordinance provision is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of
the Wisconsin Statutes and the Chapter NR 544 standards in effect on the date of the
adoption of this ordinance, or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to
this ordinance.
(5) Severability. Should any portion of this ordinance be declared unconstitutional or
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this ordinance shall not be
affected.
(6) Applicability. The requirements of this ordinance apply to all persons within the Village
of Hales Corners, Wisconsin.
(7) Administration. The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered by the Village
Director of Public Works or his designee. Such officers are hereby authorized to
administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance, including those matter set forth
in §14.23(14) and (36) below.
(8) Effective Date. The provisions of this ordinance shall take effect on January 1, 1995.
(9) Definitions. For the purposes of this ordinance:
(a) “Bi-metal container” means a container for carbonated or malt beverages that is
made primarily of a combination of steel and aluminum.
(b) “Container board” means corrugated paperboard used in the manufacture of
shipping containers and related products.
(c) “Foam polystyrene packaging” means packaging made primarily from foam
polystyrene that satisfies one of the following criteria:
1. Is designed for serving food or beverages.
2. Consists of loose particles intended to fill space and cushion the
packaged article in a shipping container.
3. Consists of rigid materials shaped to hold and cushion the packaged
article in a shipping container.
(d) “HDPE” means high density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code #2, and for
illustration purposes only, generally includes milk jugs, detergent bottles, and
bleach bottles.
(e) “LDPE” means low density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code #4, and for
illustration purposes only, generally includes grocery store produce bags, bread
bags, food wrap, and mustard squeeze bottles.
(f) “Magazines” means magazines and other materials printed on similar paper.
(g) “Major appliance” means a residential or commercial air conditioner, clothes
dryer, clothes washer, dishwasher, freezer, microwave oven if the capacitor has
not been removed, oven, refrigerator, furnace, boiler, dehumidifier, water heater,
or stove.
(h) “Multiple-family dwelling” means a property containing 5 or more residential
units, including those which are occupied seasonally.
(i) “Newspaper” means a newspaper and other materials printed on newsprint.
(j) “Non-residential facilities and properties” means commercial, retail, industrial,
institutional, and governmental facilities and properties. This term does not
include multiple family dwellings.
(k) “Office paper” means high grade printing and writing papers from offices in nonresidential
facilities and properties. Printed white ledger and computer printout
are examples of office paper generally accepted as high grade. This term does
not include industrial process waste.
(l) “Other resins or multiple resins” means plastic resins labeled y the SPI code #7.
(m) “Person” includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association, local
government unit, as defined in §66.299(1)(a), Wis. Stats., state agency or
authority or federal agency.
(n) “PETE” means polyethylene terephthalate, labeled by the SPI code #1, and for
illustration purposes only, generally includes two-liter soft drink bottles.
(o) “Plastic container” means an individual, separate, rigid plastic bottle, can, jar, or
carton, except for a blister pack, that is originally used to contain a product that is
the subject of retail sale.
(p) “Post-consumer waste” means solid waste other than solid waste generate in the
production of goods, hazardous waste, as defined in §144.61(5), Wis. Stats.,
waste from construction and demolition of structures, scrap automobiles, or high
volume industrial waste, as defined in §144.44(7)(a)1., Wis. Stats.
(q) “PP” means polypropylene, labeled by the SPI code #5, and for illustration
purposes only, generally includes yogurt containers, shampoo bottles, straws,
syrup bottles, and margarine tubs.
(r) “PS” means polystyrene, labeled by the SPI code #6, and for illustration purposes
only, generally includes plastic foam, hot beverage cups, fast food clamshell
containers, egg cartons, and meat trays.
(s) “PVC” means polyvinyl chloride, labeled by the SPI code #3, and for illustration
purposes only, generally includes cooking oil bottles and packaging around meat.
(t) “Recyclable materials” includes lead acid batteries; major appliances; waste oil;
yard waste; aluminum containers; corrugated paper or other container board;
foam polystyrene packaging; glass containers; magazines; newspaper; office
paper; rigid plastic containers, including those made of PETE, HDPE, PVC,
LDPE, PP, PS, and other resins or multiple resins; steel containers; waste tires;
and bi-metal containers.
(u) “Solid waste” has the meaning specified in §144.01(15), Wis. Stats.
(v) “Solid waste facility” has the meaning specified in §144.43(5), Wis. Stats.
(w) “Solid waste treatment” means any method, technique, or process which is
designated to change the physical, chemical, or biological character or
composition of solid waste. “Treatment” includes incineration.
(x) “Waste tire” means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose
because of wear, damage, or defect.
(y) “Yard waste” means leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris, and brush,
including clean woody vegetative material no greater than six (6) inches in
diameter. This term does not include stumps, roots, or shrubs with intact root
balls.
(z) “Published” means set forth in an ordinance adopted by the Village Board, in a
newspaper of general circulation or in a notice mailed to the Village residents.
(10) Separation of Recyclable Materials. Occupants of single family and two (2) to four (4)
unit residences, multiple-family dwellings, and non-residential facilities and properties
shall separate the following materials from post-consumer waste:
(a) Lead acid batteries.
(b) Major appliances.
(c) Waste oil.
(d) Yard waste.
(e) Aluminum containers.
(f) Bi-metal containers.
(g) Corrugated paper or other container board.
(h) Foam polystyrene packaging.
(i) Glass containers.
(j) Magazines.
(k) Newspaper.
(l) Office paper (applies only to non-residential facilities and properties.)
(m) Rigid plastic containers made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, and PS and
other resins or multiple resins.
(n) Steel containers.
(o) Waste tires.
(11) Separation Requirements Exempted. The separation requirements of §14.23(10)
above, do not apply to the following:
(a) Occupants of single-family and two (2) to four (4) unit residences, multiplefamily
dwellings, and non-residential facilities and properties that send their
post-consumer waste to a processing facility licensed by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources that recovers the materials specified in
§14.23(10) from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible.
(b) Solid waste which is burned as a supplemental fuel at a facility if less than 30%
of the heat input to the facility is derived from the solid waste burned as
supplemental fuel.
(c) A recyclable material specified in §14.23(10)(e) through (o) for which a variance
has been granted by the Department of Natural Resources under §159.11(2m),
Wis. Stats., or §NR 544.14, Wis. Admin. Code.
(12) Care of Separated Recyclable Materials. To the greatest extent practicable, the
recyclable materials separated in accordance with §14.23(10) shall be clean and kept free
of contaminants such as food or product residue, oil or grease, or other non-recyclable
materials, including, but not limited to, household hazardous waste, medical waste, and
agricultural chemical containers. Recyclable materials shall be stored in a manner which
protects them from wind, rain, and other inclement weather conditions.
(13) Management of Lead Acid Batteries, Major Appliances, Waste Oil, and Yard
Waste. Occupants of single-family and two (2) to four (4) unit residences, multiplefamily
dwellings, and non-residential facilities and properties shall manage lead acid
batteries, major appliances, waste oil, and yard waste as follows:
(a) Lead acid batteries shall be transported by the owner thereof to any recycling
business or person authorized by law to accept lead acid batteries for recycling.
(b) Major appliances shall be collected at curbside upon request to the Village or its
collection contractor by the occupant of a single or two (2) to four (4) family
residences. A person may dispose of a microwave oven in a solid waste disposal
facility in this State if the capacitor has been removed and disposed of in
accordance with §144.79(7), Wis. Stats., relating to rules prescribing the methods
and providing or designation sites and facilities for disposal of PCB’s and
products containing PCB’s.
(c) Waste oil shall be transported by the owner thereof to any recycling business or
person authorized by law to accept waste oil for recycling.
(d) Yard waste, excepting grass clippings, shall be placed at curbside by the
occupant for collection by the Village solid waste contractor on such dates as
published by the Village. Grass clippings shall not be collected by the Village or
its solid waste contractor. Grass clippings shall be mulched or composted on the
property from which they were obtained or transported by the owner thereof to
any recycling business or person authorized by law to accept grass clippings for
composting, recycling, or disposal.
(14) Preparation and Collection of Recyclable Materials. Except as directed by the Village
Director of Public Works, or his designee, occupants of single family and two (2) to four
(4) unit residences shall do the following for the preparation and collection of the
separated materials specified in §14.23(10)(e) through (o):
(a) Aluminum containers shall be rinsed free of product residue, crushed or
flattened, placed in the approved recycling bin, and placed at curbside on such
dates as published by the Village for collection.
(b) Bi-metal containers shall be rinsed free of product residue, placed in the
approved recycling bin, and placed at curbside for collection on the dates as
published by the Village for collection.
(c) Corrugated paper or other container board shall be free of debris, flattened,
stacked and tied, and placed at curbside on the dates as published by the Village.
(d) Foam polystyrene packaging shall be placed in the approved recycling bin and
placed at curbside for collection on the dates as published by the Village.
(e) Glass containers shall be placed in the approved recycling bin and placed at
curbside for collection on the dates as published by the Village.
(f) Magazines shall be bound with string or twine or in a paper bag and placed at
curbside fro collection on the dates as published by the Village.
(g) Newspapers shall be bound with string or twine or in a paper bag and placed at
curbside for collection on the dates as published by the Village.
(h) Rigid plastic containers, including those made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP,
PS, or other resins or multiple resins shall be rinsed free of product residue,
placed in the approved recycling bin, and be placed at curbside for collection on
the dates as published by the Village.
(i) Steel containers shall be rinsed free of product residue, placed in the approved
recycling bin, and be placed at curbside for collection on the dates as published
by the Village.
(j) Waste tires shall be placed at curbside for collection on such dates as published
by the Village.
(15) Responsibilities of Owners or Designated Agents or Multiple-Family Dwellings.
(a) Owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings shall do all of the
following to recycle the materials specified in §14.23(10)(e) through (o):
1. Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials.
2. Notify tenants in writing at the time of renting or leasing the dwelling
and at least semiannually thereafter about the established recycling
program.
3. Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid waste
by the tenants and the delivery of the materials to a recycling facility.
4. Notify tenants of reasons to reduce and recycle solid waste, which
materials are collected, how to prepare the materials in order to meet the
processing requirements, collection methods or sites, location and hours
of operation, and a contact person or company, including a name,
address, and telephone number.
(b) The requirements specified in 1 do not apply to the owners or designated agents
of multiple-family dwellings if the post-consumer waste generated within the
dwelling is treated at a processing facility licensed by the Department of Natural
Resources that recovers for recycling the materials specified in §14.23(10)(e)
through (o) from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible.
(16) Responsibilities of Owners or Designated Agents of Non-residential Facilities and
Properties.
(a) Owners or designated agents of non-residential facilities and properties shall do
all of the following to recycle the materials specified in §14.23(10)(e) through
(o):
1. Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials.
2. Notify in writing, at least semiannually, all users, tenants, and occupants
of the properties about the established recycling program.
3. Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid waste
by the users, tenants, and occupants and the delivery of the materials to a
recycling facility.
4. Notify users, tenants, and occupants of reasons to reduce and recycle,
which materials are collected, how to prepare materials in order to meet
the processing requirements, collection methods or sites, locations and
hours of operation, and a contact person or company, including a name,
address, and telephone number.
(b) The requirements specified in 1 do not apply the owners or designated agents of
non-residential facilities and properties if the post-consumer waste generated
within the facility or property is treated at a processing facility licensed by the
Department of Natural Resources that recovers for recycling the materials
specified in §14.23(10)(e) through (o) from solid waste in as pure a form as is
technically feasible.
(17) Prohibition on Disposal of Recyclable Materials Separated for Recycling. No person
may dispose of in a solid waste disposal facility or burn in a solid waste treatment facility
any of the materials specified in §14.23(10)(e) through (o) which have been separated for
recycling, except waste tires may be burned with energy recovery in a solid waste
treatment facility.
(18) Hauler Licensing. No person shall engage in the business of hauling recyclables within
the Village without being licensed by the DNR under section NR 502.06, Wis. Admin.
Code.
(19) Processing Facilities. Any contractor operating in the Village shall not transport for
processing any recyclables to a processing facility unless that facility has been approved
in writing by the Village and, by January 1, 1995, the facility has self-certified with the
Wisconsin DNR under section NR 544.16, Wis. Admin. Code.
(20) Anti-scavenging or Unlawful Removal of Recyclables. It shall be unlawful for any
person, unless under contract with or licensed by the Village, to collect or remove any
recyclable material that has been deposited or placed at the curb or in a container adjacent
to a home or non-residential building for the purpose of collecting for recycling.
(21) Dumping Prohibited.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of or dump garbage in any street,
alley, or other public place within the Village or in any receptacles or private
property without the owner’s consent unless it is placed in bags or containers in
the manner and at the time specified in this ordinance and §14.08 of this Code.
(b) No person shall place for collection any garbage at the curb not owned or
occupied by such person.
(22) Burning or Burying Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or bury
solid waste or recyclables unless such person is authorized or licensed to do so by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(23) Nondisposable Materials. No person shall place for disposal or municipal collection
any of the following wastes: hazardous and toxic wastes, chemicals, explosives,
flammable liquids, paint, trees and stumps, construction debris, carcasses, medical wastes
(excepting personal needles which shall be contained in cardboard to eliminate injury to
collection personnel.)
(24) Garbage from Outside of Municipality. No person shall bring refuse for disposal (and
recyclables) from outside the corporate limits into the Village unless authorized by
written agreement with the Village.
(25) Hauler Restrictions.
(a) Haulers may not dispose in a landfill or burn in a solid waste facility any
recyclable materials generated in the Village that have been separated for
recycling.
(b) Haulers shall not compact glass with paper during collection and transport of
recyclables to a processing facility or market, and shall maintain materials in
marketable condition.
(26) Right to Reject Materials. The hauler has the right to reject or leave at the curb any
recyclable material that is not prepared according to the specifications of this ordinance
or in education material provided by the contractor or the Village to the service
recipients. Materials may also be left if not separated from solid waste, place din the
proper containers, or are not designed recyclable materials for collection. The hauler also
has the right to refuse to pick up any solid waste if it contains recyclable containers or
material. In such cases, the hauler shall notify the generator of the materials about the
reasons for rejecting the item in writing. The hauler shall also keep a list of such
occurrences and provided it to the Village at least quarterly each year.
(27) Hauler Licensing. Haulers who collect solid waste or recyclables in the Village for
storage, treatment, processing, marketing, or disposal shall obtain and maintain all
necessary municipal, federal, and State permits, licenses, and approvals prior to
collecting any materials in the Village.
(28) Reporting Requirements. The recycling haulers and processors operating in the
municipality are required to maintain records and report in writing to the Village at least
quarterly each year. Reports shall include: the amount of solid waste and recyclables
collected and transported from the municipality; the amount of solid waste and
recyclables processed and/or marketed by item type from the municipality; and the final
disposal location of solid waste and recyclable material. Failure to report shall be cause
for the municipality to revoke any license or server any contract with the
hauler/processor.
(29) Ownership of Recyclables and Refuse. Recyclable materials, upon collection by any
permitted collection contractor, shall become the property of the contractor.
(30) Exemption. The Village reserves the right to designate additional waste materials as
recyclable or currently collected materials as no longer recyclable in accordance with
State law and to either add or delete them from any collection services provided by the
Village or its contractors. The Village shall publish any such change in designated
recyclable materials.
(31) Collection Schedule. The Village shall establish the time of collection of solid waste
and recyclables and the Clerk shall publish such collection schedule upon its inception
and at any time when the collection schedule is changed.
(32) Specified Containers.
(a) Solid waste shall be placed for collection in bags or containers, not to exceed 50
pounds per bag or container or 30 gallons, and contained in a manner to avoid
litter.
(b) Recyclables shall be placed in recyclable bins approved by the Village. Yard
waste shall not be enclosed in plastic bags, except dry leaves, for which for the
fall leaf collection only, may be contained in 55-gallon size plastic bags, full
weight not to exceed 80 pounds. Brush shall not exceed three (3) inch stalk
diameter and shall be packaged so as not to exceed one (1) foot in diameter and
four (4) feet in length. Wooden logs cannot exceed four (4) feet in length or six
(6) inches maximum cross sectional dimension.
(33) Placement of Recyclables and Solid Waste for Collection. Except as otherwise
specifically directed or authorized by the Village, solid waste and recycling containers
shall be placed within seven (7) feet of the edge of roadway pavement, adjacent to the
premises owned or occupied by the person. Materials should be placed out for collection
according to the scheduled days established and published by the Village.
(34) Special Materials. Occupants of single family and two (2) to four (4) residences shall
contact the Village or hauler when they have couches and bulky items for disposal, to
obtain preparation requirements and to arrange for the collection time of such items.
(35) Enforcement.
(a) For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this ordinance,
the Village Director of Public Works or his designee may inspect recyclable
materials separated for recycling, post-consumer waste intended for disposal,
recycling collection sites and facilities, collection vehicles, collection areas of
multiple-family dwellings and non-residential facilities and properties, and any
records information. No person may refuse access to such authorized officer of
the Village who requests access for purposes of inspection and who presents
appropriate credentials. No person may obstruct, hamper, or interfere with such
an inspection.
(b) Any person who violates a provision of this ordinance may be issued a citation
by the Village Director of Public Works or his designee to collect forfeitures.
The issuance of a citation shall not preclude proceeding under any other ordnance
or law relating to the same or any other matter. Proceeding under any other
ordinance or law relating to the same or any other matter shall not preclude the
issuance of a citation under this paragraph.
(c) Penalties for violating this ordinance may be assessed as follows:
1. Any person who violates §14.23(17) may be required to forfeit $50.00
for a first violation, $200.00 for a second violation, and not more than
$2,000.00 for a third or subsequent violation. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation. To such forfeiture shall be
added the costs of prosecution and in default of payment of such
forfeiture and costs, shall be imprisoned in the County Jail or House of
Correction until paid, but not exceeding 90 days.
2. Any person who violates a provision of this ordinance, except
§14.23(17), may be required to forfeit not less than $10.00 nor more than
$1,000.00 for each violation. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation. To such forfeitures shall be added the
costs of prosecution and in default of payment to such forfeiture and
costs, shall be imprisoned in the County Jail or House of Correction until
paid, but not exceeding 90 days.
14.24 GRAFFITI VANDALISM PROHIBITED.
(1) Graffiti Defined. “Graffiti” means any inscription, word, figure, or design, marked,
scratched, etched, drawn, or painted with spray paint, liquid pant, ink, chalk, dye, or other
similar substances, on buildings, fences, structures, and other similar places, without the
express written consent o the owner or operator of the property.
(2) Prohibited Conduct. No person may write, paint, or draw any inscription, figure, or
mark of any type on any public or private building or other real or personal property
owned, operated, or maintained by any public or private person, entity, agency, firm, or
corporation, unless the express permission of the owner or operator of the property has
been obtained.
(3) Graffiti Removal. The Village Police Department may serve any property owner whose
property has been injured by the application of graffiti, with a written order to remove,
cover, clean up, or repair such property within 15 days of the date of such order. Such
order may be served personally or by registered, certified, or regular mail and service
upon any single joint owner shall constitute valid service upon all property owners.
Should such property owner fail to comply with the terms of such order, in addition to the
penalties set forth under subsection (4) below, the Village may obtain the removal,
covering, cleanup, or repair of such graffiti upon its own instance as a special charge
against the property, pursuant to §66.60(16), Wis. Stats.
(4) Penalty. Any person convicted of violating subsection (2) above shall forfeit not less
than $500.00 nor more than $5,000.00 per violation, together with the costs of
prosecution, or upon default of the full payment of such forfeiture and costs, be
imprisoned in the County Jail or County House of Corrections for not more than 90 days.
Any person convicted of violating subsection (3) above, shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of §19.04 of this Code.
14.25 DISTRIBUTION OF VIEWER DISCRETION LABELED MATERIALS TO
MINORS PROHIBITED.
(1) Definitions.
(a) Viewer Discretion Labeled Material means any book, magazine, newspaper, or
other printed or written material, or any picture, drawing, video, photograph,
motion picture, or other pictorial representation of any recording, that is labeled
viewer discretion, viewer discretion advised, or any derivation thereof.
(b) Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, or other
legal entity.
(c) Disseminate means to transfer possession of, with or without consideration.
(d) Minor is any person under the age of 18 years.
(e) Knowingly means being aware of the character and the content of the material.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly disseminate viewer discretion labeled
material by placing or leaving said materials on or about any private residence in the
Village, unless said viewer discretion labeled material is personally delivered in hand to a
person, of at least 18 years of age, from said private residence without objection. If no
one 18 years of age or older is on said premises to accept material, it shall not be
unlawful to leave written notification of where the viewer discretion labeled material may
be obtained by someone 18 years of age or older.
(3) Exception. This section shall not apply to viewer discretion labeled material that is
specifically addressed to a member of the residence.
(4) Penalty. Forfeiture. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Chapter shall be
subject to a penalty as provided in §19.04 of this Municipal Code.
14.26 THROWING OF OBJECTS DURING PARADES PROHIBITED.
(1) No person shall throw, shoot, or discharge any object, missile, spray, or other solid, fluid,
or semi-fluid thing, projectile, or substance by hand or any other means at a person,
object, or otherwise, along the route of any parade upon public right-of-way within the
Village, including the Village Fourth of July parade, during the parade.
(2) Penalty. Any person convicted of violating this section shall forfeit not less than
$100.00 nor more than $400.00 per violation, together with the costs of prosecution, or
upon default of the full payment of such forfeiture and costs, be imprisoned in the County
Jail or County House of Correction for not more than 90 days. In addition thereto, the
Court upon conviction may order restitution under §800.093, Wis. Stats., or in lieu of
either restriction or forfeiture, the court may order community service work pursuant to
§800.09(1)(b), Wis. Stats.
A T T E N T I O N
Open Burning Regulations
Effective January 1, 2009, the Village of
Hales Corners prohibits the open burning
of leaves and yard waste and, therefore,
will no longer issue burning permits.
The only fires now allowed are “small
campfires for cooking, ceremonies or
recreation” as defined and regulated in
the following Section 14.07(18) of the
Village Municipal Code.
STATE OF WISCONSIN VILLAGE OF HALES CORNERS MILWAUKEE COUNTY
ORDINANCE NO. 06 - 01
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE MUNICIPAL CODE
AS IT PERTAINS TO OUTDOOR AND REFUSE BURNING
__________________________________________________________________________
WHEREAS, the Village Board having created an ad hoc committee to study and
report upon the subject of open burning within the Village, and such committee having
completed its charge, in part with substantial public input at numerous committee meetings
and a town hall meeting and also with the assistance of the staff of the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources and also with the provision of draft model ordinance
alternatives upon the subject matter as prepared by the Department, and the committee
having recommended certain legislation for consideration by the Village Board; and
WHEREAS, the Village Board having considered the existing Municipal Code
regulations pertaining to open burning and outdoor furnaces and having considered the
recommendations of its ad hoc open burning committee and having determined that certain
amendments to the Municipal Code were in order to address environmental concerns and to
promote the health, safety and welfare of the Community by way of further regulating
outdoor burning.
NOW, THEREFORE, the Village Board of the Village of Hales Corners, Wisconsin,
do ordain as follows:
SECTION 1: §14.07(18) of the Municipal Code of Hales Corners, Wisconsin, be and
the same is hereby amended to read as follows:
(18) OUTDOOR AND REFUSE BURNING.
(a) Purpose. This Subsection (18) is intended to promote the public health,
safety and welfare and to safeguard the health, comfort, living conditions,
safety and welfare of the citizens of the Village of Hales Corners due to the air
pollution and fire hazards of open burning, outdoor burning and refuse
burning.
(b) Applicability. This Subsection (18) applies to all outdoor burning and
refuse burning within the Village of Hales Corners.
(1) This Subsection (18) does not apply to grilling or cooking using
charcoal, wood, propane or natural gas in cooking or grilling
appliances.
(2) This Subsection (18) does not apply to burning in a stove, furnace,
fireplace or other heating device within a building used for human or
animal habitation unless the material being burned includes refuse as
defined in Subsection (d) of this Subsection (18).
(3) This Subsection (18) does not apply to the use of propane,
acetylene, natural gas, gasoline or kerosene in a device intended for
heating, construction or maintenance activities.
(c) Severability. Should any portion of this Subsection (18) be declared
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder
of this Subsection (18) shall not be affected.
(d) Definitions.
(1) "Campfire" means a small outdoor fire intended for recreation or
cooking using only clean dry wood and sticks, and newspaper or paper
to ignite the same, but not including a fire intended for disposal of other
yard waste or refuse.
(2) "Clean Wood" means natural wood which has not been painted,
varnished or coated with a similar material, has not been pressure
treated with preservatives and does not contain resins or glues as in
plywood or other composite wood products.
(3) "Fire Chief" means the Chief of the Hales Corners Fire Department
or other person authorized by the Fire Chief.
(4) "Outdoor Burning" means open burning or burning in an outdoor
wood-fired furnace.
(5) "Open Burning" means kindling or maintaining a fire where the
products of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air
without passing through a stack or a chimney.
(6) "Outdoor Wood-fired Furnace" means a wood-fired furnace, stove
or boiler that is not located within a building intended for habitation by
humans or domestic animals.
(7) "Refuse" means any waste material except clean wood.
(8) "Yard Waste" means leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden
debris and brush, including clean woody vegetative material no greater
than six (6) inches in diameter.
(e) General prohibition on outdoor burning and refuse burning. Open
burning, outdoor burning and refuse burning are prohibited in the Village of
Hales Corners unless the burning is specifically permitted by this Subsection
(18).
(f) Materials that may not be burned.
(1) Unless a specific written approval has been obtained from the
Department of Natural Resources, the following materials may not be
burned in an open fire, incinerator, burn barrel, furnace, stove or any
other indoor or outdoor incineration or heating device. The Village of
Hales Corners will not issue a permit for burning any of the following
materials without air pollution control devices and a written copy of an
approval by the Department of Natural Resources.
(2) Rubbish or garbage including but not limited to food wastes, food
wraps, packaging, animal carcasses, paint or painted materials,
furniture, composite shingles, construction or demolition debris or
other household or business wastes.
(3) Waste oil or other oily wastes except used oil burned in a heating
device for energy recovery subject to the restrictions in Chapter NR
590, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(4) Asphalt and products containing asphalt.
(5) Treated or painted wood including but not limited to plywood,
composite wood products or other wood products that are painted,
varnished or treated with preservatives.
(6) Any plastic material including but not limited to nylon, PVC,
ABS, polystyrene or urethane foam, and synthetic fabrics, plastic films
and plastic containers.
(7) Rubber including tires and synthetic rubber-like products.
(8) Newspaper, corrugated cardboard, container board, office paper
and other materials that must be recycled in accordance with the
recycling ordinance except as provided in Subsection (k) of this
Subsection (18).
(g) Burning leaves, brush, clean wood and other vegetative debris. Open
burning of dry leaves, weeds, brush, stumps, clean wood other vegetative
debris is allowed only in accordance with the following provisions.
(1) Open burning under this Subsection shall be conducted only
following the issuance of and in accordance with, a permit issued under
Subsection (l) of this Subsection (18), except where noted in
Subsections (10) and (11) below.
(2) Open burning under this subsection and conducted under a permit
issued under this Subsection (18), may only be conducted between on
and after April 15 and through May 15 and between on and after
October 15 and through November 30, between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 4:00 p.m., and on Saturdays only.
(3) All allowed open burning shall be conducted in a safe nuisance free
manner, when wind velocity is 9 miles per hour or less as determined
by the National Weather Service and weather conditions are such as to
minimize adverse effects and not create a health hazard or a visibility
hazard on roadways, railroads, airfields, sidewalks, and ditches.
(4) Open burning shall be conducted only on the property on which the
materials were generated.
(5) Open burning shall be constantly attended and supervised by a
competent person of at least eighteen (18) years of age until the fire is
extinguished and is cold. The person shall have readily available for
use such fire extinguishing equipment as may be necessary for the total
control of the fire.
(6) No materials may be burned, nor any ash residue disposed of, upon
any street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, alley, parkway, drainage ditch, public
place, or public right-of-way.
(7) No burning shall be undertaken within 30 feet from any building or
structure, combustible material, combustible wall or partition, exterior
window opening, building or structure exit access, or building or
structure exit, unless authorized by the Fire Chief.
(8) Except for barbecue, gas and charcoal grills, no open burning shall
be undertaken during periods when either the Fire Chief or the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources has issued a burning ban
applicable to the area.
(9) No open burning may be conducted on days when the Department
of Natural Resources has declared an ozone action day applicable to the
Village of Hales Corners.
(10) Fires set for the ecological management of native plant species are
allowed, without obtaining a permit, on property at least one (1) acre in
size and zoned P-1 (Parks and Institutional), provided that prior
approval is obtained from the Fire Chief, who shall consider
climatological conditions, and ground, flora and structure conditions
upon the subject property and adjoining property, in light of public
safety.
(11) Burning of trees, limbs, stumps, brush or weeds for clearing or
maintenance of rights-of-way, performed or authorized by the Village
Department of Public Works, is allowed, without obtaining a permit, if
approved by the Fire Chief and if in accordance with other provisions
of this Subsection (18).
(h) Small outdoor campfires (as defined in Subsection (d)(1)) for cooking,
ceremonies or recreation are allowed, without obtaining a permit, provided
that the fire is confined by a control device or structure such as a fire ring or
fire pit. A small outdoor campfire does not require a permit, provided that the
fire complies with all other applicable provisions of this Subsection (18).
(1) Small outdoor campfires are subject to the provisions of
Subsections (g)(3), (5), (6), (8) and (9) of this Subsection (18).
(i) Burn barrels. No person shall use or maintain a burn barrel in the Village
of Hales Corners.
(j) Outdoor wood-fired furnaces. No person shall install, use or maintain an
outdoor wood-fired furnace in the Village of Hales Corners.
(k) Fire department practice burns. Notwithstanding Subsections (e) and
(f) of this Subsection (18), the Village of Hales Corners may burn a standing
building if necessary for fire fighting practice and if the practice burn complies
with the requirements of the Department of Natural Resources.
(l) Permits. Unless specifically exempted elsewhere in this Subsection (18),
no person shall start or maintain any open burning without a burning permit
issued by the Village.
(1) The annual permit fee is $25.00, which fee amount may be changed
by the resolution of the Village Board from time to time and kept on
file in the Office of the Village Clerk. The term of a burning permit
shall be annual, from January 1 through November 30 of each year.
The permit shall be displayed on the property at all times while
permitted burning is occurring on the property, so that the permit is
visible and conspicuous to view by persons from the public street right
of way adjoining the property.
(2) Sunset Provision. Open Burning will be permitted until January 1,
2009, when all open burning permitted by a permit under this
Subsection (18), shall be prohibited.
(3) A burning permit issued under this Subsection shall require
compliance with all applicable provisions of this Subsection (18) and
any additional special restrictions deemed necessary to protect public
health and safety.
(4) Any violation of the conditions of a burning permit or failure to
obtain a burning permit shall be deemed a violation of this Subsection
(18). Any violation of this Subsection (18) or the burning permit shall
void the permit and subject the violator to the penalty provisions of
Subsection (o) of this Subsection (18).
(m) Liability. A person utilizing or maintaining an outdoor fire shall be
responsible for all fire suppression costs and any other liability resulting from
damage caused by the fire.
(n) Right of entry and inspection. The Fire Chief, Zoning Administrator,
Village Administrator, Police Chief, Health Administrator, Sanitarian,
Building Inspector, or their respective designees of the Village of Hales
Corners may inspect any property for the purpose of ascertaining compliance
with the provisions of this Subsection (18). [Note: If the owner or occupant
of the premises denies access to the property for this purpose, a special
inspection warrant may be obtained in accordance with Section 66.0119, Wis.
Stats.]
(o) Enforcement and penalties.
(1) The Fire Chief, Zoning Administrator, Village Administrator,
Police Chief, Health Administrator, Sanitarian, Building Inspector, and
any agents designated by these individuals are authorized to enforce the
provisions of this Subsection (18).
(2) The penalty for a first offense shall be double the permit fee. Any
subsequent violation of this Subsection (18) shall subject the violator to
the penalty provisions of Section 19.04 of the Municipal Code.
SECTION 2. §§14.07(19) and (20) of the Municipal Code of Hales Corners,
Wisconsin, be and the same are hereby repealed.
SECTION 3: The terms and provisions of this Ordinance are severable. Should any
term or provision of this Ordinance be found to be invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the remaining terms and provisions shall remain
in full force and effect.
SECTION 4: All ordinances and parts of ordinances in contravention to this
Ordinance are hereby repealed.
SECTION 5: This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its
passage and publication.
SECTION 6: Upon and following the effectiveness of this Ordinance, Village staff is
hereby directed to prepare and submit, in the manner provided by law,
to the electorate at the November 2008 general election, as an advisory
referendum, the following question:
“§14.07(18) of the Municipal Code of Hales Corners, Wisconsin,
entitled ‘Outdoor and Refuse Burning’, provides in part at Subsection
(l)(2): ‘Sunset Provision. Open Burning will be permitted until January
1, 2009, when all open burning permitted by a permit under this
Subsection (18), shall be prohibited.’
‘Should the Sunset Provision under §14.07(18)(l)(2) of the Municipal
Code of Hales Corners, Wisconsin, be repealed?”
PASSED AND ADOPTED this 9th day of January, 2006.
James R. Ryan, Village President
Countersigned:
(VILLAGE SEAL)
Michael F. Weber, Administrator/Clerk
CHAPTER 15
Public Nuisances
15.01 Nuisances Defined
15.02 Summary Abatement of Specific Nuisances
15.03 Abatement After Notice of Specific Nuisances
15.04 Trees which are Public Nuisances
15.05
15.06 Vehicle Abandonment Prohibited; Removal and Disposal; Motor Vehicle Sales and
Repairs on Residential Property; Accumulation of Used Motor Vehicles
15.07 Recreational Vehicles
15.08 Unsafe, Unsanitary, Hazardous and Unsightly Premises
15.09 Communicable Diseases and Quarantine and Isolation Regulations
15.10 Human Health Hazards and Property Violating Codes or Health Orders
15.11 Penalty
15.12 Junk or Discarded Property
15.13 Rummage Sales Regulated
15.01 NUISANCES DEFINED. Where no provision is made herein defining what are
nuisances and how the same may be removed, abated, or prevented, those offenses which
are known to the common law of the land and the statues of the State of Wisconsin as
nuisances may, in case the same exist within the Village limits, be treated as such and
proceeded against as is provided in Section 15.03 hereof, or in accordance with other
provisions of law.
15.02 SUMMARY OF ABATEMENT OF SPECIFIC NUISANCES. Whenever any
nuisance defined under this section shall be found within the Village, the Health Officer,
Police officer, or any Trustee may in his discretion, cause the same to be summarily
abated in such manner as he may direct. It shall be unlawful within the Village to:
(1) Spitting. Spit, expectorate, or deposit any sputum, spittle, saliva, phlegm, mucus,
tobacco juice, or wads of tobacco upon the floor or stairways of any part of any theater,
public hall or building, or upon the floor of any part of public conveyance, or upon any
public thoroughfares.
(2) Articles which Occasion a Nuisance. Bring into the Village or keep therein for sale or
otherwise, either for food or for any other purpose or purposes whatever, any animal,
dead or alive, matter, substance, or things which shall be or which shall occasion a
nuisance in said Village, or which shall be dangerous or detrimental to health.
(3) Sale of Unwashed Fabrics. Sell or offer for sale any rags, fabrics, or wearing apparel,
except in a thoroughly clean condition.
(4) Noises. Conduct a business between 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. in a manner as to cause or
to permit any loud or sharp noises or concussion, except under a permit from the Health
Officer. Such permits shall be issued by the Health Officer only when it appears to his
satisfaction that the conduct of such business between said hours will not be injurious to
the health of those residing in the vicinity of the place where such business is conducted;
provided, however, that the Health Officer may grant such permit when it appears to his
satisfaction that the work proposed during the hours prohibited is necessary for the public
welfare.
(5) Dumping. Place, throw, or leave any slops, dirty water, or other liquid or offensive
smell, or otherwise nauseous or unwholesome, or any dead carcass, carrion, meat, fish,
entrails, manure, or other nauseous or unwholesome matter or substance, or any rubbish,
ashes, paper, dirt, stones, bricks, tin cans, boxes, barrels, or substance whatsoever, or
drain or pour or permit to drain or flow nauseous or unwholesome fluid, oil, kerosene,
benzene, or other similar oil or oily substance or liquid, in or upon a public place or
thoroughfare, or upon any lot or land of another within the Village.
(6) Outdoor Wood Furnaces. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this
Section or this Code, no person shall construct, install, operate, or use or suffer to
construct, install, operate, or use an or any outdoor wood furnace to provide heat to any
building or structure or equipment upon any property in the Village.
15.03 ABATEMENT AFTER NOTICE OF SPECIFIC NUISANCES. Whenever any
nuisance defined under this section shall be found within the Village, the Health Officer,
Police officer, or any Trustee may cause the same to be abated in such manner as he may
direct. However, it shall be the duty of the enforcing official first to give notice in
writing to the person owning, occupying, or in charge or control of any premises wherein
such public nuisance shall be, to abate and remove the same at his own expense, within
such reasonable time as the enforcing official shall direct. Anyone causing or permitting
any nuisance specified in this section shall not be subject to penalty until the expiration of
the time specified in such notice. It shall be unlawful within the Village to:
(1) Buildings, Etc., which Emit Offensive Odors. Maintain any gas plant factory, yard,
store house, building, or structure of any kind, tallow, chandler’s shop, soap factory,
tannery, distillery, livery stable, cattle yard, shed, barn, packing house, slaughter house,
rendering establishment, coal pile, rubbish accumulation, stagnant pool, sink hold, or
other thing which shall emit foul or offensive odors, gases, effluvia, or stenches, or which
shall be dangerous or prejudicial to the public health.
(2) Certain Public Garages. Maintain any public garage, used car lot, automobile service
station, parking lot, or space which shall become noxious, foul, offensive, or dangerous
and prejudicial to the public health or which shall seriously or permanently interfere with
life or safety by the testing or running of gasoline engines at various speeds, back-fire, or
the emitting of smoke and gases, odors of gasoline, or oils of the stirring up of dusts and
dirt.
(3) Location of Tanneries. Erect or maintain a tannery in any location within the Village
which is within six (6) blocks from a public or parochial school within said Village or in
any location where the majority of buildings within a radius of six (6) blocks are devoted
to residential purposes.
(4) Cutting of Weeds Causing Hay Fever. Permit the pollution of any grasses or weeds
which cause or produce hay fever in human beings. In order to prevent such pollination,
none of the following grasses and no weeds of any kind shall be permitted to grow or
stand more than one (1) foot high on any premises, to wit: meadow grass (poa annua),
bull grass (paspalm vasyanum), Bermuda grass (capriola dectylon), smut grass
(sporabulus anugstus), Johnson grass (andropogen halapense), feather grass (leptochloa
filiformia), foxtail grass (chaetochloa glauca), and cockspur grass (panicum crus-galli).
(5) Breeding Place for Flies. Maintain on any premises any accumulation of rubbish, filth,
or material of any kind whatsoever that is, or is likely to become a medium for the
development of fly larvae, or is likely to become a breeding place for flies.
(6) Breeding Place for Rats. Maintain on any premises any accumulation of rubbish, filth,
or material of any kind whatsoever that is, or is likely to become, a breeding place for
rats.
(7) Effluvia in Public Ditches. Construct or maintain any private septic system, which shall
emit effluvia, feces, noxious matter, or any liquid of offensive smell into any drainage
ditch along any public street or highway, or any drainage ditch wherein the public has an
easement through which natural surface water drains.
(8) Water in Public Ditches. Construct or maintain any private water system, well, rain
drainage, or any drain-tile system, which shall emit water into any abutting or
neighboring property. Water may be discharged into a drainage ditch or where the
Village has an easement through which natural surface water drains provided that the
discharge pipe be terminated at the street or right-of-way line. If water is discharged onto
a State or County highway right-of-way, a permit shall first be obtained from the
appropriate agency.
15.04 TREES WHICH ARE PUBLIC NUISANCES.
(1) Certain Trees and Storage of Cut Elm Wood Prohibited. The planting, preserving,
and maintaining of cottonwood or other trees which are injurious and detrimental to the
health of the community and all such other trees as may be liable to fall upon any
sidewalk, street, or building near to such tree or which are hazardous or may result in
injury to person or property because of a defective or diseased condition, or contagiously
diseased trees, or the storage of cut elm wood, unless debarked, shall be deemed a public
nuisance and are prohibited.
(2) Examination and Notice. The Superintendent of Public Works may examine all trees,
alive or dead, standing or fallen, and logwood piles, for the purpose of determining
whether same are contagiously diseased. Such examination shall include the right to take
samples from such trees and logwood piles for laboratory testing purposes. The
Superintendent of Public Works shall give notice to the owner or owners of land in the
Village whereon there are situated any trees, or tree conditions existing, or cut elm wood,
unless debarked, declared by said Superintendent to be a public nuisance, and which are
not maintained by the Village, to remove, prune, or spray or cause same to be removed,
pruned, or sprayed within 10 days, excepting when said notice applies to the removal,
pruning, or spraying of elm trees, such shall be done within five (5) days. The
Superintendent of Public Works, if such notice is not complied with, shall cause such
trees or cut elm wood, unless debarked, to be removed, pruned, or sprayed at the expense
of the owner of the land whereon the same stand, and if such owner or his agent cannot
be founding this Village such trees may be removed, pruned, or sprayed by said
Superintendent of Public Works at the expense of the owner of such land without notice.
15.05
15.06 VEHICLE ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED: REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL;
MOTOR VEHICLE SALES AND REPAIRS ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY;
ACCUMULATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
(1) Vehicle Abandonment Prohibited. No person shall leave unattended any motor
vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer, or mobile home on any public highway or private or public
property, for such time and under such circumstances as to cause the vehicle to
reasonably appear to have been abandoned. Whenever any vehicle has been left
unattended without the permission of the property owner for more than 48 hours, the
vehicle is deemed abandoned and constitutes a public nuisance.
(a) Any vehicle in violation of this section shall be impounded until lawfully claimed
or disposed of under subsection (b) except that if the Chief of Police determines
that the cost of towing and storage charges for the impoundment would exceed
the value of the vehicle, the vehicle may be junked by the municipality prior to
expiration of the impoundment period upon determination by the Chief of Police
that the vehicle is not wanted for evidence or other reason.
(b) Any abandoned vehicle shall be retained in storage for a period of 14 days after
certified mail notice has been sent to the owner and lien holders of record to
permit reclamation of the vehicle after payment of accrued charges. Thereafter
the Village may dispose of any abandoned vehicle which is determined by the
Chief of Police to have a value in excess of $100.00 at a public auction. Any
abandoned vehicle which is determined by the Chief of Police to have a value
less than $100.00 may be disposed of by direct sale to a licensed salvage dealer.
Before any sale can be consummated, the Chief of Police must determine that the
vehicle is not reported stolen. Within five (5) days after the disposal of a vehicle
as herein provided, the Chief of Police shall advise the Division of Motor
Vehicles in the Wisconsin Department of Transportation of such disposal on a
form supplied by said division.
(c) The owner of any abandoned vehicle except a stolen vehicle is responsible for
the abandonment and all costs of impounding and disposing of the vehicle. Cost
not recovered from the sale of the vehicle may be recovered in a civil auction by
the Village against the owner.
(2) Auto Sales and Repairs.
(a) The owner of any property used or zoned for residential purposes in the Village
pursuant to the Village Zoning Code may permit no more than a total of three (3)
motor vehicles to be offered or exposed for sale on such property during any
calendar year.
(b) No one shall offer or expose for sale a motor vehicle on a property used or zoned
for residential purposes without the written permission of the owner of such
property/
(c) No one shall offer or expose for sale a motor vehicle on property used or zoned
for residential purposes during any calendar year where three (3) motor vehicles
have been offered or exposed for sale on that property during the calendar year.
(d) The owner of any property used or zoned for residential purposes in the Village
pursuant to the Village Zoning Code may permit no more than four (4) motor
vehicles to be repaired on such property during any calendar year.
(e) No one shall repair a motor vehicle on any property used or zoned for residential
purposes without the written permission of the owner of said property.
(f) No one shall repair a motor vehicle on any property used or zoned for residential
purposes during any calendar year where four (4) motor vehicles have been
repaired on such property during that calendar year.
(g) The term “motor vehicle” as used in this section shall mean that term as it is
defined by §341.266(4), Wis. Stats.
(3) Accumulation of Used Motor Vehicles. No person except a licensee of a motor vehicle
dealer’s license issued under the Wisconsin Statues shall accumulate or store or allow to
remain outside of any building on real estate located within the Village for a period of
more than 10 days or dump, deposit, or otherwise abandon upon any property or upon
any highway, street, road, alley, or way within the Village any used motor vehicles as
motor vehicle is defined by the Wisconsin Statutes or any detached part or parts there of
for which no current registration fee has been paid under State Statues or which, if paid,
does not have properly attached thereto under State Statues a current license plate or
plates if so required and which is in condition which would mechanically prevent its
immediate operation upon any public highway or its operation thereon would be in
violation of the law. Each day that any used motor vehicle as herein defined or any
detached part or parts thereof shall be accumulated or stored or allowed to remain
contrary to these provisions shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. This section
shall not apply to a licensed and registered special interest vehicle and parts regulated
pursuant to §341.266(4), Wis. Stats.
(4) Penalties. Any person violating subsection (1) of this section, in addition to the costs
required under subsection (4), shall also be subject to the penalties provided in §15.09 of
this Chapter. Any person violating subsection (3) of this section shall be subject to the
penalties provided in §15.09 of this Chapter, excepting that the forfeiture for the first
offense shall not be less than $50.00 and a forfeiture for a second offense shall not be less
than $60.00.
15.07 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
(1) Definitions. “Recreational Vehicles” for purposes of this ordinance are defined as
motorized vehicles used on private or public property for individual or organized
recreational purposes whether licensed or unlicensed. By way of illustration but not of
limitation, “recreational vehicles” shall include snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles, minibikes,
motorcycles, motorized scooters, and motorized bicycles.
(2) Safety. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a recreational vehicle:
(a) In a negligent manner, or
(b) Which is unsafe under prescribed federal or State standards, or
(c) Without proper safety attire or equipment under prescribed federal and State
standards.
(3) Prohibited Use. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a recreational
vehicle upon private or public property (other than roads, driveways, business zoned
parking lots, or public lakes.)
(4) Exceptions. This section shall not apply to:
(a) Licensed recreational vehicles operating on public streets;
(b) A dealer or repairer of recreational vehicles whose operation shall be limited to
operation for demonstration or maintenance purposes on his own property.
15.08 UNSAFE, UNSANITARY, HAZARDOUS, AND UNSIGHTLY PREMISES. No
person shall cause items to be placed at streetside before noon the day before the
scheduled pick up under the Village Garbage Disposal Contract. Emptied receptacles
shall be removed by 8:00 a.m. the day following garbage pickup.
(1) The penalty provisions of 19.04, Village Code, shall not apply to violations of this
subsection.
(2) For the first offense, any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall
receive a written warning.
(3) For a second offense at the same premises within one (1) year period of the date of the
first offense, any person who shall violate the provisions of this sections shall, upon
conviction, forfeit the sum of $25.00 together with any costs of prosecution, and in
default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the
County House of Correction until said forfeiture and cost are paid, but not exceeding
three (3) days.
(4) For a third and subsequent offense at the same premises within the same one (1) year
period, any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction,
forfeit the sum of $50.00 together with any costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the County
House of Correction until said forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding six (6)
days.
15.09 COMMUNICABLE DISEASES AND QUARANTINE AND ISOLATION
REGULATIONS.
(1) Communicable Diseases; General. The Village Health Officer shall perform all duties
prescribed to him or her by the State of Wisconsin and the State Department of Health
and Family Services regarding contagious diseases, particularly, but not limited to Ch.
252, Wis. Stats. And Ch. HFS 145, Wis. Adm. Code, and “local health officer” as used
within the Wisconsin Statutes and Wisconsin Administrative Code shall mean the Village
Health Officer, all such Statutes and Code provisions pertaining to contagious diseases
being specifically incorporated herein by reference, as amended from time to time, and as
such constituting local direction and authority for the Village Health Officer and Health
Department.
(2) Control, Isolation, and Quarantine Measures for Communicable Diseases Other
Than Tuberculosis. The Village Health Officer shall undertake such measures for the
control of communicable diseases, other than tuberculosis, but also including those
diseases as are specifically set forth in Appendix A to Ch. HFS 145, Wis. Adm. Code, as
set froth under §252.06, Stats., and §145.06, Wis. Adm. Code, specifically, but not
limited to measures to direct a person known to have or suspected of having a contagious
disease to participate in such programs, tests, evaluations, conduct cessation, isolated or
segregated residence, placement and the like as set forth under §145.06(4), Wis. Adm.
Code, and in the absence of compliance with such directive, to petition a court of record
to order compliance with such directive, as set forth under §145..06(5), Wis. Adm. Code.
(3) Control, Isolation and Quarantine Measures for Tuberculosis. The Village Health
Officer shall undertake such measures for control of tuberculosis, as set forth under
§252.07, Stats., and §145.10, Wis. Adm. Code, specifically, but not limited to measures
to order the confinement to a facility of an individual having or suspected of having
tuberculosis, upon those conditions set forth under §252.07(8)(a), Stats., and
§145.10(6)(d), (e) and (f), Wis. Adm. Code, and to petition the court for an extension of
such confinement as necessary and pursuant to those conditions set forth under
§252.07(9)(a), Stats., and §145.10(7), Wis. Adm. Code.
(4) Communicable Diseases Information to the Public and to Schools. The Village
Health Officer may advise the public and any individual persons of the provisions of this
Section and the Wisconsin Statutes and the Wisconsin Administrative Code provisions
referenced and incorporated herein, in order to assist the Health Officer in the
performance of duties pertaining to the protection against contagious diseases, including,
but not limited to the provisions of §252.19, Stats., providing that no person who is
knowingly infected with a communicable disease may willfully violate the
recommendations of the local health officer or subject others to danger of contracting the
disease and that no person may knowingly and willfully take, aid in taking, advise or
cause to be taken, a person who is infected or is suspected of being infected with a
communicable disease into any public place or conveyance where the infected person
would expose any other person to danger of contracting the disease. The Village Health
Officer may further specifically advise schools, teachers, school nurses and principals of
the provisions of §252.21, Stats., providing in part at sub. (1), that a local health officer
should be notified of the existence or suspicion of the existence of the presence of a
communicable disease in a school, and the provisions of sub. (6), thereof, providing in
part that any teacher, school nurse, or principal may send home pupils whoa re suspected
of having a communicable disease or any other disease the State Department of Health
and Family Services specifies by rule.
(5) Violations. Any person who willfully violates or obstructs the execution of any term or
provision of this Section or any State Statute, Code or Rule, County, Village ordinance or
Departmental order under this Section, Ch. 252, Wis. Stats and/or Ch. HFS 145, Wis.
Adm. Code, relating to the public health, for which no other penalty is prescribed, shall,
in addition to being subject to all other legal and equitable actions and relief available to
the Village of Hales Corners, be subject to the penalty provisions set forth under §19.04
of this Code.
15.10 HUMAN HEALTH HAZARDS AND PROPERTY VIOLATING CODES OR
HEALTH ORDERS. §§254.01 Definitions, 254.55 Definitions, 254.56 Public Places,
254.59 Human Health Hazards, 254.593 Authority of the department and local health
departments, and 254.595 Property violating codes or health orders, of the Wisconsin
Statutes, as amended from time to time and as they apply to a village, be and the same are
hereby incorporated into this Code by reference.
15.11 PENALTY. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Chapter shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in Section 19.04 of this Code.
15.12 JUNK OR DISCARDED PROPERTY.
(1) No person or other entity shall store or allow to be stored open to the elements and not in
an approved structure on any lot, except under conditional or special use permit where
specifically approved, any junk or discarded property including, but not limited to,
refrigerators and other appliances; toilets, sinks, and other plumbing fixtures; furnaces;
machinery or machinery parts; junked vehicles or vehicle parts not otherwise regulated
by this Code; wood; construction materials; amusement park devices; barrels; old iron;
chain; brass; copper; tin; led; other base metals; paper clippings; rags; rubber; glass;
bottles or similar items; and any other debris, equipment, or implement.
(2) Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
section shall upon conviction be subject to the penalty provisions of §19.04 of this Code.
In addition to such penalties, upon failure of any person or entity to remove such junk or
discarded property after service by the Building Inspector of an order to do so within 10
days from the date of the order, the Village may obtain the removal of such junk or
discarded property and charge same as a special charge against the subject property
pursuant to §66.60(16), Wis. Stats. In addition to all of the aforesaid remedies, the
Building Inspector may cause any abatement procedure to be commenced and may seek
injunctive relieve by Circuit Court action in order to obtain compliance with this Section.
15.13 RUMMAGE SALES REGULATED. The owner or occupant of any residential zoned
or used property in the Village may conduct nor more than three (3) rummage sales in the
aggregate on such property during any calendar year, and such sale shall be limited to a
period of not more than 72 consecutive hours within any one week. The definition of
“Rummage Sale” shall include, but not be limited to, events also identified as “garage
sale”, “estate sale”, “moving sale’, or “auction”.
CHAPTER 16
Parks and Parkways
16.01 Definitions
16.02 Permits for Public Meetings and Assemblies
16.03 Games and Amusements Prohibited Except in Designated Areas; Permits for Exclusive
Use
16.04 Sales and Solicitations for Sale Prohibited without Permit; Distribution of Handbills,
Advertisement; Regulation of
16.05 Use of Firearms, Fireworks; Hunting with Bow and Arrow and Trapping; Throwing of
Missiles; Making of Fires; Deposit or Breakage of Tin Cans, Bottles, and Glassware;
Prohibitions
16.06 Animals in Parks
16.07 Fish; Waterfowl; Game Birds
16.08 Injury to, Destruction, or Removal of Public Property
16.09 Use of Parks for Aircraft or Parachute Prohibited Except with Permit
16.10 Use of Motor Vehicles in Parks
16.11 Regulation of Bicycle Riders
16.12 Horseback Riding Regulations
16.13 Boating Regulations
16.14 Bathing and Swimming Regulations
16.15 Fortune Telling; Gambling; Prohibited
16.16 Disorderly Conduct
16.17 Use of Liquor in Parks
16.18 Care of Waste
16.19 Location and Construction of Utility Fixtures
16.20 Cutting of Parkway Curbs for Private Drives; Permit Required
16.21 Excavating in Park or Parkway; Permit Required; Conditions
16.22 Care Required in Making Excavation
16.23 Closing Park or Parkway Facilities to the Public
16.24 Improper Use of Park Furniture
16.25 Sleeping, Camping, or Lodging in Parks Forbidden
16.26 Interference with Park Employees Unlawful
16.27 Park Hours
16.28 Permits; Obligations of Permittees
16.29 Loitering on County Premises
16.30 Police Powers in Enforcement of this Chapter
16.31 Application of Chapter 16 to Village Parks
16.32 Penalties
16.01 DEFINITIONS
(1) Park: Parkway.
(a) Milwaukee County Parks. The terms “park” and “parkway”, whenever used in
Chapter 16, unless otherwise stated, shall include the grounds, buildings thereon,
waters therein, and any other property which is now or may hereafter be under
the control or jurisdiction of the Milwaukee County Park Commission.
(b) Village of Hales Corners Parks. The term “park” and “parkway”, whenever
indicated by Section 16.31 of this Chapter, shall include the grounds, buildings
thereon, waters therein, and any other property which is now or may hereafter be
under the control or jurisdiction of the Village Board of the Village of Hales
Corners.
(2) Person. The term “person”, as used in Chapter 16 shall include any individual, firm,
partnership, corporation, and association of persons, and the singular number shall
include the plural.
(3) Park Commission: Commission. The term “Park Commission”, or “Commission”,
wherever used in Chapter 16, shall mean the Milwaukee County Park Commission.
16.02 PERMIT FOR PUBLIC MEETINGS AND ASSEMBLIES.
(1) Public meetings, assemblies, religious services, entertainment, and sporting or athletic
events are allowed in parks and parkways, the use thereof and/or facility only by written
permit issued by the Director of Parks, Recreation, and Culture or his designee.
(a) Application for permits shall be made in writing to the Park Commission and
shall state:
1. The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
2. The name and address of the person, persons, corporation, or association
sponsoring the activity.
3. A description of the activity to be conducted.
4. The name of the park or parkway and the part thereof for which the
permit is requested.
5. The date of the proposed activity and the hour at which it will begin and
end.
6. The estimated anticipated attendance.
7. Special needs, i.e., kitchen, utilities, parking, tent, sound, security, and
other.
(b) A permit shall be issued to an applicant for the facility requested if:
1. It has not been reserved by other permittees.
2. The site or facility requested will safely accommodate the anticipated
attendance, is appropriate for the activity to be conducted, and the
activity will not physically damage the site or unreasonably interfere
with general public enjoyment or use and enjoyment by other permittees.
3. Permittee provides a signed statement, on a form to be provided by the
Park Commission prior to issuance of said permit, stating that the
permitte will abide by Sections 47.16, 63.01, and 63.02 of the Milwaukee
County General Ordinances.
(2) Noise. No person shall use or operate any radio, phonograph, musical instrument, or
other (mechanical, electrical sound making, reproducing, or amplification) device in a
park or parkway so as to unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of the park or
parkway by the public.
(3) Interference with Permittees Prohibited. No person shall in any manner disturb,
harass, or interfere with any person or party holding a written permit, nor with any of
their equipment or property.
(4) No permittee shall in any manner disturb, harass, or interfere with any member of the
public in the park or parkway nor with any of their equipment or property.
(5) Parades and Processions. Parades or processions shall be allowed in any park and
parkway only by written permit, issued by the Director of Parks, Recreation, and Culture
or his designee, unless they are scheduled for a time which presents a hazard or danger to
other users of the parks or parkways. Application shall be in writing and state:
1. The name and address of the applicant.
2. The name and address of the person, persons, corporation, or association
sponsoring the parade or procession and the purpose of the event.
3. The name of the park or parkway through which the parade or procession is to
pass.
4. The date of the parade or procession, its designated route, and the time it will
pass through the park or parkway.
5. The estimated number of vehicles and persons expected to participate in the
parade or procession.
16.03 GAMES AND AMUSEMENTS PROHIBITED EXCEPT IN DESIGNATED
AREAS; PERMITS FOR EXCLUSIVE USE.
(1) Prohibited Except in Designated Areas. No person shall engage in any sport, game,
race, or amusement in any park or parkway except upon such portions thereof as may be
designated for that purpose, and then only under such rules and regulations as may be
established by the Park Commission.
(2) Permits for Exclusive Use; Interference with Prohibited. Permits for the exclusive
use of any picnic or play area for any specified date or time may be granted at the
discretion of the Park Commission, and no person shall in any manner disturb or interfere
with any person or party occupying the ground under such a permit, nor with any of their
equipment or property.
16.04 SALES AND SOLICITATION FOR SALE PROHIBITED WITHOUT PERMIT;
DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS, ADVERTISEMENT; REGULATION OF.
(1) Sales and Solicitation of Sales. No person shall sell, keep, or offer for sale, any tangible
or intangible article, merchandise, or thing; nor solicit for any trade, occupation, business,
or profession, or for alms, within the park or parkway, without the written permit of the
Park Commission.
(2) Distribution of Literature. No person shall post or affix any circular, card, or sign,
irrespective of type, in any park or parkway. Distribution of literature or the expression
of ideas by signs or placards which interfere with or obstruct the passage or movement of
people or vehicles is prohibited.
16.05 USE OF FIREARMS, FIREWORKS; HUNTING WITH BOW AND ARROW
AND TRAPPING; THROWING OF MISSILES; MAKING OF FIRES; DEPOSIT
OR BREAKAGE OF TIN CANS, BOTTLES, AND GLASSWARE;
PROHIBITIONS.
(1) Use of Firearms and Fireworks; Hunting with Bow and Arrow; Trapping. No
person shall carry, fire, or discharge any gun, pistol, or firearm, nor any rocket, torpedo,
or other fireworks of any description, nor shall any person engage in trapping within any
park or parkway without a written permit of the Park Commission; nor shall any person
hunt with bow and arrow within any park or parkway. The word “gun” shall include air
gun.
(2) Throwing of Stones or Missiles. No person shall throw stones or missiles in or into any
park or parkway.
(3) Making of Fires. No person shall make or kindle a fire for any purpose except in places
provided therefore, and then subject to such regulations as may be prescribed.
(4) Deposit of Tin Cans, Bottles, and Glassware Forbidden Except in Waste Container;
Removal of Broken Tin Cans, Bottles, or Glassware.
(a) No person shall deposit any tin cans, bottles, or other glassware, after the same
have been used in any place in a park or parkway, except in waste containers
provided by the County Park Commission, or except in containers carried by
such person for the purpose of removing same from such park or parkway.
(b) Any person who breaks a bottle or other glassware in any park or parkway shall
immediately pick up the broken pieces and remove same into a park waste
container.
16.06 ANIMALS IN PARKS.
(1) Disturbance of Animals on Exhibition. No person shall injure, molest, or disturb any
animal exhibited in the Zoological Garden or in any other area of the park or parkway,
nor feed or attempt to feed the same where posted rules prohibit such conduct.
(2) Animals Not Allowed in Parks; When; Exception. No animal, except those placed in
the park or parkways by the authority of the Park Commission, and excepting horses
when saddled or harnessed and in use for riding for pleasure, driving only on roadways or
paths duly designated, and except dogs on leash, as regulated by subsection (3) hereof,
shall be conducted into or driven within the parks or parkways or be allowed to remain
therein. This, however, does not apply to animals engage din the construction,
maintenance, or operation of the parks and parkway.
(3) Dogs Prohibited in Certain Areas. Otherwise Permitted Only When on Leash. No
person having the control or care of a dog shall suffer or permit such dog to enter or
remain in a public park or parkway unless it be led by a leash of suitable strength not
more than six (6) feet in length, and then only within such areas in parks as have been
designated by order of the Park Commission. The Park Commission shall cause signs to
be posted in areas wherein dogs are not permitted.
(4) Dogs not Permitted in Zoological Gardens. No dog, whether on leash or not, shall be
permitted at any time in the Zoological Garden nor in any other area of a park or parkway
where domestic or wild animals are exhibited.
(5) Impounding of Dogs, When. Dogs found running at large within any park or parkway
may be impounded by any peace officer or by any employee of the Park Commission.
16.07 FISH; WATERFOWL; GAME BIRDS.
(1) Fish. No person shall take or attempt to take any fish from, or send or throw any animal
or thing into or upon, any of the waters of the parks or parkways; or kill, injure, or
attempt to injure, or unnecessarily disturb the fish in said waters, except with permission
of the Park Commission.
(2) Waterfowl; Game Birds. No one shall kill, injure, or attempt to injure, or unnecessarily
disturb any waterfowl or other birds or animals, wild or domestic, within any of the parks
or parkways. Nor shall any person rob or disturb the nest or eggs of any bird or other
animal therein.
16.08 INJURY TO, DESTRUCTION, OR REMOVAL OF PUBLIC PROPERTY.
(1) Destruction of Property.
(a) No person shall climb any tree, or pluck any flowers or fruit, wild or cultivated,
or break, cut down, trample upon, remove, or in any manner injure or deface
write upon, defile, or ill use any tree, shrub, flower, flower bed, turf, fountain,
ornament, statute, building, fence, apparatus, bench, table, official notice, sign,
bridge, structure, or other property within any park or parkway.
(b) No person in any park or parkway shall remove any device for the protection of
trees or shrubs, nor shall any such person fasten a horse or other animal next to
any tree, shrub, or grass plot, which may become damaged by the action of the
animal.
(2) Removal of Ice or Sand Prohibited. No person shall take ice from any stream or lake
within any park or parkway, nor remove any sand therefrom or from the shores thereof
without a written permit of the Park Commission.
16.09 USE OF PARKS FOR AIRCRAFT OR PARACHUTE PROHIBITED EXCEPT
WITH PERMIT. No person shall ascend or land with any aircraft, including gliders and
parachutes, nor engage in stunt flying or parachute landing in any park or parkway
without the written permit of the Park Commission.
16.10 USE OF MOTOR VEHICLES IN PARKS.
(1) Driving Confined to Regular Drives and Parking Area. No person shall operate or
drive any motor vehicle or other vehicle of traffic or burden upon any part of the parks or
parkways except roads, driveways, parking areas, or other areas which have been
designated by the Park Commission for vehicular travel.
(2) Vehicles for Hire not to Stand in Parks; Exception. No person shall cause any taxi,
bus, limousine, or other vehicle for hire to stand upon any part of the parks or parkways
for the purpose of soliciting or taking in passengers or persons other than those carried to
the parks or parkways by said vehicle, unless licensed by the Park Commission.
(3) Use of Parks by Certain Vehicles Prohibited. No person shall cause any bus, with or
without passengers, nor any cart, dray, wagon, truck, or trailer, or other vehicle carrying
goods, merchandise, manure, soil, or any other articles, or solely in use for the carriage of
goods, merchandise, manure, or other article, to enter or be driven in any part of the parks
or parkways. This section shall not apply to vehicles engaged in the construction,
maintenance, or operation of the parks or parkways, nor to buses under permit of the Park
Commission.
(4) Duty of Vehicle Operators to Comply with Traffic Codes. It shall be the duty of every
person operating an automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle of traffic or burden within
the parks or parkways, to comply with the State, County, and municipal traffic codes, and
with all orders, directions, and regulations of traffic officers, or officially displayed on
any post, standard, sign, or device installed for the regulation of traffic.
(5) Speed of Vehicles. No vehicle shall be operated on any road or drive in any park or
parkway at a speed exceeding 25 miles per hour.
(6) Stopping at Intersections of Park Drives or Roadways. When the County Park
Commission has caused certain intersections of park drives or roadways to be marked
with “Stop” signs, no person shall operate any vehicle except authorized emergency
vehicles over or across such intersections without first brining such vehicle to a complete
stop opposite “Stop” sign.
(7) Parking Prohibited in Specific Areas During Specific Hours. No person shall park
any vehicle or permit any vehicle to remain standing on any highway or roadway within
the boundaries of County parks and parkways as hereinafter designated in excess of the
length of time and between the hours as hereinafter specified in this subsection:
(a) No parking shall be allowed on any of the park or parkway roads during the
hours from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
(b) Whitnall Park:
1. No parking on the southerly side of the north park road between the first
and second intersections on the road leading from West Forest Home
Avenue to the Arboretum.
2. No parking on the southerly side of the north park road between the
second intersection southeasterly of Forest Home Avenue and the east
end of the drive to the Arboretum Building.
3. No parking on both sides of the road leading from the north park drive to
the Arboretum building.
4. No parking on the westerly side of the central park road from the second
intersection southeasterly of Forest Home Avenue southerly 200 feet to
the southeasterly limits of the Family Picnic Area.
5. No parking on the westerly side of the east park road from the first
intersection north of College Avenue to the east end of the drive to the
Arboretum Building.
6. No parking on both sides of the central park road from the first
intersection north of College Avenue 1,200 feet northerly.
7. No parking on both sides of the east park road from South 92nd Street
northwesterly 700 feet to the intersection of the roads.
(c) Parking Area. Parking areas in County parks are established for the convenience
of patrons while using the facilities of the parks. It shall be unlawful for any
person to park, stop, or leave standing any vehicle in any park area in any County
park except during the time he remains in the park.
(8) Definition of Terms
(a) The term “parking” where used in Section 16.10 of the General Ordinances
means the standing of any motor vehicle or other vehicle of traffic or burden,
whether attended or unattended, upon any highway otherwise than temporarily or
while actually engaged in loading or unloading or in receiving or discharging
passengers or while standing in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signals.
(b) The term “motor vehicle” where used in Section 16.10 of the General Ordinance
means a vehicle which is self-propelled.
(c) The term “motor go-kart” where used in Section 16.10 of the General Ordinances
means a motor vehicle propelled by a cycle type gasoline engine or engines,
designated to travel on three (3) or more wheels with a seat for the driver and not
exceeding 300 pounds net weight.
(9) Posting of Signs. The County Park Commission shall erect suitable signs on all
highways hereinabove restricted as to parking, which signs shall indicate the limitation of
no parking and shall indicate that no parking shall be allowed at any time.
(10) Parking Area to be Used for Parking Purposes Only. No person shall operate or drive
any motor vehicle in any area designated for the parking of vehicles except for the
purpose of parking therein or of maintaining such area.
(11) Operation of Motor Go-Karts Prohibited in Parks. No person shall operate a motor
go-kart upon any part of the parks or parkways except in areas which have been
designated by the Park Commission for the operation of motor go-karts.
(12) Stipulations for Parking Violations; Procedure. The procedure for persons to whom a
summons has been issued by the Hales Corners Police Department shall be in accordance
with Chapter 2 of this Code.
(13) Regulation of Snowmobiles.
(a) Definition. Snowmobile means a motor-driven vehicle designed to travel over a
snow surface with an operator or an operator and one (1) or more passengers.
Such vehicle shall derive traction from a continuous track-laying device, the
periphery of which shall be rubber or metal reinforced rubber but shall not
include any block, studs, flange, spike, or other protuberance. The term
“snowmobile” shall not mean vehicle driven by an airplane propeller or a vehicle
driven by wind action and specifically designed for ice sailing.
(b) No person shall be permitted to operate or drive a snowmobile in any park or
parkway.
16.11 REGULATION OF BICYCLE RIDERS. Riders of bicycles shall comply with the
rules for the regulations of other vehicles, as stated in Section 16.10 of the General
Ordinances, and in addition thereto shall be subject to the following regulations.
(1) No person shall ride a bicycle upon the lawns, walks, or foot trails in the parks or
parkways.
(2) Riders shall proceed in the extreme right hand lane of the drives at all times, in single file
only.
(3) Riding crosswise and curving to and fro are strictly prohibited.
(4) No rider shall take both hands off the handles or ride recklessly in any other manner.
(5) A bicycle shall not be towed by a rope or otherwise, nor shall any rider hold on to any
moving vehicle for the purpose of being drawn along.
(6) No bicycle shall be pushed upon any park or parkway drive where an adjoining footwalk
is available.
(7) Infants, children, or extra passengers shall not be carried on bicycles in any manner
whatsoever.
(8) Children riding small bicycles, wheels less than 20 inches in diameter, may use the
footwalks.
(9) Wherever possible, bicycles shall be parked in places provided for such purpose.
16.12 HORSEBACK RIDING REGULATIONS.
(1) Riding on Designated Paths Only. No person shall ride horseback in any park or
parkway except upon designated roadways and bridle paths.
(2) Hours When Riding is Permitted. No person shall be permitted to ride horseback in
any park or parkway after dark or before daybreak.
(3) Unruly Horses Barred. No person shall be permitted to ride or drive a horse which
cannot be held under such control that it may be easily turned or stopped.
(4) Reckless Riding Prohibited. No person shall be permitted to ride or drive a horse in a
reckless manner.
(5) Pedestrian Right-of-way. Pedestrians shall have the right-of-way when crossing a
bridle path, and whenever groups of people are visible within 300 feet, horses shall be
ridden at slow gaits.
(6) Compliance with Posted Rules. Every rider shall comply with all Park Commission
rules and signs along the bridle paths.
16.13 BOATING REGULATIONS. No person shall, without written permission of the Park
Commission, place upon the lagoons, rivers, or any of the waters under the control of the
Park Commission, any float, boat, or other water craft, nor land or go upon any of the
islands of the lagoons or rivers, nor land or touch with a boat upon any part of the shores
not designated as a landing place.
16.14 BATHING AND SWIMMING REGULATIONS.
(1) Swimming Permitted Only at Designated Places. No person shall wade, bathe, or
swim within a park or parkway except at such pools or beaches as are or may be
designated for that purpose by the Park Commission.
(2) Proper Bathing Attire Required. No person shall wade, bathe, swim in, or attend at
any such pool or beach with out proper bathing attire as prescribed by any rules and
regulations.
(3) Bathers Restrict to Bathing Areas. No person dressed in bathing costume shall be
permitted in the parks or parkways except in such areas as are designated for bathers by
the Park Commission.
(4) Tin Cans, Bottles, Etc., Prohibited. No person shall take any tin can, bottles, or
glassware of any kind except eye glasses, into an area designated as a beach or pool for
bathers by the Park Commission.
16.15 FORTUNE TELLING; GAMBLING; PROHIBITED. No person shall be allowed to
tell fortunes or to play or bet at or against any game which is played, conducted, dealt, or
carried on with cards, dice, corn, or other device for money, chips, credit, or any other
representative of value; nor shall any person be allowed to maintain or exhibit any
gambling table or other instrument of gambling or gaming.
16.16 DISORDERLY CONDUCT; SMOKING; PROHIBITED.
(1) Disorderly Conduct. No person shall use threatening, abusive, insulting, profane, or
indecent language, nor be guilty of conduct that is abusive, insulting, obscene, indecent,
or constitutes a breach of the peace.
(2) Person Guilty of Disorderly Conduct to be Removed. No person violating any of the
prohibitions enumerated in subsection (1) of this section shall be allowed to remain in
any park or parkway.
(3) Smoking, When Prohibited.
(a) No person shall be permitted to smoke or to hold a lighted cigarette, cigar, or
pipe in any building where domestic or wild animals are exhibited, nor in any
building or section of a building, or in any park or parkway area where officially
posted notices so prohibit.
(b) Dropping Lighted Cigars, etc., on Roadway. No person shall throw or drop a
lighted cigar or cigarette stub or empty a lighted pipe from an automobile moving
along a park or parkway drive.
16.17 USE OF LIQUOR IN PARKS. No person shall bring into or drink any spirituous,
vinous, malt, or mixed liquors in any park or parkways, except in such areas as
designated by the Park Commission, and then only by written permission of the Park
Commission, and except at such places as beverages are sold by licensees of the
Commission.
16.18 CARE OF WASTE.
(1) Scattering of Rubbish Prohibited. No person shall scatter, drop, or leave any piece of
paper, rug, tin can, bottle, glass, peanut shells, melon rinds, banana peels or other
garbage, dead flowers, or other rubbish in any portion of the parks or parkways, except in
the receptacles provided for that purpose.
(2) Wholesale Dumpage of Rubbish and Waste Prohibited. No person shall deposit,
dump, throw, or place any earth, rubbish, dust, manure, paper, garbage, or any other
refuse matter, or any sand, stone, lumber, or building material, or any substance of any
kind, in or upon part of the waters, grounds, or roadways of any park or parkway without
written permission of the Park Commission.
16.19 LOCATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FIXTURES. The location of all
sewers and receivers, gas pipes, water pipes, stopcock boxes, hydrants, lamp posts,
telegraph, telephone, and electric power posts and lines, manholes, conduit, and pumps
within any park or parkway shall be subject to the jurisdiction of and control of the Park
Commission; and their construction, erection, repair, or relocation shall be undertaken
only after written permission is received from said Commission.
19.20 CUTTING OF PARKWAY CURBS FOR PRIVATE DRIVES; PERMIT
REQUIRED.
(1) Curb Cutting Allowed Only with Permit. No curb, whether stone, concrete, or grass,
shall be cut for the purpose of constructing a private driveway across any parkway border
nor for any other purpose, without written permission of the Park Commission.
(2) Design of Private Paths, Drives, and Roadways Across Any Sidewalk Border
Subject to Commission Approval. The location, width, grade, and construction of all
paths, driveways, and roadways across any sidewalk border along any parkway shall be
subject to the approval of an constructed only after written permission therefore is
obtained from the Park Commission.
16.21 EXCAVATING IN PARK OR PARKWAY; PERMIT REQUIRED;
CONDITIONS.
(1) Permit Required to Excavate. No person shall open a trench for any purpose, or dig
into, or take up, any part of any park or parkway, without the written permission of the
Park Commission.
(2) Conditions of Permit. The person to whom such permit is granted shall complete the
work within the time specified in said permit, and shall do said work and refill and
replace or remove in a substantial and workmanlike manner all material disturbed by him,
and shall leave the place where said work was done in as good condition as before said
work was begun. No such trench or opening shall be dug in any location or manner
which may injure the roots of any tree without the prior written permission of the
Commission.
16.22 CARE REQUIRED IN MAKING EXCAVATION. Every person, firm, or
corporation, who shall receive a permit to open a trench, to cut a curb, or to deposit
materials in or upon any park or parkway, shall at all times after such work has been
commenced or materials deposited, and until the same has been completed, and until all
accumulations of materials resulting from such work have been removed, so guard and
protect the same that persons driving or passing along the roadway or sidewalk or in the
vicinity of the place where the work is being done, shall not be likely to meet with any
accident therefrom; and shall also during the time, from sunset to sunrise, each night
while said work is in progress, cause the same to be securely fenced and guarded by a red
light or lights placed in a conspicuous position, and so secured that the same shall not be
extinguished.
16.23 CLOSING PARK OR PARKWAY FACILITIES TO THE PUBLIC. In case of an
emergency, or when in the judgment of the Park Commission the public interest demands
it, any portion of the parks or parkways or buildings therein may be closed to the public,
or to designated persons, until permission is given to return.
16.24 IMPROPER USE OF PARK FURNITURE. No person shall lie down upon any bench
or table in any park or parkway, nor shall hang, occupy, or use any hammock, excepting
those used for placing infants therein.
16.25 SLEEPING, CAMPING, OR LODGING IN PARKS FORBIDDEN. No person shall
sleep, or camp, or lodge in any park or parkway, except in such places as designated for
such purposes, as overnight, or tourist, or trailer camps, and then only subject to the rules
and regulations of the Park Commission, governing the use of such areas.
16.26 INTERFERENCE WITH PARK EMPLOYEES UNLAWFUL. No person shall
interfere with or in any manner hinder any employee of the Park Commission, nor any
employee of a contractor while engaged in constructing, repairing, or caring for any
portion of the parks or parkways, or while in the discharge of the duties conferred by
Chapter 47 of the General Ordinances of Milwaukee County
16.27 PARK HOURS. Parks and parkways shall be closed daily between midnight and sunrise
except to vehicular traffic moving along streets or roadways and except with the Park
Commission publishes or posts different closing hours. No person shall remain in the
park or parkways during the hours they are closed.
16.28 PERMITS; OBLIGATIONS OF PERMITTEES. All permits shall be issued by a
duly authorized employee of the Park Commission in writing and subject to park rules
and regulations. The persons to whom such permits have been granted shall be bound by
said rules and regulations as fully as though the same were inserted in said permit, and
any person or persons to whom such permits have been granted shall be liable for any
loss, damage or injury sustained by the Park Commission, or by any person by reason of
the negligence of the person or persons to whom such permits have been granted, their
servants or agents.
16.29 LOITERING ON COUNTY PREMISES.
(1) To loiter means to remain idle, stand around, sit, or lie, in essentially one location or
move about slowly.
(2) No person shall loiter on County grounds, including buildings, entrances and exits
thereto, structures, walkways, and roadways in a manner which:
(a) Creates alarm or fear in members of the public, County employees, and County
officers for their safety or the safety of public or private property.
(b) Molests, harasses, or intimidates any person on County premises.
(c) Obstructs offices, lobbies, corridors, stairways, doorways, walkways, roadways,
and parking lots as to prevent and interfere with access or free passage by
members of the public, County officers, and employees.
(d) Interferes with the transaction of business or the performance of duties by County
employees or officials.
16.30 POLICE POWERS IN ENFORCEMENT OF THIS CHAPTER. Pursuant to the
authorization contained in Section 47.30 of the Milwaukee County Rules and Regulations
governing parks and parkways, any police officer of Hales corners may without a warrant
arrest any offender whom he may detect in the violation of any of the provisions of this
Chapter, and take the person so arrested forthwith before a magistrate having competent
jurisdiction, and he shall have at all times the right to enter the premises of any building,
structure, or enclosures which may be leased or set aside for private or exclusive use of
any individual or group of individuals, for the purpose of arresting violators hereof, and
may use all necessary means to attain that end.
16.31 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER 16 TO VILLAGE PARKS. The following sections
of Chapter 16 of the Village Code shall apply to any facility designated a “park” or
“parkway” under the jurisdiction of the Village Board of the Village of Hales Corners
and the terms “Park Commission” and ”County Park Commission” as set forth in such
sections shall mean “Village Board or its designee”: 16.03; 16.05; 16.06(1), (2), (3), and
(4); 16.07(2); 16.08; 16.09; 16.10; 16.11; 16.13; 16.14; 16.17; 16.25; 16.27.
16.32 PENALTIES. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Chapter shall be
subject to a penalty as provided in Section 19.04 of this Code.
CHAPTER 18
Housing Code
18.01 Definitions
18.02 Inspection of All Buildings and Premises
18.03 Minimum Standards for Basic Equipment and Facilities
18.04 Minimum Standards for Light, Ventilation, and Heating
18.05 Responsibility of Owners Related to the Maintenance of Dwellings and Dwelling Units
18.06 Minimum Space, Use, and Location Requirements
18.07 Responsibility of Occupants Relating to the Maintenance of Dwellings or Dwelling Units
18.08 Responsibility of Owners Relating to the Maintenance of Non-dwelling Structures,
Fences, and Premises
18.09 Permitted Vehicle Storage
18.10 Storage of Firewood
18.11 Enforcement
18.12 Condemnation of Unfit Dwellings and Dwelling Units; Legal Procedure of
Condemnations and Placarding for Human Habitation
18.13 Article Does Not Impair Authority of Village of Hales Corners or Village Health Officer
to Act on Nuisances
18.14 Article Does Not Abrogate Provisions of Building and Zoning Code
18.01 DEFINITIONS. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of all sections of this Article:
(1) Approved shall mean approved by or in accordance with regulations under the Village
Code, enforced and interpreted by the Building Inspector or others as indicated elsewhere
in this Ordinance.
(2) A Basement is a story the floor line of which is below grade at any exist and the ceiling
of which is not more than four (4) feet above grade at any entrance or exit.
(3) Bathroom shall mean a room containing a bathtub, toilet, and lavatory basin.
(4) Bedroom shall mean a habitable room within the dwelling unit which is used or intended
to be used primarily for the purpose of sleeping, with a door to insure privacy but shall
not include any kitchen or dining room.
(5) Building Inspector shall mean the legally designated authority of the Village of Hales
Corners or his authorized representative, charged with the responsibility of enforcing the
provisions of the Village building and zoning codes and the applicable laws of the State
of Wisconsin.
(6) Communal shall mean used or shared by or intended to be used or shared by occupants
of two (2) or more dwelling units.
(7) Duplex shall mean a structure with two (2) dwelling units.
(8) Dwelling shall mean any building or structure, except temporary housing, which is
wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants,
and includes any appurtenances attached thereto.
(9) Dwelling Unit shall mean a suite of habitable rooms, occupied by or intended to be
occupied by not more than one (1) family as a residence.
(10) Extermination shall mean the control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests
by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that
may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping, or any other
approved pest extermination methods.
(11) Family shall mean an individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage,
or legal adoption, or a group of not more than five (5) persons who need not be related by
blood, marriage, or legal adoption, living together in a dwelling unit, included within the
definition of a family shall be children placed with a family in a dwelling unit under the
provisions of Chapter 48, Wis. Stats., whereby a foster home license is issued, provided
that the number of children shall not exceed four (4), unless all are in the relationship to
each other of brother or sister.
(12) Floor Area shall mean the net area of any floor space enclosed by exterior walls, fire
walls, or absolute fire separation exclusive of open spaces.
(13) Garbage shall mean animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, or consumption of food including spoiled food and all other
combustible material.
(14) Hotel. A hotel is a building in which board and lodging are provided and offered to the
transient public for compensation.
(15) Infestation shall mean the presence of any insects, rodents, or other pests within a
dwelling or in the dwelling premises.
(16) Lavatory Basin shall mean a hand washing basin which is properly connected with both
hot and cold water lines and which is separated and distinct from a kitchen sink.
(17) Living Room shall mean a habitable room within a dwelling unit which is used or
intended to be used primarily for general living.
(18) Non-dwelling Structure shall mean nay structure except a dwelling.
(19) Occupant shall mean any person over six (6) months of age, including an owner, tenant,
operator, living, sleeping, or cooking in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling,
dwelling unit, hotel, motel, hotel unit, motel unit, or rooming unit.
(20) Operator shall mean any person who has charge, care, custody, or control of any
building in which dwelling units are offered for rent or occupancy, or any premises or
part thereof which are offered for rent.
(21) Owner shall mean any person who alone or jointly or severally with others:
(a) Shall have legal or equitable title to any premises upon which no structures have
been erected or upon which non-dwelling structures are present, or has legal or
equitable title to any dwelling, dwelling unit, hotel, motel, hotel unit, motel unit,
or rooming unit; or
(b) Shall have charge, care, or control of premises upon which no structures have
been erected, or upon which non-dwelling structures are present, or has charge,
care, or control of any dwelling, dwelling unit, or hotel, motel, hotel unit, motel
unit, or rooming unit, as executor, executrix, administrator, administratix, trustee,
or guardian of the estate of the owner.
(22) Person shall mean and include any individual, firm, corporation, association, or
partnership.
(23) Plumbing shall include all gas pipes, waste pipes, water pipes, water closets, sinks,
lavatories, bathtubs, catch basins, drams, vents, and any other provided fixtures together
with the connections to the water, sewer, or gas lines.
(24) Premises shall mean any platted lot or part thereof, or unplatted lot or parcel of land or
plot of land, either occupied or unoccupied by any dwelling or non-dwelling structure.
(25) Roomer shall mean an occupant, transient, or permanent, of a rooming unit or dwelling
unit, who is not a member of the family occupying the dwelling unit.
(26) Rooming House shall mean any dwelling or that part of any dwelling, containing one or
more rooms in which space is let by the owner or operator to more than two (2) roomers.
(27) Supplied shall mean paid for, furnished, provided by, or under the control of the owner
or operator.
(28) Temporary Housing shall mean any tent, trailer, or other structure used for human
shelter which is designed to be transportable, and which is not attached to the ground, to
another structure, or to any utility system on the same premises.
(29) Whenever the word “Board” is used in this Chapter, it shall mean “Village Board”.
(30) Whenever the words dwelling, dwelling until, rooming house, rooming unit, nursing
home, nursing unit, hotel, hotel unit, motel, motel unit, motor hotel, or motor hotel unit or
premises are used in this Chapter, they shall be construed as though they were followed
by the words “or any part thereof”.
(31) Vehicle shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, except railroad trains, but including
snowmobiles.
18.02 INSPECTION OF ALL BUILDINGS AND PREMISES.
(1) Inspections. The Building Inspector, the Village Health Officer, and the Chiefs of Police
and Fire, or their duly authorized agents, are hereby authorized to make such inspections
and to take such action as may be required to enforce the provisions of this Code in order
to safeguard the health and welfare of the occupants of all buildings and of the general
public.
(2) Right of Entry.
(a) Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions
of or perform any duty imposed by this Code or any applicable law, or whenever
the Building Inspector or his authorized representative has reasonable cause to
believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises, any condition
which makes such building or premises hazardous, unsafe, or dangerous for any
reason specified in this Code or other similar law, the Building Inspector or his
authorized representative hereby is authorized to enter such property at any
reasonable time, and to inspect the same and perform any duty imposed upon the
Building Inspector by this Code or other applicable law, provided that:
1. If such property be occupied, he shall first present proper credentials to
the occupant and request entry, explaining his reasons therefore; and
2. If such property be unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to
locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the
property and request entry, explaining his reasons therefore. If such
entry is refused or cannot be obtained because the owner or other person
having charge or control of the property cannot be found after due
diligence, the Building Inspector or his authorized representative shall
have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure lawful entry
and inspect the property.
(b) Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the Building Inspector or his authorized
representative has reasonable cause to believe that the building or premises is so
hazardous, unsafe, or dangerous as to require immediate inspection to safeguard
the public health or safety, he shall have the right to immediately enter and
inspect such property and may use any reasonable means required to effect such
property and make such inspection, whether such property be occupied or
unoccupied, and whether or not permission to inspect has been obtained. If the
property be occupied, he shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and
demand entry, explaining his reasons therefore and the purpose of his inspection.
(c) “Authorized representative” shall include the officers named in subsection (1) of
this section and their authorized inspection personnel.
(d) No person shall fail or refuse after proper demand has been made upon him as
provided in this section, to promptly permit the Building Inspector or his
authorized representative to make any inspection provided for by subparagraph
(b) of this section. Any person violating any of the provisions of this subsection
shall be subject to penalty as hereinafter provided.
18.03 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES. No
person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to or offer to let to another for occupancy,
any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, and/or eating
of meals therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
(1) Every dwelling unit shall contain an approved kitchen sink.
(2) Every dwelling until shall contain a bathroom.
(3) Every toilet and every bath shall be contained within a room or within separate rooms
which afford privacy to a person within said room or rooms.
(4) Every dwelling unit shall have water heating facilities which are properly installed and
maintained in reasonably good working conditions and are properly connected with hot
water lines to the kitchen sink, lavatory, and bathtub, and are capable of heating water to
such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn for every bath a
temperature of not less than 100º F, supplied by the owner or operator. Such water
heating facilities shall be capable of meeting the requirements of this subsection when the
heating facilities of the dwelling and/or dwelling unit required under the provision of a
following subsection are not in operation. (See §18.04(6)).
(5) Every kitchen sink, toilet, lavatory, basin, and bath shall be in good working condition
and properly connected to an approved water and sewer system.
(6) Access to all areas of a dwelling unit included in the computation of habitable area of the
dwelling unit shall be available from the other habitable areas of the dwelling units
without passing through any portion of any other dwelling unit or communicating
corridor common to more than one dwelling unit.
Access to all the habitable area of a dwelling unit included in the computation of the
habitable area of the dwelling unit, on a floor, or level other than that of the main living
area, shall be via an interior stairway with fixed risers. No stairway may be located in a
closet.
(7) Every stairway, entrance, and exit of every dwelling unit shall comply with the following
requirements:
(a) Shall be kept in a reasonable good state of repair.
(b) Shall be unobstructed at all times.
(8) The provisions of the building regulations and supplemental building regulations of the
Village Code relating to access and egress from all entrances and/or exits, inside
stairways, and required hand rails shall be applicable to the Village housing code and
incorporated references herein as same may pertain to all dwellings and dwelling units in
the Village of Hales Corners.
(9) Smoke Detection in Existing Buildings. On or before October 1, 1987, each living unit
in existing one (1) and two (2) family dwellings shall be provided with an approved,
listed, and labeled smoke detector, sensing visible or invisible particles of combustion,
installed in the basement and on each floor level, except the attic or storage area of each
dwelling unit. Said detectors shall be located in the sleeping areas of each floor.
18.04 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR LIGHT, VENTILATION, AND HEATING. No
person shall occupy as owner-occupant nor shall let to another for occupancy, any
dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with
the following requirements:
(1) Every habitable room, bathroom, and toilet room shall have a window or windows which
shall open onto a street alley, yard, court, or open to the sky; such with a total glass area
equal to at least 10% of its floor area unless in the opinion of the Building Inspector the
structure of the building precludes the use of windows, in which case other means of
lighting and ventilation approved by the Building Inspector may be used. Such windows
shall open onto a street, alley, yard, court, or open to the sky; such windows shall be so
constructed that at least one-half may be fully opened. Approved mechanical ventilation
may be substituted.
(2) Every public hall and public stairway of every dwelling containing four (4) or more
dwelling units shall be lighted by means of a minimum of five (5) foot candles, properly
located electric light fixtures at all times, provided that such electrical lighting may be
omitted from sunrise to sunset where there are windows or skylights opening directly to
the outside, and where the total window or skylight area is at least one-tenth of the
combined horizontal area of said hall and stairway, and if said skylights provide adequate
natural light to all parts of each such public pathway. Every public hall and stairway in
dwellings containing two (2) or three (3) dwelling units shall be supplied with convenient
light switches controlling lighting systems which may be turned on when needed, instead
of full-time lighting.
(3) At least one (1) window in each habitable room shall be supplied with a screen covering
at least 33% of the window area; provided that such screens shall not be required in
rooms deemed by the Health Officer to be located sufficiently high in upper stories of
dwellings as to be free of mosquitoes, flies, and other flying insects. Such screens shall
have a wire mesh not less than No. 16, or in lieu thereof, approved mechanical
ventilation.
(4) Every dwelling having two (2) or more basement or cellar windows shall have at least
two (2) window screens which cover the entire window. Where there is only one (1)
basement window, it shall be similarly screened. Such screen shall have a wire mesh of
not less than No. 16.
(5) Every room and area within every dwelling and/or dwelling until shall contain the
number of wall type electric receptacle outlets and the amount of branch circuit required
to feed same as established by the State electrical code; also every toilet room, bathroom,
furnace room, laundry room, and public hall shall contain at least one (1) supplied ceiling
type or wall type electric light fixture; every outlet and fixture shall e installed and
maintained in good working condition.
(6) Every owner, agent, manager, or lessee of any building whatsoever, who leases, rents, or
lets such building or portion thereof as living quarters or as a business establishment
where one or more persons are employed, on terms either expressed or implied to furnish
heat to the occupants thereof, shall and is hereby directed to maintain a minimum
temperature of at least 68º F unless otherwise provided by contract; however, the
provisions of this sections hall not apply to buildings or portions thereof used and
occupied for trades, businesses, or occupations where high or low temperatures are
essential. The heating facilities supplied shall be installed and maintained at all times by
the owner of the premises in good working conditions.
18.05 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS RELATED TO THE MAINTENANCE OF
DWELLINGS AND DWELLING UNITS. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant
or let to or offer to let to another for occupancy, any dwelling unit or portion thereof for
the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
(1) Every foundation, exterior wall, and roof shall be reasonably weather-tight, waterproof,
insect-proof, and rodent-proof, and shall be kept in a good state of maintenance and
repair.
(2) Every interior partition wall, floor, and ceiling shall be kept in a reasonably good state of
repair and maintained so as to permit them to be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(3) All rain water shall be so drained and conveyed from every roof so as not to cause
dampness in the walls, ceilings, or floors of any building or structure or part thereof.
(4) Every window, exterior door, and basement hatchway shall be reasonably weather-tight,
insect-proof, and rodent-proof, and shall be kept in reasonably good working conditions
and in a reasonably good state of maintenance and repair.
(5) All exterior surfaces shall be protected from the elements and against decay and
deterioration by paint or by other approved protective coating, applied in workmanlike
fashion.
(6) Every inside and outside stairway, every porch, and every appurtenance thereto, shall be
so constructed as to be reasonably safe to use and capable of supporting such a load as
normal use may cause to be placed thereon, and shall be maintained in a good state of
repair.
(7) Every supplied plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed and
maintained in good, sanitary working condition.
(8) Every chimney and every supplied smoke pipe shall be adequately supported, reasonably
clean, and maintained in a reasonably good state of repair.
(9) Every toilet room floor surface and bathroom floor surface shall be maintained so as to be
reasonably impervious to water and so as to permit such floors to be kept in clean and
sanitary condition.
(10) Every supplied facility, piece of equipment, or utility which is required under this
Chapter shall be so constructed or installed that it will function properly and shall be
maintained in reasonably good working condition.
(11) No owner or operator shall cause any service, facility, equipment, or utility which is
required to be supplied under the provisions of this Chapter to be removed, shut off, or
disconnected from any occupied dwelling or dwelling unit let or occupied by him except
for such temporary interruptions as may be necessary while actual repairs, replacement,
or alterations are in process of being made.
(12) Every owner of a building or structure shall be responsible for the extermination of
insects, rodents, or pests on the premises, including adjacent premises under control of
the owner.
(13) Every owner of a building or structure shall be responsible for maintaining same in a
clean and sanitary condition and in a good state of repair.
(14) No owner shall occupy or rent to any other person for occupancy or allow any other
person to occupy any vacant dwelling until unless it is reasonably clean, sanitary, and
complies with all provisions of this Chapter and all rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto.
18.06 MINIMUM SPACE, USE, AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS. No person shall
occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of
living therein which does not comply with the following requirements:
(1) No dwelling unit shall be occupied by more than one (1) family as defined in this article.
(2) Floor areas, ceiling heights, and room areas shall be as provided for under the Building
Code.
(3) No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two (2) or more bedrooms shall have such room
arrangement that access to a bathroom or toilet room intended for use by the occupants of
more than one (1) bedroom can be had only be going through another bedroom; nor shall
such room arrangements exist so that access to a bedroom can be had only be going
through another bedroom or bathroom or toilet room.
(4) No space in a basement may be used for sleeping purposes or as a dwelling unit unless it
complies with required existing and natural light requirements of the Building Code.
(5) Every occupant of every dwelling unit shall have unrestricted access to a toilet and to a
kitchen sink or lavatory basin located within that dwelling unit.
18.07 RESPONSIBILITY OF OCCUPANTS RELATING TO THE MAINTENANCE OF
DWELLINGS OR DWELLING UNITS.
(1) Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and sanitary condition
that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit, and premises thereof which he occupies or
controls.
(2) Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all of his rubbish, garbage,
and other organic waste materials in a clean and sanitary manner, by placing it in rubbish
containers and garbage disposal containers or facilities, as required by this Code.
(3) Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for
the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the premises, and
every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one (1) dwelling
unit shall be responsible for such extermination in the dwelling unit occupied by him
whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing
provisions of this subsection, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to
maintain a dwelling in reasonably rat-proof or reasonably insect-proof condition,
extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.
(4) Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all supplied plumbing fixtures in a clean and
sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the
proper use and operation thereof.
(5) Every plumbing fixture furnished by the occupant shall be properly installed and shall be
properly maintained in a reasonably good working condition and clean and sanitary state,
free from leaks and obstructions.
(6) Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care,
proper use, and proper operation of supplied heating facilities.
(7) Every space heater furnished by the occupant shall be properly installed, shall be
maintained in reasonably good working condition, and shall comply with all of the
requirements of the Hales Corners Building Code.
18.08 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS RELATING TO THE MAINTENANCE OF
NON-DWELLING STRUCTURES, FENCES, AND PREMISES.
(1) Every foundation, exterior wall, roof, window, exterior door, and basement hatchway and
every other entrance of every non-dwelling structure shall be so maintained by the owner
there of as to prevent the structure from becoming a harborage for rodents, insects, and
other vermin and shall be kept in a reasonably good state of maintenance and repair at all
times.
(2) All exterior surfaces of non-dwelling structures shall be protected from the elements
against decay and decomposition, by paint or other approved protective coating applied
in a workmanlike manner and shall be kept and so maintained by the owner thereof in a
reasonably good state of repair so that the condition and appearance of the structure will
not adversely affect the character and appearance of the surrounding area.
(3) Every fence and every other non-dwelling structure shall be kept in a good state of
maintenance and repair by the owner thereof or shall be removed.
(4) Every premise shall be graded and maintained by the owner thereof so that no stagnant
water shall accumulate or stand on the premises or within any building or structure
located on the premises.
(5) All open areas and premises shall be landscaped by the owner thereof with grass, trees,
shrubs, or other planted ground cover; the owner or occupants of said premises shall keep
said premises in a clean and sanitary condition, unsightly weeds or growth, as well as free
of and uncluttered by building materials, tools and equipment, miscellaneous
paraphernalia, rubbish, debris, and waste. All concrete or asphalt surfaces shall be
maintained by the owner of said premises in a good state of repair.
18.09 PERMITTED VEHICLE STORAGE.
(1) General. Vehicles and vehicular equipment may be stored or parked only in those
districts where said vehicles or vehicular equipment are either directly permitted or
customarily accessory to a permitted use in the specific zoning district involved.
(2) Residential Districts. No more than four (4) vehicles, including recreational vehicles as
defined in subsection (3) below, and including one panel, enclosed, or pickup truck when
used by the occupant in the occupant’s business or occupation, in operable condition,
shall be permitted to be parked or stored outside on a lot in any residential zoning district.
Trucks permitted hereunder shall be limited to those with a wheel base of 129 inches or
less and a gross vehicle weight of 8,000 pounds or less. No more than two (2)
recreational vehicles may be parked or stored on a residential lot at any time, provided
that only one of the recreational vehicles may exceed 16 feet in length. In addition to the
foregoing four vehicle and two recreational vehicle limitations, one utility trailer
recreational vehicle with a bed not exceeding eight (8) feet by six and a half (6½) feet in
area may be parked on a residential zoned lot.
(3) Recreational Vehicles and Equipment. For purposes of this section, a “recreational
vehicle” means all types of trailers, all types of mobile homes and motor homes, all types
of campers, boats, snowmobiles, personal water crafts, all-terrain vehicles, motorbikes
and motorcycles, and the like, not exceeding 32 feet in length, eight (8) feet in width, and
13 feet six (6) inches in height, provided that each such recreational vehicle to qualify as
such shall be operable and kept in a good state of maintenance and repair, and be owned
by the resident or occupant of the property. An empty or unloaded trailer is one (1)
recreational vehicle; a trailer designed to carry personal water craft(s), snowmobiles(s),
all-terrain vehicle(s), or the like, is one (1) recreational vehicle when such other
recreational vehicle(s) are mounted thereon; no more than four (4) such other recreational
vehicles may be mounted or loaded on a single trailer. The outdoor storage or
accumulation of recreational vehicle related equipment, included parts and accessories,
and recreational vehicle related debris or paraphernalia, is prohibited.
(4) Parking and Storage Locations.
(a) No recreational vehicle or equipment shall be parked or stored on the public
right-of-way. Any recreational vehicle, when parked or stored within the front or
side setback areas of any residential property, must be placed on a properly
improved driveway and be at least 15 feet away from any adjacent dwelling.
Recreational vehicles parked in the rear setback area of a property must be at
least five (5) feet from any property line. Vehicles other than recreational
vehicles must be placed on a properly improved driveway.
(b) Exception. This section does not include those items which are stored within an
enclosed storage garage.
18.10 STORAGE OF FIREWOOD.
(1) The storage of firewood shall be restricted to the rear setback area of any residential
property. Said storage shall be neatly stacked to avoid rodent infestation and be located
not less than five (5) feet from any property line.
(2) Exception. The storage of not more than one-half of one “Face Cord” (16 inches x 4 feet
x 4 feet) may be stored beyond the rear setback area of a lot provided it is located not less
than 15 feet from any property line and is neatly stacked.
18.11 ENFORCEMENT.
(1) Service of Notices. Whenever the Building Inspector determines that there has been a
violation, or that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of
any provision of his article or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he shall
give notice of such violation or alleged violation to the person or persons responsible
therefore. Such notice shall:
(a) Be put in writing;
(b) Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
(c) Include a statement of the reason or reasons why it is being issued;
(d) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires;
(e) Be served upon the owner, or the operator, or the occupant, as the case may
require, provided that such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon
such owner, or upon such operator, or upon such occupant if a copy thereof is
delivered to him personally or, if not found, by leaving a copy thereof at his usual
place of abode, in the presence of someone of the family of suitable age and
discretion who shall be informed of the contents thereof, or by sending a copy
thereof by registered mail or by certified mail with return receipt requested or
certified letter with the copy is returned with a receipt showing it has not been
delivered to him, by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place in or about he
dwelling affected by the notice.
Such notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this article and with the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto.
(2) Appeal from Inspector’s Ruling. Any person feeling himself aggrieved by any order or
ruling of the Building Inspector may appeal in writing to the Board of Appeals of the
Village of Hales Corners within 30 days of the alleged act or omission of said inspector
pursuant to §62.23, Wis. Stats., and to the rules of the Board of Appeals. The appellant
shall annex to the notice of appeal such plats, surveys, plans, or specifications which are
of probative value in the determination of the appeal together with the name and address
of the appellant. Upon the filing of such notices with the Village Clerk, the appellant
shall receive a copy of the rules of the Board of Appeals. Upon the filing of notice of
appeal, an appeal shall stay all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from, unless the inspector certifies to the Board of Appeals that by reason of the facts
stated in a certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property. Upon the filing of such notice of appeal, the Board of Appeals shall fix a time
and place for the hearing of the appeal not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days from
the date of such filing.
(a) Penalty Provisions. General Penalty. Whenever so provided in this Code, any
person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code shall upon conviction
of such violation, be subject to a penalty, which shall be as follows:
1. First Offense – Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provisions of
this Code subject to a penalty shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit no
more than $200.00 together with the costs of prosecution and in default
of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution shall be
imprisoned in the County Jail or County House of Correction until said
forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90 days.
2. Second Offense – Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating any
ordinance or part of an ordinance of this Code who shall previously have
been convicted of a violation of the same ordinance shall upon
conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $10.00 nor more than $200.00 for
each such offense, together with the costs of prosecution and in default
of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the County
Jail or County House of Correction until said forfeiture and costs of
prosecution are paid, but not to exceed six (6) months.
(b) Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a
separate offense. Nothing in this Code shall preclude the Village from
maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any
ordinance contained in this Code.
(c) Execution Against Defendant’s Property. Whenever any person fails to pay any
forfeiture and costs of prosecution upon the order of the court for violation of any
ordinance of the Village the court may, in lieu of ordering imprisonment of any
defendant, or after the defendant has been released from custody, issue an
execution against the property of the defendant for said forfeiture and costs.
(3) Issuance of Subpoenas. Upon application of either the officer executing the notice on
behalf of the Board or the person or persons against whom the notice has been issued, the
Board shall issue subpoenas in accordance with the statutes of the State of Wisconsin,
ordering witnesses to appear and testify under oath at the hearing held before the Board.
(4) Issuance of Order when Emergency Exists. Whenever the Health Officer or Building
Inspector acting in his behalf in the enforcement of this article finds that an emergency
exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may, without
notice of hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and
requiring that such action be taken as he deems necessary to meet such emergency.
Notwithstanding other provisions of this article, such order shall be effective
immediately. Any person to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith, but
upon petition to the Board shall be afforded a hearing as prescribed in this article. After
such hearing, depending upon the findings of the Board as to whether the provisions of
this ordinance and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied
with, such Board shall continue such order or modify it or revoke it.
18.12 CONDEMNATION OF UNFIT DWELLINGS AND DWELLING UNITS; LEGAL
PROCEDURE OF CONDEMNATION AND PLACARDING FOR HUMAN
HABITATION. The designation of dwellings or dwelling units as unfit for human
habitation and the procedure for condemnation and placarding of such unfit dwellings or
dwelling units shall be carried out in compliance with the following requirements:
(1) Condemnation of Dwellings and Dwelling Units as Unfit for Human Habitation.
Any dwelling or dwelling unit which the Building Inspector shall find to have any of the
following defects, shall be condemned as unfit for human habitation:
(a) One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, difficult to heat,
unsafe, or vermin-infested that it creates a hazard to the safety or welfare of the
occupants or of the public; or
(b) One which lacks illumination, ventilation, or sanitary facilities adequate to
protect the safety or welfare of the occupants or of the public; or
(c) On which, because of its general condition or location, is unsanitary or otherwise
dangerous to the safety or welfare of the occupants or of the public.
Any dwelling or dwelling unit may be condemned as unfit for human habitation by the
Building Inspector if the owner or occupant failed to comply with any order based on the
provisions of this ordinance or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto;
provided that such dwelling or dwelling unit is, in the opinion of the Building Inspector,
unfit for human habitation by reason of such failure to comply.
(2) Notice to Owner of Condemnation and Intent to Placard. Whenever the Building
Inspector has condemned a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation, he
shall give notice to the owner of such condemnation and of his intent to placard the
dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation. Such notice shall:
(a) Be put in writing;
(b) Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
(c) Include a statement of the reason or reasons why it is being issued;
(d) Include a description of the repairs and improvements required to bring the
condemned dwelling or dwelling unit into compliance with the provisions of this
ordinance and any rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto;
(e) Include an explanation of the owner’s right to seek modification or withdrawal of
the notice by petition to the Board in accordance with the provisions of
subsections 18.09(2) and (3) of this article; and
(f) Be served upon the owner, provided that such notice shall be deemed to be
properly served upon such owner if a copy thereof is delivered to him personally,
or if not found, by leaving a copy thereof at his usual place of abode, in the
presence of someone of the family of suitable age and discretion who shall be
informed of the contents thereof, or by sending a copy thereof by certified mail
with return receipt requested, to his last known address, or if the certified letter
with the copy is returned with a receipt showing it has not been delivered to him,
by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected
by the notice.
(3) Appeal of Notice Relating to Condemnation. Any owner affected by any notice
relating to the condemnation of a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation
may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Board, under the
procedure set forth in §18.10.
(4) Placarding of Condemned Dwellings and Dwelling Units as Unfit for Human
Habitation. After the condemnation notice which is required under the provisions of
subsection (b) of this section has resulted in an order, the Building Inspector shall placard
the affected dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation. The Building
Inspector shall post, in a conspicuous place or places upon the affected dwelling or
dwelling unit, a placard or placards bearing the following words: “Condemned as Unfit
for Human Habitation.”
(5) Vacation of Condemned and Placarded Dwellings and Dwelling Units. Any dwelling
or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded as unfit for human habitation
by the Building Inspector shall be vacated within a to any person for human habitation
and no person shall occupy any dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and
placarded by the Building Inspector after the date on which said Inspector has required
the affected dwelling or dwelling unit to be vacated.
(6) Placard Not to be Removed Until Defects are Eliminated. No dwelling or dwelling
unit which has been condemned and placarded as unfit for human habitation shall again
be used for human habitation until written approval is secured from, and such placard is
removed by, the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector shall remove such placard
whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were
based, have been eliminated.
(7) Placard to be Removed Only by Building Inspector. No person shall deface or
remove the placard from any dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned as
unfit for human habitation and placarded as such, except as provided in subsection (6)
above.
18.13 ARTICLE DOES NOT IMPAIR AUTHORITY OF VILLAGE OF HALES
CORNERS OR VILLAGE HEALTH OFFICER TO ACT ON NUISANCES.
Nothing in this article shall be construed or interpreted to in any way impair or limit the
authority of the Village of Hales Corners to define and declare nuisances or of the Village
Health Officer or his authorized representative to cause the removal or abatement of a
nuisance by summary proceedings of other appropriate proceedings.
18.14 ARTICLE DOES NOT ABROGATE PROVISIONS OF BUILDING OR ZONING
CODE. The provisions of this article will not abrogate the responsibility of any person
to comply with any provision of the Village Building and Zoning Codes and the State
Building Code.
CHAPTER 19
General Provisions
19.01 Rules of Construction
19.02 Conflict and Separability
19.03 Clerk to File Documents Incorporated by Reference
19.04 Penalty Provisions
19.05 Repeal of General Ordinances
19.06 Effect of Repeals
19.07 Use of Citation
19.08 Title: Effective Date: Citation
19.01 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
(1) In the construction of this Code of general ordinances, the following rules shall be
observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
ordinance.
(a) Wisconsin Statutes. The term Wisconsin Statutes whenever used in this Code
shall mean the Wisconsin Statutes for the year 1990 and shall include subsequent
amendments thereto.
(b) Gender: Singular and Plural. Every word in this Code and in any ordinance
importing the masculine gender may extend and be applied to females as well as
males, and every word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or one thing;
provided that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any provisions
which shall contain any express language excluding such construction or when
the subject matter or context of such provisions may be repugnant thereto.
(c) Person. The word “person” extends and applies to natural persons, firms,
corporations, associations, partnerships or other bodies politic, and all entities of
any kind capable of being sued unless plainly inapplicable.
(d) Acts by Agents. When a provision requires an act to be done which may by law
be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be
construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
19.02 CONFLICT AND SEPARABILITY.
(1) Conflict and Separability. If the provisions of the different chapters of this Code
conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each Chapter shall prevail as to
all matters and questions arising out of the subject matter of such chapter.
(2) Separability of Code Provisions. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase
of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by reason of any
decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity
of any other section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase or portion thereof. The
Village Board of the Village of Hales Corners hereby declares that they would have
passed this Code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion thereof
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses,
phrases, or portions thereof may be declared invalid or unconstitutional.
19.03 CLERK TO FILE DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE. Whenever
in this Code any standard, code, rule, regulation, or other written or printed matter are
adopted by reference, they shall be deemed incorporated in this Code as if fully set forth
herein and the Village Clerk is hereby directed and required to file, deposit, and keep in
his office a copy of the Code, standard, rule, regulation, or other written or printed matter
as adopted. Materials so filed, deposited, and kept shall be public records open for
examination with proper care by any person during the Village Clerk’s office hours,
subject to such orders or regulations which the Village Clerk may prescribe for their
preservation.
19.04 PENALTY PROVISIONS.
(1) General Penalty. Whenever so provided in this Code, any person who shall violate any
of the provisions of this Code shall upon conviction of such violation, be subject to a
penalty, which shall be as follows:
(a) First Offense – Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provisions of this
Code subject to a penalty shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not more than
$400.00 together with the costs of prosecution and in default of payment of such
forfeiture and costs of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the County Jail or
County House of Correction until said forfeitures and costs are paid, but not
exceeding 90 days. In event, however, an ordinance incorporates by reference a
State Statute which limits the maximum fine to a lesser amount than reflected
herein, the State Statute shall prevail.
(b) Second Offense – Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating any ordinance
or part of an ordinance of this Code who shall previously have been convicted of
a violation of the same ordinance shall upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less
than $10.00 nor more than $400.00 for each such offense, together with the costs
of prosecution and in default of payment of such forfeiture an costs shall be
imprisoned in the County Jail or County House of Correction until said forfeiture
and costs of prosecution are paid, but not to exceed six (6) months. In event,
however, an ordinance incorporates by reference a State Statute which limits the
maximum fine to a lesser amount than reflected herein, the State Statue shall
prevail.
(2) Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate
offense. Nothing in this Code shall preclude the Village from maintaining any
appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any ordinance in this Code.
(3) Execution Against Defendant’s Property. Whenever any person fails to pay any
forfeiture and costs of prosecution upon the order of the court for violation of any
ordinance of the Village the court may, in lieu of ordering imprisonment of the defendant,
or after the defendant has been released from custody, issue an execution against the
property of the defendant for said forfeiture and costs.
(4) Juvenile Justice Code Dispositional Orders and Sanctions Adopted. The Municipal
Code is authorized to enter an order making one or more of the available dispositions set
forth under §938.343, Wis. Stats., for the disposition of a juvenile adjudged to have
committed certain intoxicating liquor, beer, and drug violations, which statutes are
incorporated herein in their entirety. The Municipal Code is authorized to order any of
the sanctions enumerated under §938.355(6)(d), Wis. Stats., as a consequence for any
incident in which the juvenile has violated one or more conditions of his or her
dispositional order, which statutory subsection is incorporated herein in its entirety.
19.05 REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES. All ordinances heretofore adopted by the
Village Board of the Village of Hales Corners are hereby repealed, except all ordinances
or parts of ordinances or resolutions relating to the following subjects and not conflicting
with any of the provisions of this Code:
(1) The issuance of corporate bonds and notes of the Village of Hales Corners of whatever
name or description.
(2) The establishment of grades, curb lines, and widths of sidewalks in the public streets and
alleys.
(3) The fixing of salaries of public officials and employees.
(4) Creating or abolishing offices.
(5) Rights, licenses, or franchises or the creation of any contract with the Village of Hales
Corners.
(6) The lighting of streets and alleys.
(7) The annexation of territory to the Village of Hales Corners.
(8) The naming and changing of names of streets, alleys, public grounds, and parks.
(9) The letting of contracts without bids.
(10) The establishment of wards, ward boundaries, and election precincts.
(11) Tax and special assessment levies.
(12) Release of persons, firms, or corporations from liability.
(13) Construction of any public works.
(14) Water, sewer, and electrical rates, rules, and regulations and sewer and water main
construction.
(15) Budget ordinances, resolutions, and actions.
(16) The Zoning Ordinance being Ordinance No. 30 (Chronological Ordinance No. 102)
which is reenacted with all amendments thereto.
19.06 EFFECT OF REPEALS. The repeal of any section or provision of this Code or of any
other ordinance or resolution of the Village Board shall not:
(1) By implication be deemed to revive any ordinance not in force or existing at the time at
which such repeal or amendment takes effect.
(2) Affect any vested right, privilege, obligation, or liability acquired, accrued, or incurred
under any enactment so repealed or amended, unless the privilege of repealing such
obligation or privilege has been reserved by the Village.
(3) Affect any offense committed or penalty or forfeiture incurred, previous to the time when
any ordinance shall be repealed or amended, except that when any forfeiture or penalty
shall have been mitigated by the provisions of any ordinance, such provisions shall apply
to and control any judgment to be pronounced after such ordinance takes effect for any
offense committed before that time.
19.07 USE OF CITATION.
(1) Authorization for Use of Citation.
(a) Authority. Pursuant to the authority of Wisconsin Statute §66.119, as amended,
the Village of Hales Corners hereby elects to adopt and authorize the use of a
citation to be issued for violations of ordinances, including ordinances for which
a statutory counterpart exists.
(b) Citation. The form of the citation is hereby prescribed as found in §66.119(1)(b),
Wis. Stats., as amended, which is incorporated herein by reference.
(c) Schedule of Cash Deposits. A schedule of cash deposits shall be established by
municipal judge action, upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police, which
is incorporated herein by reference.
(2) Officials Authorized to Issue Citation.
(a) Citations authorized in subsection (1) above, may be issued by officers of the
Police Department or by other law enforcement officers of the Village and by the
following designated Village officials with respect to sections of the Code which
are directly related to the official’s area of responsibility. The officials granted
authority to issue citations under this section may delegate the authority to other
Village employees within the designated officials department with the approval
of the Village Board.
1. Building Inspector.
2. Fire Inspector.
3. Fire Chief and Assistant Fire Chief.
4. Health Officer and Sanitarian.
5. Weed Commissioner.
(3) Form of Citation.
(a) The form of the citation to be issued by law enforcement officer s or other
designated Village officials is incorporated herein by reference and shall provide
for the following information:
1. The name, address, date of birth, and physical description of the alleged
violator;
2. The factual allegations describing the alleged violation;
3. The date and place of the offense;
4. The section of the ordinance violated;
5. A designation of the offense in such manner as can be readily understood
by a person making a reasonable effort to do so;
6. The time at which the alleged violator may appear in court, if known;
7. A statement which in essence informs the alleged violator: that the
alleged violator may make a cash deposit of a specified amount to be
mailed to a specified official within a specified time; that if the alleged
violator makes such a deposit, he need not appear in court unless
subsequently summoned; that if the alleged violator makes a cash deposit
and does not appear in court, he will be deemed to have tendered a plea
of no contest and submitted to a forfeiture and a penalty assessment
imposed by §165.87, Wis. Stats., and court costs as imposed by §800.10,
Wis. Stats., not to exceed the amount of the deposit, or will be
summoned into court to answer the complaint if the court does not accept
the plea of no contest; that if the alleged violator does not make a cash
deposit and does not appear in court at the time specified, an action may
be commenced against the alleged violator to collect the forfeiture and
the penalty assessment imposed by §165.87, Wis. Stats.
8. A direction that if the alleged violator elects to make a cash deposit, the
alleged violator shall sing an appropriate statement which accompanies
the citation to indicate that he read the statement required under
subsection 7 and shall send the signed statement with the cash deposit.
9. Such other information as may be deemed necessary.
(4) Schedule of Cash Deposits.
(a) The schedule of cash deposits for the various ordinances for which a citation may
be issued are as established on the deposit schedule adopted by the municipal
judge, a copy of which is on file with the Village Administrator. In addition to
the deposit amount listed, the deposit must include a penalty assessment imposed
by §165.87, Wis. Stats., and court costs as imposed by §800.10, Wis. Stats.
(5) Receipt of Cash Deposits.
(a) Deposits shall be made in cash, money order, personal checks, or certified check
to the Clerk of Municipal Court. Receipts shall be given for all deposits
received.
(6) Procedure.
(a) §66.119(3), Wis. Stats., relating to violator’s options and procedure on default, is
hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference.
(7) Nonexclusivity of Section.
(a) Adoption of this section does not preclude the Village Board from adopting any
other ordinance providing for the enforcement of any other law or ordinance
relating to the same or other matters.
(b) The issuance of citation hereunder shall not preclude the Village or any
authorized officer from proceeding under any other ordinance or law or by any
other enforcement method to enforce any ordinance, regulation, or order.
19.08 TITLE: EFFECTIVE DATE: CITATION. These ordinance shall be known as the
“Municipal Code of Hales Corners, Wisconsin” and shall take effect from and after
passage and publication as provided in §66.035, Wis. Stats. All references thereto shall
be cited by section number (example: section 13.06, Village Code of Hales Corners,
Wisconsin.)
CHAPTER 20
Commercial Exterior Maintenance Code
20.01 Title
20.02 Intent and Purpose
20.03 Applicability
20.04 Rules and Definitions
20.05 Safe, Sanitary, and Attractive Maintenance of Property
20.06 Fixing the Responsibility of Owners, Operators, and Occupants
20.07 Enforcement, Service of Notices and Orders, and Hearings
20.08 Appeals
20.09 Penalties
20.01 TITLE. This Chapter shall be known as the Commercial Exterior Maintenance Code.
20.02 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
(1) This Chapter is adopted for the purpose of preserving and promoting the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience, prosperity and general welfare of the people of the Village and environs.
This includes, among others, physical, aesthetic, and monetary values.
(2) It is recognized that there may now be or may, in the future, be commercial buildings, structures,
yards or vacant areas, and combinations thereof which are so dilapidated, unsafe, dangerous,
unhygienic, or inadequately maintained so as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, and
general welfare of the people. The establishment and enforcement of minimum commercial
property maintenance standards is necessary to preserve and promote the private and public
interest.
20.03 APPLICABILITY.
(1) Application of Other Ordinances. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to authorize the
use of a structure or premises contrary to any other provision of the Village of Hales Corners
Municipal code. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure shall be done in accordance with
the procedures of State law and Chapter 3 of the Village of Hales Corners Municipal Code.
20.04 RULES AND DEFINITIONS.
(1) Rules. In the construction of this Chapter, the rules and definitions contained in this Section shall
be observed and applied, except when the context clearly indicates otherwise:
(a) Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
(b) Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the
singular.
(c) The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
(d) The word "may" is permissive.
(e) The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended
for," "maintained for," and "occupied for."
(2) Definitions.
(a) Adequate. "Adequate" shall mean adequate as determined by the Zoning Administrator
or his/her designee under the regulations of this Chapter or adequate as determined by an
authority designated by law or this Chapter. "Adequately" shall mean the same as
adequate.
(b) Approved. "Approved" shall mean approved by the Zoning Administrator or his/her
designee under the regulations of this Chapter or approved by an authority designated by
law or this Chapter.
(c) Attractive Appearance. "Attractive appearance" shall mean an appearance which is in
accordance with generally accepted professional practices for new construction within the
Village and which is not likely to adversely affect the values of abutting or neighborhood
properties, or of the principal property.
(d) Building. "Building" means a combination of material to form a construction that is safe
and stable, and adapted to permanent or continuous occupancy for assembly, business,
educational, high hazard, industrial, institutional, mercantile, or a storage purpose; the
term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or portion thereof." For
the purpose of this Code, each portion of a building completely separated from other
portions by an unpierced fire wall shall be considered as a separate building.
(e) Building-related Equipment. Includes heating and air-conditioning equipment, chimneys
and vents, signs, antennae, gutters and downspouts, metal awnings, canopies and similar
overhang extensions, fences, steps, shutters, lights, garages, sheds and accessory storage
structures.
(f) Commercial. "Commercial" shall mean not residential.
(g) Commercial Use. "Commercial use" shall mean any nonresidential use.
(h) Good Working Condition. "Good working condition" shall mean capable of performing
the task for which it was designed and in the manner intended by this Chapter.
(i) Imminent Hazard. A condition which could cause serious or life threatening injury or
death at any time.
(j) Impervious to Water. "Impervious to water" shall mean constructed of concrete, cement
block, terrazzo, brick, tile, or other material approved by the Zoning Administrator or
his/her designee, and having tight-fitting joints.
(k) Mixed Occupancy. "Mixed occupancy" shall be occupancy of a building in part for
commercial use and in part for some other use not accessory thereto.
(l) Occupant. "Occupant" means one who occupies or has actual possession of usable space.
(m) Operator. "Operator" shall mean any person who has charge or control of a commercial
property or part thereof.
(n) Owner. The term "Owner" shall mean every person, firm, partnership, or any individual
member thereof, corporation, business organization of any kind, the state, the county, the
Village, any sewer district, drainage district, and any other public or quasi-public
corporation having vested interest in the property under consideration and shall include
the representative, officer, agent, or other person having the ownership, control, custody,
or management of any building.
(o) Person. A "person" shall mean and include any individual, firm, corporation, association,
or partnership.
(p) Premises. Any lot, whether or not improved with a principal or accessory structure.
When a lot is improved with a structure, the lot and premises shall be jointly referred to
as premises.
(q) Properly. "Properly" shall mean as deemed proper by the Zoning Administrator or
his/her designee under the regulations of this Chapter or deemed proper by an authority
designated by law or this Chapter.
(r) Provided. "Provided" shall mean furnished, supplied, paid for, or under control of the
owner.
(s) Structure. "Structure" is anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more
or less permanent location on the ground, or attached to something having permanent
location on the ground.
(t) Supplied. "Supplied" shall mean paid for, furnished, or provided by or under control of
the owner or operator.
20.05 SAFE, SANITARY, AND ATTRACTIVE MAINTENANCE OF PROPERTY.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to recognize the private and public benefits resulting
from the safe, sanitary, and attractive maintenance of commercial buildings, structures, yards, or
vacant areas. Attractive and well-maintained property will enhance the neighborhood and Village
and provide a suitable environment for increasing physical and monetary values.
(2) Maintenance Requirements. Every owner or operator shall improve and maintain all property
under their control to comply with the following minimum requirements:
(a) Drainage. All courts, yards, or other areas on the premises shall be properly graded to
divert water away from any building or structure. Adjacent ground surface shall be
sloped away from any building or structure with a grading of at least one-half (1/2) inch
per foot for a minimum of five (5) feet where possible or by other means such as eaves
troughs, and downspout extensions.
(b) Weeds. All exterior property areas shall be kept free from noxious weeds as required by
15.03(4) of this Code of Ordinances.
(c) Debris. All exterior property areas and adjacent public ditches and right-of-ways shall be
properly maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free from debris, rubbish or
garbage, physical hazards, rodent harborage and infestation, and animal feces. All animal
feces shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours.
(d) Fences and Walks. Fences, other minor construction, and walks shall be properly
maintained in a safe, sanitary and substantial condition. Approved walks shall provide
convenient all-weather access to buildings or structures.
(e) Exterior Surfaces. Exterior surfaces of buildings and structures not inherently resistant to
deterioration shall be treated with a protective coating of paint or other suitable
preservative which will provide adequate resistance to weathering and maintain an
attractive appearance. Any exterior surface treated with paint or other preservative shall
be maintained so as to prevent chipping, cracking, or other deterioration of the exterior
surface or the surface treatment and to present an attractive appearance. All paint or
other preservative shall be applied in a workmanlike fashion.
(f) Yard Areas. Yard areas of real estate shall not be permitted to deteriorate or remain in a
condition that is not in accord with the following: Yard areas shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition, free from any accumulation of combustible or non-combustible
materials (which are not used as an integral part of the authorized business carried out on
the premises), debris, or refuse. Yards shall not be used to store appliances, furnaces, hot
water heaters, water softeners, or building material not used within five (5) days, or any
unsightly bulk items, unless these items are raw materials used in the business carried out
on the premises.
(g) General Requirements. Every foundation, exterior wall, roof, canopy, overhang and
chimney shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight, and rodentproof and shall be kept
in proper repair and shall be capable of affording privacy. Any hazardous sagging or
bulging portion of the building shall be properly repaired to a level or plumb position.
All chimneys and breaching shall be so constructed and maintained so as to insure that it
safely and properly removes the products of combustion from the building.
(h) Windows and Doors. Every window, exterior door, interior door, and basement
hatchway shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight, and rodentproof and kept in
proper repair. All door and window hardware shall be installed and maintained in proper
working condition.
(i) Outside Stairs and Porches. Every outside stair, every porch, and every appurtenance
thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that
normal use may cause to be placed thereon, and shall be kept in proper condition and
repair and shall present an attractive appearance. All exterior stairs and steps and every
appurtenance thereto shall comply with the requirements specified in the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
(j) Waste Containers and Dumpsters.
1. The occupant shall be responsible for preventing or correcting any overflow of
waste from the waste containers or dumpsters.
2. Enclosures required under Section 8-2-3(l) shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with approved plans.
3. Waste containers and dumpsters shall be maintained in sound structural condition
and in good repair.
4. Waste containers and dumpsters shall be located so as not to create a nuisance.
(k) Removal of Debris.
1. No person shall dispose of rocks, trees, stumps, waste building material, or other
debris from land development, building construction, street grading, or
installation of underground utilities upon the surface of any land in the Village,
except at approved disposal sites.
2. No land owner shall allow an accumulation of rocks, trees, stumps, waste
building material or other debris from land development, building construction,
street grading, or installation of underground utilities upon the surface of his land
for a period of more than twenty-one (21) days.
3. All land filling operations shall be leveled off to permit the mowing of the weeds
between June 1 and November 1. This includes the removal of stones, bottles,
wire, and other debris that will interfere with mowing operations.
(l) Buffers. All required and existing buffers shall be maintained in such a manner as to
afford proper screening heights and densities of plantings and to be attractive and wellmaintained.
Such maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, cutting, trimming and
fertilizing, if necessary. Replacement shall be required for any subsequent destroyed,
eroded or dead plantings in order to preserve the screening/buffering between properties.
(m) Driveway, Parking and Loading Areas. All driveway, parking, loading and outside
storage areas on properties used for commercial purposes shall be surfaced and
maintained as set forth in the approved site plan for the property and shall have smooth
surfaces in good repair. Paved areas must be repaired or replaced when any deterioration
occurs to the extent that the road rock or sub-base is visible.
(n) Signage. All signage shall be maintained in the originally permitted and constructed
condition.
(o) Lighting. Exterior lighting shall be in conformance with approved site plan and/or the
Village of Hales Corners Municipal Code. All lighting shall be maintained in the
originally permitted and constructed condition.
20.06 FIXING THE RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS, OPERATORS AND OCCUPANTS.
Every owner, operator, or occupant of a commercial property, or part thereof, shall maintain that portion
of the exterior of the property controlled by him.
20.07 ENFORCEMENT, SERVICE OF NOTICES AND ORDERS AND HEARINGS.
(1) Whenever the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this Chapter or of any rule
or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person
or persons responsible therefore.
(2) The property owner shall notify the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee upon completion of
repairs so that a re-inspection may be made.
(3) If a violation has not been corrected within the time limits allowed by the Zoning Administrator
or his/her designee, the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee shall issue a citation on the
property owner regarding such violation. For noxious weed violations, pursuant to Wisconsin
Statute 66.98 the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee shall have the alternative option to
instruct the Weed Commissioner and/or Department of Public Works to correct said violation and
charge the actual costs incurred against the property owner. If such charges are not paid by
November 1 of the year in which they are billed, such charges shall be extended on the next
succeeding tax roll as a tax charged against the property affected and collected in the same
manner as are other taxes, pursuant to 66.98 Wis. Stats.
20.08 APPEALS. Any person feeling himself aggrieved by any order or ruling of the Zoning
Administrator may appeal in writing to the Board of Appeals of the Village of Hales Corners within thirty
(30) days of the alleged act or omission of said Zoning Administrator pursuant to § 62.23, Wisconsin
Statutes, and to the rules of the Board of Appeals, Article XII of Chapter 1 of the By-Laws.
The appellant shall annex to the notice of appeal such plats, surveys, plans or specifications which are of
probative value in the determination of the appeal together with the name and address of the appellant.
Upon filing of such notice with the Village Clerk, the appellant shall receive a copy of the rules of the
Board of Appeals. Upon the filing of notice of appeal, an appeal shall stay all legal proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board of Appeals
that by reason of the facts stated in a certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life
or property. Upon filing such notice of appeal, the Board of Appeals shall fix a time and place for the
hearing of the appeal not less than 10 nor more than 30 days from the date of such filing.
20.09 PENALTIES. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Chapter or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Section 19.04 of the
Village of Hales Corners Municipal Code.

ZONING
445 Attachment 1
Zone standards
District Minimum Lot Size Minimum Lot Width Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
R-1 10,000 75 35 10 40
R-2 15,000 90 45 10 40
R-3 20,000 100 60 15 40
R-4 10,000 n/a 35 20 40
B-1 (shopping center) 2 acres 200 50 50 25
B-2 7,200 60 20 20 25
B-3 15,000 100 40 40 25
B-4 7,200 60 20 20 25
M-1 10,000 75 50 50 25
P-1 10,000 n/a 35 50 40
RCO None n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a
PUD 1 to 3 acres n/a n/a n/a n/a
FW None n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a
445 Attachment 1:2 Publication, Mar 2021